the technology used to cast and count votes is one aspect of the multifaceted u.s. election process . gao examined voting technology , among other things , in a series of reports that it issued in 2001 following the problems encountered in the 2000 election . in october 2002 , the congress enacted the help america vote act , which , among other things , established the election assistance commission ( eac ) to assist in the administration of federal elections . the act also established a program to provide funds to states to replace older punch card and lever machine voting equipment . as this older voting equipment has been replaced with newer electronic voting systems over the last 2 years , concerns have been raised about the vulnerabilities associated with certain electronic voting systems . among other things , gao 's testimony focuses on attributes on which electronic voting systems can be assessed , as well as design and implementation factors affecting their performance . gao also describes the immediate and longer term challenges confronting local jurisdictions in using any type of voting equipment , particularly electronic voting systems . an electronic voting system , like other automated information systems , can be judged on several bases , including how well its design provides for security , accuracy , ease of use , and efficiency , as well as its cost . for example , direct recording electronic systems offer advantages in ease of use because they can have features that accommodate voters with various disabilities , and they protect against common voter errors , such as overvoting ( voting for more candidates than is permissible ) ; a disadvantage of such systems is their capital cost and frequent lack of an independent paper audit trail . advantages of optical scan voting equipment ( another type of electronic voting system ) include capital cost and the enhanced security associated with having a paper audit trail ; disadvantages include lower ease of use , such as their limited ability to accommodate voters with disabilities . one important determinant of voting system performance is how it is designed and developed , including the testing that determines whether the developed system performs as designed . in the design and development process , a critical factor is the quality of the specified system requirements as embodied in applicable standards or guidance . for voting technology , these voluntary standards have historically been problematic ; the eac has now been given responsibility for voting system guidelines , and it intends to update them . the eac also intends to strengthen the process for testing voting system hardware and software . a second determinant of performance is how the system is implemented . in implementing a system , it is critical to have people with the requisite knowledge and skills to operate it according to well - defined and understood processes . the eac also intends to focus on these people and process factors in its role of assisting in the administration of elections . in the upcoming 2004 national election and beyond , the challenges confronting local jurisdictions in using electronic voting systems are similar to those facing any technology user . these challenges include both immediate and more long term challenges .