despite a massive deployment of resources and support from both military and civilian agencies , many have regarded the federal response as inadequate .
when hurricane katrina made its final landfall along the louisiana / mississippi border on august 29 , 2005 , it quickly became one of the largest natural disasters in the history of the united states .
to address our objectives , we interviewed officials from dod , the national guard , the military services , and defense agencies that participated in the response to hurricane katrina .
as recovery operations continue , the nation is quickly approaching the 2006 hurricane season , and faces other natural and man - made threats that could result in a catastrophe at any instant .
§12304 ( c ) ( 1 ) — that limits reserve component participation in catastrophic natural disasters .
this report presents the results of our review of the military response to hurricane katrina , which examined ( 1 ) the extent to which pre - katrina plans and training exercises reflected the military assistance that might be required during a catastrophic , domestic , natural disaster , ( 2 ) the support that the military provided in responding to katrina and factors that affected that response , and ( 3 ) the actions the military is taking to address lessons learned from katrina and to prepare for the next catastrophic event .
about 9 months prior to katrina's landfall , the national response plan ( nrp ) was issued to frame the federal response to domestic emergencies ranging from smaller , regional disasters to incidents of national significance .
we currently have a large body of ongoing work to address preparation , response , recovery , and rebuilding efforts related to hurricanes katrina and rita .
hurricane katrina response efforts were hampered by the federal government's failure to fully use its available assets to conduct timely , comprehensive damage assessments in louisiana and mississippi .
as local , state , and federal governments responded in the days following katrina , confusion surfaced as to what responsibilities the military has and what capabilities it would provide in planning and responding to a catastrophic event .
as a result , dod is taking some actions to address catastrophic disaster response problems .
several additional examples of dod's planned efforts follow .
it further recommended that dod seek ways to leverage reserve members' civilian skills in disaster relief efforts .
while dod stated that the long - term focus of the u.s. government should be to develop more robust domestic disaster capabilities within the department of homeland security , it acknowledged that dod will need to assume a more robust response role in the interim period , and when other responders lack the resources and expertise to handle a particular disaster .
since details about many of the department's actions were still emerging as we completed our review we were unable to fully assess the effectiveness of dod's actions .
in addition , the plan's catastrophic incident supplement , which was supposed to have listed specific proactive actions agencies would take in response to a catastrophe , had not been approved during the 9 months between the plan's issuance and katrina's landfall .