the department of defense ( dod ) has expressed concerns about servicemembers ' use of predatory consumer loans as well as their overall financial conditions . `` predatory lending '' has no precise definition but describes cases where a lender takes unfair advantage of a borrower , sometimes through deception , fraud , or terms such as very high interest or fees . serious financial problems can adversely affect unit morale and readiness as well as servicemembers ' credit history and military career . dod has tools such as off - limits lists to help curb the use and effects of predatory loans . gao answered two questions : to what extent do active duty servicemembers use consumer loans considered to be predatory in nature ? . and are dod and active duty servicemembers fully utilizing the tools that dod has to curb the use and effects of predatory lending practices ? . the extent to which active duty servicemembers use consumer loans considered to be predatory and the effects of that borrowing are unknown . the only dod - wide data come from surveys . in a 2004 survey , 12 percent of servicemembers said they or their spouse had used , during the last 12 months , at least one of four types of loans : payday , rent - to - own , automobile title pawn , or tax refund , which dod says can often be associated with predatory lending practices . dod is unable to quantify the extent to which the loans have associated predatory practices , the frequency of such borrowing , the amounts borrowed , or the effects of the loans . although not generalizable , participants in gao 's 60 focus groups at 13 bases in the united states and germany identified problems resulting from the use of short - term consumer loans , but other participants described the loans as quick , easy , and obtainable by servicemembers with bad credit . privacy concerns and the reluctance of servicemembers to reveal financial problems make it difficult to quantify the use and effects of predatory lending . dod and active duty servicemembers are not fully utilizing dod 's tools for curbing the use and effects of predatory lending practices . at some of the installations that we visited , the armed forces disciplinary control board -- a panel that can recommend to an installation commander that a business be placed off - limits to servicemembers -- had not met in over a year . fort drum 's board , for example , had not met in about 4 years , even though the new york attorney general had filed two lending - related lawsuits against businesses on behalf of servicemembers and some of their family members at fort drum . dod officials told us the reasons for boards not meeting or making recommendations include high deployment levels and the effort required to place a business on an off - limits list . other commanders effectively changed businesses ' predatory practices by using their board 's recommendations to place or threaten to place the businesses off - limits . in addition , dod is not always providing a clear message regarding advertising in installation publications . participants in gao 's focus groups said they were confused because dod - provided financial management training ( described in our 2005 report , military personnel : more dod actions needed to address servicemembers ' personal financial management issues ) warned them against using payday lenders but some installation newspapers carried advertisements for such businesses . these problems occur even though a dod instruction requires a disclaimer indicating that the advertisement does not constitute endorsement by the u.s. government and a review by public affairs staff to determine if the advertisement might be detrimental to servicemembers . our review of some installation newspapers showed possible reasons for the confusion ; the disclaimers were often not prominently displayed or were located away from the advertisements . dod also offers servicemembers free legal review of contracts and other financial transactions , but servicemembers often do not use the reviews until problems result . recently , dod began exploring additional on - installation alternatives to payday loans .