in response to your interest , we are reporting on ( 1 ) the status of the network growth strategy , ( 2 ) amtrak's estimates of expected mail and express revenue , and ( 3 ) amtrak's success in obtaining freight railroads' agreement to allow it to expand service over their tracks .
in recent years , facing the continuing deterioration of its financial condition and its attempt to eliminate its need for federal operating assistance by december 2002 , amtrak undertook a number of actions intended to improve its financial condition .
the national railroad passenger corporation ( amtrak ) is the nation's intercity passenger rail operator .
in december 1999 , amtrak's board of directors shifted its route and service strategy toward planning to implement new routes and expand services ( called the network growth strategy ) on the freight railroad tracks over which amtrak operates .
it estimated that this expansion , involving 15 routes , would yield about $66 million in net financial benefits through fiscal year 2002 , primarily from expanding its mail and express business , and help amtrak move toward operational self - sufficiency .
among these actions were changes in its routes and services .
starting in 1995 , amtrak began reducing service and eliminating routes to reduce costs , although this strategy was ultimately unsuccessful .
in february 2002 , after we completed our work , amtrak estimated that it would need more than twice the amount of federal appropriations ( $1.2 billion for fiscal year 2003 ) than it had received on average over the past 3 years to retain its route network .
we discussed the proposed network growth strategy actions with officials from amtrak , the department of transportation , and several freight railroads over which amtrak operates .
we also reviewed amtrak's financial information used to generate route and service actions .
these potential risks include the expected ability to obtain capital funding and reach agreement with freight railroads to operate over their tracks .
amtrak's network growth strategy has been unsuccessful because it overestimated ( 1 ) revenues expected from new mail and express service and ( 2 ) its ability to reach agreement with freight railroads over capital funding and other implementation issues .
to carry out our work , we reviewed documents describing the network growth strategy , among other things .
amtrak has been unsuccessful in implementing its network growth strategy .
we recommend that , for any future major route and service proposals , the president of amtrak disclose to amtrak's board of directors any significant risks that could impair the successful implementation of the planned actions and its plans to ameliorate those risks .
however , we believe that amtrak's not examining more closely the capital improvements needed to implement their route proposals and whether freight railroads would likely agree to them were significant flaws in amtrak's strategy .
we did not assess the reasonableness of this estimate .
by so doing amtrak would have proposed considerably fewer new services and would have been more successful in implementing its proposals .
about 2 years after announcing the network growth strategy , amtrak has cancelled 9 of the 15 planned route actions without implementing them .