to ensure a stable future supply of lithium - 7 , we recommend that the secretary of energy direct the isotope program , consistent with the program's mission to manage isotopes in short supply , to take on the stewardship role by fully assessing supply risks ; communicating risks , as needed , to stakeholders ; ensuring risks are appropriately managed ; and fully and accurately determining domestic demand .
this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the supply and domestic demand for lithium - 7 ; ( 2 ) the responsibilities of doe , nrc , and other entities in assessing risks to the lithium - 7 supply , and what , if anything , has been done to mitigate a potential supply disruption of lithium - 7 ; and ( 3 ) additional options , if any , identified by government officials and industry representatives for mitigating a potential lithium - 7 shortage .
about 13 percent of our nation's electricity is produced by 65 nuclear power reactors that rely on enriched lithium hydroxide — a chemical that is produced and exported only by china and russia .
of the 100 commercial nuclear power reactors in the united states , these 65 are pressurized water reactors , a type of reactor that requires lithium hydroxide to be added to the water that cools it .
all commercial nuclear power reactors in the united states , including the 65 pressurized water reactors , are regulated by the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) through licensing , inspection , and enforcement of its requirements .
the lithium hydroxide is used in pressurized water reactors to prevent the cooling water from becoming acidic due to the addition of other chemicals that are critical to managing the nuclear reaction .
today , industry relies on china and russia for its supply of lithium - 7 has not been produced in the united states since 1963 , but a portion of the low - enriched lithium - 7 was further enriched and is stored by the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semiautonomous agency within doe .
without the lithium hydroxide , the cooling water's acidity would increase the rate of corrosion of pipes and other infrastructure in the reactor — possibly causing them to fail .
in light of the risk of relying on two suppliers for a critical component used in most of the nation's commercial nuclear power reactors , you asked us to review lithium - 7 supply and demand in the united states .
doe has studied lithium - 7 supply and demand to guide its decisions related to lithium - 7 .
similarly , nnsa makes other isotopes available to the isotope program to sell , including helium - 3 , on which we previously reported.pronged mission is to: ( 1 ) produce or distribute isotopes in short supply , their associated by - products and surplus materials , and deliver isotope - related services ; ( 2 ) maintain the infrastructure required to produce and supply isotopes and related services ; and ( 3 ) investigate and develop according to doe , the isotope program's three - new or improved isotope production and processing techniques that can make new isotopes available for research and other applications .