the department of defense ( dod ) has expressed continuing concerns about servicemembers' use of predatory consumer loans .
and ( 2 ) are dod and active duty servicemembers fully utilizing the tools that dod has to curb the use and effects of predatory lending practices ? .
our recommendation will ( 1 ) require the boards to meet regularly and ( 2 ) provide installation commanders additional focus and oversight into conditions that may adversely affect servicemembers on their installations .
these tools include: ( 1 ) the armed forces disciplinary control boards , which can make recommendations to installation commanders who can then use or threaten to use their “off - limits” authority to prohibit servicemembers from using a business that engages in predatory lending practices ; ( 2 ) free legal assistance with contracts and other financial transactions ; and ( 3 ) personal financial management ( pfm ) programs that offer servicemembers assistance , such as financial management training and counseling .
these loans can result in financial problems that may lead to severe negative consequences for the military as a whole ( e.g. , decreases in unit readiness and morale ) as well as for the servicemembers themselves ( e.g. , criminal and adverse personnel actions , including possible discharge from the military ) .
this confusion is particularly problematic because it may harm dod's efforts to reduce the use and effects of predatory lending practices .
we are making the following two recommendations to the secretary of defense: to improve dod's ability to curb the use and effects of predatory lending practices , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness to amend existing regulations to require installation commanders to convene the armed forces disciplinary control boards at least semiannually to investigate and make recommendations to commanders on matters related to eliminating conditions which adversely affect the health , safety , morals , welfare , morale , and discipline of the armed forces , to include servicemembers' use of lenders who may use predatory lending practices .
dod policy officials have expressed concerns over certain types of high - cost , short - term consumer loans that are typically provided by lenders who lie outside the system of federally insured financial institutions .
dod and service policy officials identified dod's primary tools for curbing the use and effects of predatory loans .
in its comments , dod noted that it is in the initial stages of staffing and coordinating changes to the armed forces disciplinary control boards' joint regulations and will take two actions — require boards to meet four ( instead of two ) times a year and direct that businesses on the off - limits list for one service be off - limits for all services .
dod has a number of tools to address the use and effects of loans that it considers predatory .
dod's efforts to assess predatory lending are hampered by the lack of a precise definition of predatory lending — a problem shared with other organizations attempting to quantify the use and effects of predatory loans .
in addition , dod has encouraged servicemembers to seek , for example , payday loan alternatives available from on - installation banks , on - installation credit unions , and service - affiliated relief / aid societies .