these incidents have raised questions regarding how allegations of sexual assault are addressed by the chain of command , the authority and process to convene a court - martial , and the ability of the convening authority to provide clemency to a servicemember convicted of an offense . the constitution , in order to provide for the common defense , gives congress the power to raise , support , and regulate the armed forces , but makes the president commander in chief of the armed forces . therefore , courts - martial are not considered to be article iii courts and are not subject to all of the rules that apply in federal courts . under article i , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the power to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy ; and provide for organizing and disciplining them . under this authority , congress has enacted the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , which is the code of military criminal laws applicable to all u.s. military members worldwide . the mcm contains the rules for courts - martial ( rcm ) , the military rules of evidence ( mre ) , and the ucmj . the proposed language , if enacted , would prohibit the enlistment of individuals previously convicted of sexual offenses , eliminate the statute of limitations on prosecution of sexual offenses , and prohibit commanders from overturning a court - martial conviction as part of the post - trial review process . the house and senate have included numerous provisions addressing sexual assault , including those mentioned above , in the respective versions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ndaa ) . additionally , secretary of defense chuck hagel recently announced that the department of defense would implement a series of new initiatives designed to address sexual assaults in the military , many of which are addressed by proposals contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa . due to the sheer number and scope of the provisions contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa , this report addresses selected proposals including requiring creation of special victims' counsel programs , changes to disposition and clemency authorities , mandatory minimum punishments , commander's authority to transfer an accused , and protections for recruits and trainees . s. 967 addresses sex - related offenses under the ucmj by modifying the authority to proceed to trial by court - martial , modifying the manual for courts - martial to eliminate the factor relating to character and military service of the accused on initial disposition , modifying the authority to convene general and special courts - martial , creating a deadline for a military judge to call general and special courts - martial into session , modifying clemency authority of the convening authority , and requiring command action on reports of sexual offenses .