recent high - profile military - related cases involving sexual assaults by u.s. servicemembers have resulted in increased public and congressional interest in military discipline and the military justice system . questions have been raised regarding how allegations of sexual assault are addressed by the chain of command , the authority and process to convene a court - martial , and the ability of the convening authority to provide clemency to a servicemember convicted of an offense . under article i , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the power to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy ; and provide for organizing and disciplining them . under this authority , congress has enacted the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) , which is the code of military criminal laws applicable to all u.s. military members worldwide . the president implemented the ucmj through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) . the manual for courts - martial contains the rules for courts - martial ( rcm ) , the military rules of evidence ( mre ) , and the ucmj . members of the armed forces are subjected to rules , orders , proceedings , and consequences different from the rights and obligations of their civilian counterparts , and the ucmj establishes this unique legal framework . the ucmj authorizes three types of courts - martial : ( 1 ) summary court - martial , ( 2 ) special court - martial , and ( 3 ) general court - martial . depending on the severity of the alleged offense , the accused 's commanding officer enjoys great discretion with respect to the type of court - martial to convene . generally , each of the courts - martial provides fundamental constitutional and procedural rights to the accused , including , but not limited to , the right to a personal representative or counsel , the opportunity to confront evidence and witnesses , and the right to have a decision reviewed by a lawyer or a court of appeals . in the 113th congress , there have been no fewer than 10 separate bills introduced addressing the issue of sexual assault in the military . the bills have proposed various provisions that include , but are not limited to prohibiting enlistment in the armed forces of individuals previously convicted of sexual offenses , eliminating the statute of limitations on prosecution of sexual offenses under the ucmj , and barring commanders from overturning convictions obtained at court - martial . in recent months , congress has included many provisions addressing sexual assault , including those mentioned above , in the house and senate versions of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 ( fy2014 ndaa ) . additionally , secretary of defense chuck hagel recently announced that the department of defense would implement a series of new initiatives designed to address sexual assaults in the military . due to the sheer breadth of the various provisions contained in the house and senate versions of the fy2014 ndaa , this report will address selected legislative proposals including requiring special victims ' counsel , changes to disposition and clemency authorities , creation of a mandatory minimum punishment , authority to transfer the accused , and protections for recruits and trainees .