these include significant government ( military , intelligence , and civil ) and commercial interests . in recent years , recognition has been growing among space - faring nations and the international scientific community that the mass of man - made debris in low - earth orbit ( leo ) has reached a critical density that will lead to a slow but unstoppable growth of space debris that could have profound implications for those interests . significant debris - generating events in the past decade have heightened the issue , and a number of national and international studies confirm that the amount of current leo debris is both unstable and increasing . although space debris is not the sole threat to u.s. space assets , this report focuses on the threat posed by orbital debris , the steps that have been taken thus far to mitigate it , and what might be done to ensure the long - term sustainability of the space environment . "remediation" of the space environment denotes taking action with respect to inactive objects in space . a few hearings in recent years have touched on orbital debris issues , but congress might consider additional hearings from major stakeholders in the military , intelligence , civil , and commercial sector on whether proposed mitigation measures are in the national interests of the united states . congress might also consider requiring dod and nasa to develop a roadmap outlining a range of possible remediation programs to consider . others perceive the danger as potentially affecting u.s. security interests , especially in its ability to interfere with consistent satellite support to u.s. military and intelligence organizations . catastrophic collisions are likely to continue to drive its growth , and the threat posed by orbital debris may be exacerbated by accidental or intentional debris - generating events . international compliance with mitigation measures is widely seen as critically important , but many experts believe that mitigation efforts alone are insufficient . for this reason , more aggressive measures , such as active debris removal , could be considered to protect u.s. national security interests in space and the long - term sustainability of the space environment .