for decades , executive permission in the form of a presidential permit has been required for the construction , connection , operation , and maintenance of certain facilities that cross the united states' borders with canada and mexico . the constitutional basis for the president's cross - border permitting authority was examined in a prior crs report . however , questions remain about the manner in which this authority is exercised among the agencies to which it has been delegated . in particular , some members of congress and affected stakeholders seek greater clarity about how presidential permit applications are reviewed for various kinds of cross - border energy projects , including the degree to which there may be differences or similarities among the various agency approaches to evaluating environmental impacts of proposed projects and in determining whether they serve the national or public interest . with few exceptions , requests for presidential permits for cross - border pipelines or electric transmission lines have involved projects extending a relatively short distance into a u.s. border state before connecting to some existing facility ( e.g. , a refinery in texas or a power plant in arizona ) . however , in the last decade , two long cross - border pipeline projects have been approved — transcanada's keystone and enbridge energy's alberta clipper . in particular , there has been significant national attention on the department of state's process for considering transcanada's permit application for its proposed keystone xl pipeline . the trump administration issued a presidential permit for that project on march 23 , 2017 . most notable was the keystone xl pipeline approval act ( s. 1 ) , which was passed in congress but vetoed by president obama . given the issues that arose in the wake of transcanada's application for the keystone xl pipeline , congress may again propose legislation intended to expedite approval of future applications for presidential permits . this report focusses on the presidential permit review processes for cross - border energy infrastructure as implemented by these agencies: the department of state for pipelines and similar facilities that transport liquids such as petroleum , petroleum products , and other hazardous liquids ; the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) for natural gas pipelines and associated facilities ; and the department of energy ( doe ) for electricity transmission lines and associated facilities . the state department makes its permitting decisions primarily in accordance with directives in executive order ( e.o. ) . 11423 , as amended by e.o . 13337 . ferc and doe make permitting decisions in accordance with e.o . 10485 , as amended by e.o . 12038 . broadly speaking , each executive order requires the respective agency to do the following: gather necessary project - specific information from the applicant ; seek input from specific outside federal agencies ; and decide whether to seek input from additional local , state , tribal , or federal agencies or from members of the public . under the applicable executive order , each agency is required to issue a presidential permit if , after evaluating all relevant project information , the agency determines that the project would "serve the national interest" ( pursuant to e.o . 10485 ) . each agency authorized to issue presidential permits informs its decisionmaking regarding such permits using information gathered in accordance with its procedures implementing the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) . permit conditions , such as mitigation measures and additional compliance requirements , are also generally identified during the nepa review . in 2015 , the state department under the obama administration did deny transcanada's application for a presidential permit , finding that the pipeline would not meet the national interest . in recent years , largely within the context of the obama administration's consideration of the presidential permit application for the keystone xl pipeline project , congress has acted on numerous occasions to influence the state department permitting process or to assert direct congressional authority over permit approval through new legislation . for example , congress could choose to consider legislation that would explicitly define the scope of federal agency reviews for some projects , change the agency responsible for authorizing such projects , or explicitly define the criteria that can or must be evaluated to determine whether a proposal is in the national or public interest .