the jones act , which refers to section 27 of the merchant marine act of 1920 ( p.l . 66-261 ) , requires that vessels transporting cargo from one u.s. point to another u.s. point be u.s. - built , and owned and crewed by u.s. citizens . the act provides a significant degree of protection from foreign competition for u.s. shipyards , domestic carriers , and american merchant sailors . it is a subject of debate because some experts point out that it makes domestic ocean shipping relatively expensive , constrains the availability of ships , and contributes to making it much more costly to build merchant vessels in u.s. shipyards than in shipyards abroad . the jones act has been an issue in recent congresses , coming into prominence amid debates over puerto rico's economic challenges and recovery from hurricane maria in 2017 ; in the investigation into the sinking of the 40-year - old ship el faro with 33 fatalities during a hurricane in 2015 ; and in discussions about domestic transportation of oil and natural gas . the law's effectiveness in achieving national security goals has also been the subject of attention in conjunction with a congressional directive that the administration develop a national maritime strategy , including strategies to increase the use of short sea shipping and enhance u.s. shipbuilding capability . the jones act of 1920 was not the first law requiring that vessels transporting cargo domestically be u.s. - built , owned , and crewed . rather , it was a restatement of a long - standing restriction that was temporarily suspended during world war i by p.l . in 1817 , congress enacted a precursor to the jones act by disallowing any vessel wholly or partially foreign - owned from transporting domestic cargo between u.s. ports ( 3 stat . while bills that would have allowed foreign - built vessels to qualify for u.s. - flag international service were reported by house and senate committees in the late 1800s , it was in 1912 that congress enacted such a measure ( p.l . points. . puerto rico is exempt for passengers but not for cargo . the terms "coastwise qualified" and "jones act qualified" are synonymous . customs and border protection ( cbp ) is primarily responsible for determining what maritime activity falls under the act , namely defining what constitutes "transportation" and whether the origin and destination of a voyage are "u.s. points" ( 19 c.f.r . since 1920 , congress has enacted provisions that could be said to tighten jones act requirements , as well as provisions that exempt certain maritime activities from the requirements . in 1935 , congress forbade jones act - qualified vessels sold to foreign owners or registered under a foreign - flag to subsequently requalify as jones act - eligible ( p.l . this provides additional protection from competition for jones act carriers if coastal shipping demand increases , because it can take two years to construct a new ship . in 1940 , congress expanded the jones act to cover towing vessels , such as river tugs that push barge tows and harbor tugs that assist larger ships , and salvage vessels operating in u.s. waters ( p.l . 76-599 ) . in 1988 , congress specified that waterborne transport of valueless material , such as dredge spoil or municipal solid waste , requires use of a jones act - qualified vessel ( p.l . 100-329 ) . recent controversies over the jones act have concerned the oceangoing ship and offshore supply vessel sectors . as with the commercial aspirations stated in the maritime policy of the jones act , there are also perceived shortcomings with respect to the domestic fleet's ability to serve as a naval auxiliary in times of war or national emergency . this has yet to be issued . the jones act crew of oceangoing ships consists of about 3,380 merchant mariners , which is about 29% of the total mariner pool of 11,678 mariners that marad estimates would be required to crew the government - owned reserve fleet while still concurrently being able to operate the commercial fleet . while the jones act's statement of maritime policy indicated a desire for a commercial fleet that also could provide sealift in times of war , since then three other fleets of ships have been established for purposes of military sealift: the rrf , msc , and msp . as per long - standing agreements between marad , acting as advocate for the u.s. maritime industry , and the department of defense , the military is to utilize msp ships and exhaust that capacity before it utilizes msc ship capacity . the higher cost of the domestically built sealift fleet would be shared nationally , as is the case with other defense assets . the navy has found that repairing the vessels has thus far been three times more expensive and has taken twice as long as originally projected .