this paper explains the u.s. economic sanctions in place up to the point when north korea was delisted as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism . until june 2008 , u.s. economic sanctions were imposed against north korea for five primary reasons : ( 1 ) north korea is seen as posing a threat to u.s. national security ; ( 2 ) north korea is designated by the secretary of state as a state sponsor or supporter of international terrorism ; ( 3 ) north korea is a marxist - leninist state , with a communist government ; ( 4 ) north korea has been found by the state department to have engaged in proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; and ( 5 ) north korea has been found by the president to have detonated a nuclear explosive device . the united states has also taken steps to isolate the macau - based banco delta asia for counterfeiting and money - laundering activities , actions north korea has characterized as attacks against it . in accordance with u.s. law , the united states limits some trade , denies trade in dual - use goods and services , limits foreign aid , and opposes entry into or support from international financial institutions . at the president 's discretion , north korea would also be subject to the economic sanctions pursuant to the international religious freedom act of 1998 , under which the administration has identified north korea as a `` country of particular concern '' since 2001 , and pursuant to the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , under which the administration has classified north korea in the category of most severe offender ( tier 3 ) since 2003. in october 2002 , after meetings between high - level u.s. and north korean government officials , the united states reported that north korea had confirmed suspicions that it had reactivated its nuclear weapons development program . an international crisis ensued , with north korea expelling international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) inspectors and declaring that it would withdraw from the non - proliferation treaty . participants in the korean energy development organization ( kedo ) — including united states , japan , south korea and european union — in turn suspended shipments of fuel oil . kedo also suspended construction of the light - water reactors , the completion of which had been planned for 2003. north korea officially withdrew from the nuclear nonproliferation treaty on january 10 , 2003 ( effective three months hence ) , the first signatory country to do so .