appendix a . other crs products relating to north korea overview crs report rl33567 , korea - u.s. relations: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . placement on the sec . 6 ( j ) list not only results in the constriction of trade possibilities ; placement also may trigger denial of beneficial trade designation ( ntr or gsp ) , unfavorable tax status for investors , new limits on diplomatic relations , opposition in international financial institutions , and stricter licensing requirements for trade with the united states in food and medicine . following the easing of sanctions that pertained to trade , travel , and related transactions in 2000 , there was some speculation that north korea would be removed from the sec . 6 ( j ) list of state sponsors of terrorism . north korea was particularly interested in changing its status so that it could effectively apply for membership in the world bank and the international monetary fund . the united states is required by law to oppose membership in the international financial institutions of , or financial support to , terrorist states . the united states discussed the matter with south korea and japan in 2000 . south korea supported north korea's bid for this step toward normalization ; japan opposed a change in status until the matter of kidnaped japanese citizens was resolved . north korea remains on the united states' sec . 6 ( j ) list . north korea is also among those countries listed as being in violation of section 40a of the arms export control act , which prohibits the selling or licensing of defense articles or defense services to any country that the president finds "is not cooperating fully with united states antiterrorism efforts. the president is required to make such a determination annually , and the prohibition may be waived on grounds that it is in the national interest to do so . the trade agreement extension act of 1951 required the suspension of most - favored - nation trade status ( which has since been replaced by normal trade relations status ) for all communist countries except yugoslavia . as a result , north korea was denied mfn trade status on september 1 , 1951 . north korea remains listed in the headnotes of the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) as a rate of duty column 2 country ( along with cuba ) . as a result , while trade is not prohibited with north korea under the relevant trade laws , tariffs are set at the highest rates for imports from that country . a side result of being denied mfn or ntr is that any such country is also denied preferential trade treatment under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , pursuant to the trade act of 1974 . on several occasions , north korean entities have been found to be in violation of u.s. missile nonproliferation laws . once a finding is made , the imposition of sanctions is mandatory , though sanctions may be waived if the president finds it "essential to the national security of the united states" to do so .