our testimony last march noted important strides by the secretary of veterans affairs to improve the department's it leadership and management , including the hiring of a chief information officer ( cio ) to lead the program and a commitment to reform how the department uses information technology . in addition we will provide an update of the department's progress since march in addressing specific weaknesses in its overall information technology program , including the status of its actions to develop an enterprise architecture , improve information security , implement the veterans benefits administration's ( vba ) veterans service network ( vetsnet ) replacement compensation and pension payment system and maintain the existing benefits delivery network , and implement jointly with the department of defense and indian health service the government computer - based patient record initiative . the secretary's initiative also represents a bold and innovative step by the department , and is one that has been undertaken by few other federal agencies . va's new organizational structure holds promise for building a more solid foundation for investing in and improving the department's accountability over information technology resources . va officials describe the architecture as a top - down , business - focused document that provides a blueprint for systematically defining and documenting the department's desired ( target ) environment . as of september 6 , 5 of the office's 16 positions had been filled . for example , va identified eight different ways in which registration and eligibility are determined in the “as - is” ( baseline ) architecture . va's information security continues to be an area of significant concern . va has also acted to help provide a more solid foundation for detecting , reporting , and responding to security incidents . in assessing the department's recent corrective actions relative to our information security risk management framework , va still needs to accomplish a number of critical tasks that are essential to successfully achieving a comprehensive and effective computer security management program . va has begun placing greater emphasis on controlling its security risks ; however , its current framework does not yet include some of the essential elements required to achieve a formal program for monitoring and evaluating computer controls . these recommended actions included ( 1 ) appointing a project manager to direct the development of an action plan for , and oversee the complete analysis of , the current system replacement effort ; ( 2 ) finalizing and approving a revised c&p replacement strategy based on results of the analysis and implementing an integrated project plan ; ( 3 ) developing an action plan to move vba from the current to the replacement system ; and ( 4 ) developing an action plan to ensure that bdn will be available to continue accurately processing benefits payments until the new system is deployed . the officials stated that , presently , the fhie repository contains data on almost 2 million unique patients . beyond fhie , va and dod have envisioned a long - term strategy involving the two - way exchange of clinical information .