in addition we will provide an update of the department's progress since march in addressing specific weaknesses in its overall information technology program , including the status of its actions to develop an enterprise architecture , improve information security , implement the veterans benefits administration's ( vba ) veterans service network ( vetsnet ) replacement compensation and pension payment system and maintain the existing benefits delivery network , and implement jointly with the department of defense and indian health service the government computer - based patient record initiative .
information technology continues to play an integral and substantial role in helping va effectively serve our nation's veterans , with the department spending more than a billion dollars annually in support of its information technology operations .
our testimony last march noted important strides by the secretary of veterans affairs to improve the department's it leadership and management , including the hiring of a chief information officer ( cio ) to lead the program and a commitment to reform how the department uses information technology .
as you are well aware , however , the department has been challenged in its efforts to effectively manage its information technology to produce results and achieve optimal agency performance .
since that time , the secretary has taken additional steps toward achieving improvements in key areas of it performance , including recently announcing a realignment of the way in which the department is organized to carry out its information technology mission .
thank you for inviting us to take part in your discussion of the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) information technology ( it ) program .
in conducting this work we analyzed relevant documentation and interviewed key agency officials to identify and assess va's decisions and actions since march to improve its information technology management .
at your request , we will discuss today this new organizational structure and resulting changes in the role of va's cio .
we reviewed available documentation discussing the department's plans and strategies for realigning its information technology structure .
further , we conducted site visits at the veterans benefits administration's regional office in salt lake city to assess the current use of vetsnet in processing compensation and pension benefits claims ; and at the va medical center in washington , d.c. , to observe data retrieval capabilities of the federal health information exchange ( formerly the government computer - based patient record initiative ) .
we also examined its enterprise architecture strategy as well as steps being taken to strengthen computer security management departmentwide .
this could have a significant effect on va's accountability for how components are spending money , as we have previously noted the department's inability to adequately capture all of its it costs .
this initiative has been termed healthepeople ( federal ) .
va's new organizational structure holds promise for building a more solid foundation for investing in and improving the department's accountability over information technology resources .
the department's critical remaining actions include routinely monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of security policies and controls and acting to address identified weaknesses .
successful implementation of va's information technology program requires strong leadership and management to help define and guide the department's plans and actions .