deepening project . as of december 2009 , the corps estimated average annual benefits of $30.1 million and average annual costs of $22.3 million for the project , yielding annual net benefits of $7.8 million . because estimated benefits exceeded estimated costs — resulting in positive net benefits and a benefit - cost ratio greater than one — the corps determined that the project remained economically justified . see table 2 for a summary of the benefit and cost estimates and resulting benefit - cost ratios in the corps' reanalysis and in its most recent economic update . as noted in table 2 , the benefit and cost estimates are based on different price levels and discount rates , which accounts for some of the changes observed in the estimates between the 2002-2004 reanalysis and the 2009 economic update . this means that the estimates and resulting net benefits and benefit - cost ratios are not directly comparable between the two analyses . with regard to assessing the project's potential environmental impacts , the corps is required to comply with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) . as our discussions with refinery officials suggest , firms are not likely to commit to the modifications needed to realize project benefits until they have conducted their own financial analysis of the benefits they would gain . second , eia officials explained that the nation's current economic recession has been associated with declines in demand for products refined from crude oil and shrinking profit margins for delaware river refineries . these conditions are reflected in relatively low utilizations — that is , how much of a refinery's total productive capacity is being used — which eia officials said had fallen below 80 percent by late 2009 . the officials noted that the following two delaware river refinery firms have recently reduced their respective refinery capacities by halting production at major facilities: in october 2009 sunoco announced that it was indefinitely idling its eagle point refinery facility in westville , new jersey . subsequently , the firm announced in february 2010 that the closure was permanent . in november 2009 valero announced that it would permanently shut down one of its two delaware river refinery facilities — the former motiva facility in delaware city , delaware . according to eia officials , the remaining delaware river facilities are likely to continue to operate because most of the excess refinery capacity has already been squeezed out of the delaware river region . looking ahead , eia officials said that according to many observers , demand is not expected to return to its former levels even after the economy recovers because of the policy and structural changes noted earlier , resulting in less need for gasoline from crude oil . however , they said that the northeast will remain a major consumer of home heating oil , which is made from crude oil , and that demand will likely grow for diesel fuel , a crude oil product that is used heavily in the trucking industry — especially in the northeast .