with the illegal alien population in the united states estimated to be between 5 and a reported 11 million people , the issue of illegal immigration continues to attract the attention of policymakers , the media , and the public .
in 1994 , the attorney general announced a five - part strategy to strengthen enforcement of the nation's immigration laws , including a strategy to deter illegal entry along the southwest border .
to deter illegal entry between the nation's ports of entry , the strategy called for the immigration and naturalization service's ( ins ) border patrol to incrementally increase control of the border in four phases to make it so difficult and costly for aliens to attempt illegal entry that fewer individuals would try .
specifically , this report addresses ( 1 ) ins' progress in implementing the strategy , ( 2 ) the strategy's effects to date , and ( 3 ) experience gained as the strategy has unfolded over the past 7 years .
the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 requires us to track , monitor , and evaluate the attorney general's strategy and to report annually for 6 years .
seven years later , ins continues to make record numbers of arrests for illegal entry along the southwest border — over 1.6 million in fiscal year 2000 .
the four - phased approach involved adding resources along the southwest border , starting with the areas that had the highest known levels of illegal alien activity .
we have issued two previous reports on ins' southwest border strategy and two others dealing with other parts of the attorney general's strategy .
as agreed with your committees , this report focuses on the component of the attorney general's strategy that deals with ins' efforts to deter illegal entry between the ports of entry along the southwest border .
ins' current efforts to measure the effectiveness of its border control efforts could be enhanced by analyzing data in its ident system .
to better gauge the effects of its border control efforts , we recommend that the ins commissioner develop specific performance indicators using the ident data and incorporate these indicators into ins' annual performance plan .
these data offer ins an opportunity to develop additional performance indicators that could be incorporated into its annual performance plan review process and could help ins assess whether its border control efforts are associated with an overall reduction in the flow of illegal aliens across the border .
the strategy's impact on local communities has been affected by the timing of ins' infusion of agent and other resources intended to protect the local community from a surge in illegal alien traffic ; what routes the illegal aliens have used in crossing the border ; and ins' involvement with the community .
ins has taken some steps to design an overall evaluation of the strategy's effectiveness , and it has issued reports on the effects of operations gatekeeper and rio grande .
whether ins' strategy has deterred illegal entry overall or whether it has merely shifted the traffic to different locations is unclear .
as a way of gauging the effectiveness of its strategy in deterring illegal entry , the border patrol is attempting to measure its effectiveness in apprehending aliens .