the smithsonian institution ( smithsonian ) is the world 's largest museum complex . its funding comes from its own private trust fund assets and federal appropriations . the smithsonian board of regents , the smithsonian 's governing body , is responsible for the long - term stewardship of the smithsonian . in recent years , gao and others have documented significant governance and accountability breakdowns at the smithsonian , which could ultimately put funding and the organization 's credibility at risk , and the deterioration of the smithsonian 's facilities and the threat this deterioration poses to the smithsonian 's collections . this testimony discusses the smithsonian 's status in implementing governance reforms recommended by its governance committee and by gao in a 2008 report ( gao - 08-632 ) -- as discussed in a gao report being released today ( gao - 10-190r ) -- and the smithsonian 's progress in implementing facilities and funding recommendations gao made in a 2007 report ( gao - 07-1127 ) . the work for this testimony is based on gao - 10-190r and an analysis of documentary and testimonial evidence from smithsonian officials . gao is not making recommendations in this testimony and did not make new recommendations in gao - 10-190r . the smithsonian and the board of regents concurred with the findings of gao - 10-190r . since may 2008 the smithsonian has implemented 9 reforms recommended by the board of regents governance committee -- in addition to the 30 it had implemented prior to may 2008- - and 1 of 4 gao recommendations , but work remains on 3 reforms and 3 recommendations . the 9 governance committee reforms implemented since may 2008 include efforts such as revising policies related to travel and expense reimbursement and event expenses , creating a regents ' annual public forum , completing a review and revision of board of regents committees ' charters , and developing an assessment process for the board of regents . the smithsonian has not completed implementation of 3 governance committee reforms related to the smithsonian 's contracting policy , a comprehensive review of financial reporting and internal controls , and enhancing the role of advisory boards . regarding gao 's may 2008 recommendations , the smithsonian implemented gao 's recommendation to evaluate what actions it can take in the event of persistent neglect of duties by a regent , but has not completed implementation of the following three recommendations : the board of regents has not fully implemented gao 's recommendation to develop and make public its process for the selection , use , and evaluation of nonregents . the board of regents posted on its web site the process for selecting nonregent committee members but did not make a final decision regarding a proposed bylaw to give nonregent members of committees the same roles and responsibilities as regents . the board of regents took steps to improve its relationship with stakeholders , including advisory boards . however , because of limitations of the efforts thus far -- such as the informal nature of the board of regents ' efforts and their focus on the dissemination of information from the regents rather than two - way communication -- several advisory board chairs with whom gao spoke expressed concern that the board of regents still lacked a sufficient understanding of smithsonian museums and other entities to govern as effectively as possible . the board of regents has not yet conducted a comprehensive evaluation of its reforms but plans to do so in fiscal year 2010. the smithsonian has implemented four of gao 's five 2007 recommendations related to facilities and funding . these include recommendations related to improving the smithsonian 's security communications and the comprehensiveness of its capital plan . furthermore , the smithsonian has implemented gao 's recommendation to more comprehensively analyze nonfederal funding options to meet the needs of its facilities projects . the smithsonian is planning to launch a national fund - raising campaign to raise private sector funds for its programs and facilities . it is unclear how much in funds will be raised or dedicated to facilities through such a campaign . the smithsonian has not implemented gao 's recommendation to submit a report to congress and the office of management and budget on its funding strategy , but it plans to do so as part of its national fund - raising campaign .