adjudication . if the consular officer determines that the applicant is eligible for the visa on the basis of the application , supporting documentation , and other relevant information such as statements made in an interview , he or she will take the applicant's passport for final processing , but the visa cannot be printed until all security checks have been returned and reviewed . if the consular officer determines that the applicant is inadmissible to the united states or otherwise ineligible under the applicable visa eligibility criteria , he or she informs the applicant that the visa has been refused , and identifies the provision ( s ) of law under which the visa was refused . recurrent vetting . in march 2010 , shortly after the december 2009 attempted bombing by a foreign national traveling to the united states on a valid visa , cbp began vetting individuals with nivs on a recurrent basis . this program has led state to revoke visas after they have been issued when information was later discovered that rendered the individual inadmissible to the united states or otherwise ineligible for the visa . in addition , cbp analysts may take other actions as needed after identifying new derogatory information , such as recommending that the airline deny boarding to the traveler because the traveler is likely to be deemed inadmissible upon arrival in the united states ( known as a no - board recommendation ) or making a referral to ice , which may seek to remove the individual if already within the united states . according to nctc , kfe also conducts recurrent vetting of niv holders against emerging threat information . the total number of niv applications that consular officers adjudicated annually ( or , niv adjudications ) peaked at about 13.4 million in fiscal year 2016 , which was an increase of approximately 30 percent since fiscal year 2012 . in fiscal year 2017 , niv adjudications decreased by about 880,000 adjudications , or about 7 percent . figure 2 shows the number of applications adjudicated each year from fiscal year 2012 through 2017 . appendix ii includes additional data on niv adjudications related to this and the other figures in this report . annual monthly trends . state data from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 indicate that niv adjudications generally followed an annual cycle , ebbing during certain months during the fiscal year ; however , adjudications in fiscal year 2017 departed slightly from this trend . specifically , from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , the number of niv adjudications typically peaked in the summer months . state officials noted that the summer peak is generally due to international students who are applying for their visas for the coming academic year . however , in fiscal year 2017 , the summer months did not experience a similar increase from previous months , departing from the trend over the previous five fiscal years , according to state data . instead , niv adjudications peaked in december of fiscal year 2017 . state officials attributed some of the decline in fiscal year 2017 to a decrease in chinese niv applicants , which we discuss later in this report . figure 3 shows monthly niv adjudications for fiscal years 2012 through 2017 .