the objectives of our review were to evaluate the extent to which ( 1 ) the army national guard ( arng ) has provided oversight of its recruiting process ; ( 2 ) the arng met its goals for recruiting , completion of initial military training , and completion of initial term of service in recent years ; and ( 3 ) the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , department of the army , and arng have conducted their oversight responsibilities of the arng's financial incentives programs .
the nearly 15 years of deployment of u.s. troops in a wartime environment has proved challenging for recruiting servicemembers for the department of defense ( dod ) .
this report evaluates the extent to which ( 1 ) the arng has provided oversight of its recruiting process ; ( 2 ) the arng met its goals for recruiting , completion of initial military training , and completion of initial term of service in recent years ; and ( 3 ) the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , department of the army , and arng have conducted their oversight responsibilities of the arng's financial incentives programs .
at the height of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom , the department of the army and the national guard bureau ( ngb ) allowed applicants with lower aptitude scores or prior felony convictions to enlist in order to ensure that the army national guard ( arng ) and active army could meet their respective missions .
the evaluation should also determine whether incentives are being effectively awarded in military occupational specialties that have been under or over authorized levels , and whether changes are needed to effectively use existing incentives .
also , the house report included two additional provisions: ( 1 ) a provision for us to assess the extent to which contracting vehicles used to support arng recruiting were in compliance with dod and department of the army policies and regulations , and ( 2 ) a provision for us to assess the numbers of individuals who complete basic and advanced individual training and the average length of time between when a person enlists in the arng and when the person completes initial military training .
we could not assess the extent to which the arng met goals prior to fiscal year 2015 because arng officials stated that the goals have changed over time and could not provide goals for previous fiscal years .
with the army's downsizing and the current fiscal environment , including the budget control act of 2011 , dod faces an uncertain future where personnel decisions may prove even more important and where there is particular need for effective measures such as financial incentives to help the arng meet its recruiting mission and readiness requirements .
and any type of recruiter misconduct could have significant implications for dod .
however , since the end of operation iraqi freedom and a significant drawdown from afghanistan , the department of the army and ngb have issued guidance prohibiting approval of waivers for applicants with prior criminal offenses , such as certain types of sexual offenses , as well as increasing the applicant aptitude score standards .
given that the reporting of information related to the amounts of incentives obligated has been a requirement but not carried out in recent years , we recommend that the office of the secretary of defense take the following action in order to ensure continued reporting in the future: enforce its requirement for the national guard and reserve component to submit information on the amounts of incentives obligated and incorporate the required information in the recruiting resources reports .