in 1992 congress authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to implement the delaware river deepening project . in addition to the reanalysis , we reviewed later economic and environmental analyses the corps had prepared to determine whether certain limitations and other key issues previously identified by gao had been addressed in these subsequent documents . deepening project . the corps' reanalysis addressed many of the limitations that we had identified in 2002 in the project's original economic analysis by using more recent information to correct invalid assumptions and outdated data , recalculating benefits and costs to correct miscalculations , and accounting for some of the economic uncertainty associated with the project . in addition , as we recommended , the corps had independent experts review the reanalysis before submitting it to congress . for example , in its analysis of the economic uncertainty associated with the project , the corps considered the effects of negative - growth scenarios only for crude oil and refined petroleum but not for the remaining benefit categories . in the reanalysis these issues were addressed as follows: first , according to the corps' original statistical model , in 23 percent of all possible cases , ships on specific crude oil trade routes would carry enough cargo to exceed 40 feet of draft if a 45-foot channel were available , leading to transportation cost savings for that cargo in a deeper channel . overall , while the corps' efforts have been responsive to the recommendations we made in 2002 , we identified several limitations in the economic reanalysis that introduce additional uncertainty into the project's benefit estimates . for example , the department of energy has lowered its long - term forecasts for growth in east coast refinery capacity and u.s. imports of crude oil . the corps' 2008 update also did not resolve uncertainties related to some other benefit categories . however , the 2009 update did not present any revised modeling , sensitivity analysis , or related adjustments to the benefit estimates to reflect changes to market and industry conditions and outlook for the delaware river region — for example , by incorporating the lost refinery capacity at the delaware city and eagle point facilities into its forecasts , or by revisiting the sensitivity analysis from the corps' 2002 report that analyzed the effect of negative growth for crude oil , both of which could have provided additional context for decision makers . specifically , the corps ( 1 ) lowered its estimate of the volume of dredged material , which eliminated the need for new disposal sites , but it continues to face resistance to its disposal plan ; ( 2 ) was sued by delaware and new jersey in october and november 2009 , respectively , which charged that the corps lacks the environmental approvals needed to proceed with the project ; and ( 3 ) has an ongoing dispute with new jersey and several environmental groups over the project's national environmental policy act ( nepa ) process . specifically , new jersey officials and several environmental groups have separately claimed that the assessment is not the appropriate mechanism for updating the last major environmental analysis of the project — the 1997 supplemental environmental impact statement ( seis ) — because , in their view , applicable regulations require the corps to prepare another seis to account for project and environmental conditions that they contend have changed significantly since 1997 . among other things , environmental groups criticized the corps for not giving stakeholders sufficient time for commenting on these changes and for scheduling the comment period over a major holiday period . to better ensure that decision makers have the most current information about changes that could affect the benefits of the delaware river deepening project , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the chief of engineers and commanding general of the u.s. army corps of engineers to provide an updated assessment to the assistant secretary of the army for civil works , and to congress , of relevant market and industry trends and outlook that specifies the extent to which the data and assumptions underlying each benefit category have changed , and the effect of any changes on each benefit estimate and the project's net benefit estimate . to determine the extent to which the benefit projections the corps included in its reanalysis of the project , as updated , are consistent with current and anticipated future market and industry conditions , we attempted to verify key data and assumptions underlying the key benefit categories in the reanalysis's 2002 report and 2004 supplement , as well as the corps' 2008 and 2009 economic updates , using data on the general trends since the corps conducted its reanalysis , current conditions , and the expected outlook for relevant delaware river imports and industries .