al. ) , reported by the house financial services and agriculture committees on june 16 , 2011 , the provisions of title vii and any implementing regulations would not take effect earlier than december 31 , 2012 , with the exception of provisions and rules relating to ( 1 ) swap reporting and data repositories , ( 2 ) certain clearing provisions , ( 3 ) authorities relating to speculation , and ( 4 ) the prohibition on federal bailouts of swap dealers contained in dodd - frank section 716 . 1573 also requires the cftc and sec to conduct public hearings to determine the amount of time and resources that would be needed by market participants to comply with proposed or contemplated regulations , and to consider alternate regulatory approaches . finally , the bill authorizes u.s. regulators to exempt persons who are subject to foreign regulation that is comparable to u.s. regulation . 2112 ( representative garrett ) would postpone the effective date of rules pursuant to dodd - frank section 727 , which deals with public reporting of swap trading data , until 12 months after the adoption of such rules . the repeal bills include h.r . 87 ( representative bachmann ) , s. 712 ( senator demint ) , s. 746 ( senator shelby ) , s. 1720 ( senator mccain ) , and s.amdt . 2112 ( senator crapo ) would require the cftc , before adopting final rules under title vii of dodd - frank , to adopt an implementation schedule and to complete and submit to congress a study of the effects of title vii on ( 1 ) u.s. economic growth and job creation , ( 2 ) the international competitiveness of u.s. financial markets , ( 3 ) derivatives market depth and liquidity , as well as an assessment of the degree of harmonization among u.s. regulators and an analysis of the progress of members of the group of 20 and other countries toward implementing derivatives regulatory reform . the amendment was withdrawn during senate floor consideration of h.r . two other bills — h.r . the bill requires the cftc and sec to adopt an orderly implementation schedule by december 31 , 2011 , taking into account the impact on u.s. economic growth , the international competitiveness of u.s. financial markets , the effect on derivatives market depth and liquidity , and the degree of cooperation among u.s. regulators . 1840 ( representative conaway ) amends the section of the commodity exchange act that requires the cftc to consider the costs and benefits of its regulations . under dodd - frank , the agencies are required to establish reward programs for whistleblowers who provide information that leads to enforcement actions resulting in recovery of ill - gotten gains from securities or commodities fraud . 2483 , among other things , would require whistleblowers to report violations internally ( to their employers ) before reporting to regulators , in order to be eligible for an award . the bill also eliminates the minimum award provisions of dodd - frank , leaving the size of the whistleblower payment to the discretion of the agencies . that capital protects its trading partners and the system as a whole .