a health insurance exchange has been established in every state , as required by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) . if a state opts not to , or if the department of health and human services ( hhs ) determines that the state is not in a position to administer its own exchange , then hhs will establish and administer the exchange in the state as a federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) . fourteen states and dc established sbes in 2014 , while the remaining 36 states have ffes . there are varying levels of state involvement in ffes . in some cases , a state has partnered with hhs to establish and administer the exchange , and in other cases hhs is administering the individual exchange while the state administers the shop exchange . each exchange is expected to generate its own funds to sustain its operations beginning january 1 , 2015 . it then briefly describes the requirement for exchanges to be self - sustaining , and concludes with a discussion of the sources and amounts of funding that hhs has used and plans to use to support ffe operations . for each fiscal year , the hhs secretary is to determine the total amount that will be made available to each state for exchange grants . any state that intends to do exchange establishment work can apply for and receive a section 1311 grant ; for instance , a state that is not establishing an sbe may receive a grant provided the state uses the funds for activities related to exchange establishment and implementation . hhs has awarded three different types of exchange grants , which are described below . the aca provides that an exchange may charge an assessment or user fee to participating issuers , but also allows an exchange to find other ways to generate funds to sustain its operations . the fee for an issuer is equal to the product of the billable members enrolled in the plan through an ffe and a monthly user fee rate . during the period fy2010 through fy2012 , a total of $456 million was used to support exchange operations . the remaining $125 million came from the health insurance reform and implementation fund ( hirif ) , a $1 billion fund within hhs that was established and funded to help pay for the administrative costs of aca implementation . cms's administrative costs to support exchange operations totaled $1,545 million in fy2013 . those funds included ( 1 ) discretionary funds transferred from other hhs accounts under the secretary's transfer authority ; ( 2 ) expired discretionary funds from the nonrecurring expenses fund ( nef ) ; ( 3 ) mandatory funds from the hirif ; and ( 4 ) mandatory funds from the prevention and public health fund ( see table 2 ) .