combating terrorism has emerged as one of the most important u.s. foreign policy and national security priorities . theresulting ntc report , countering thechanging threat of international terrorism , was issued on june 5 , 2000 . iran . it also calls upon the president to actively seeksupport from u.s. allies to compel iraniancooperation in the khobar towers investigation . role of the armed forces under extraordinary circumstances when a catastrophic event is beyond the capabilities of local , state , and other federal agencies , or is directly related to an armedconflict overseas , the report suggests that the president may want to consider designating the department of defense ( dod ) as the lead federal agency for thegovernment's response in the event of a catastrophic terrorist attack on u.s. soil . protecting civil liberties , while effectively combating terrorism , remains a strong area of concern in congress . issues within the purview of the commission's mandate , but not addressed in its report or in the reports cited above include: ( 1 ) who should be in charge of u.s. counterterrorism policy , and what are the best organizational mechanisms for policy formulation and implementation ; ( 2 ) how does one effectively utilize the gamut of tools available to policymakers to combat terrorism: i.e. , public diplomacy , economic and political sanctions,covert action , military force , and international cooperation and agreements ; ( 3 ) how does one prioritize for budget purposes whatever is viewed as an appropriate mix of counterterrorism resources to facilitate assuring that importantcomponents are neither short - changed or overfunded depending on political "clout" ; ( 4 ) how effective are sanctions and military force as policy tools ; how might their use be improved ; and how are commercial interests balanced in the equation . for example , if u.s. trade with china is deemed to produce a moderating effect on china's rogue human rights policy , supporters of the "carrot" approach mightargue that trade with libya could have a moderating effect on that nation's rogue terrorism policy . the national commission on terrorism's report and recommendations on countering the changing threat of international terrorism are likely to spur strongcongressional interest in counterterrorism policy during the 107th congress . the most likely areas ofscrutiny include: ( 1 ) more productive counterterrorismpolicies and mindsets ; ( 2 ) enhanced use of legislative authority to impose sanctions on states that support or activelycountenance terrorism , and ( 3 ) methods ofachieving a more cohesive , better coordinated federal counterterrorism effort through enhanced budget coordinationmechanisms .