i am pleased to submit this statement for the record as you consider the fiscal year 2000 budget request for the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) .

in your letter requesting that we examine ins budget issues , you noted a concern that “ins has incurred budget shortfalls” for fiscal year 1999 .

we have sought to determine ( 1 ) ins' overall fiscal condition in fiscal year 1999 , and ( 2 ) how factors such as overhiring and a decline in examinations fee applications have affected ins' fiscal situation .

after discussions with officials in ins , the department of justice ( doj ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and based on our analysis of ins budget documents , we concluded that ins is not experiencing an overall budget shortfall at this time .

the hiring policy that ins followed in fiscal year 1998 in an attempt to meet congressional and administration expectations resulted in ins having to commit a greater share of its fiscal year 1999 budget to salaries and benefits than in prior years .

overall , however , ins currently has more discretionary funds than it had in fiscal year 1998 .

with respect to the examinations fee account , ins overestimated the number of applications it would receive and did not detect the consequent revenue shortfall for months because of computer programming errors .

when it became apparent that the anticipated revenues would not be realized , ins decided to seek reprogramming of funds from other accounts to cover the costs .

the overhiring and reduced examinations fee revenues contributed to most ins programs having less discretionary funding in fiscal year 1999 than in fiscal year 1998 .

although ins has not experienced an overall budget shortfall , the combination of higher personnel costs , declining examinations fee revenues , and the resultant need to reduce discretionary funding allocations to most programs has created fiscal stress for the agency .

as shown in figure 1 , ins has benefited from significant increases in its regular appropriations and appropriations from its fee accounts .

funding increases have continued in fiscal year 1999 with congress providing over $3.9 billion .

when funding from the working capital fund , carryover balances , and certain reimbursements are added to this figure , ins' operating budget totals approximately $4.0 billion for fiscal year 1999 .

ins divides its operating budget into four categories of spending: ( 1 ) mandatory expenses , eg , rent ; ( 2 ) personal salaries and benefits ; ( 3 ) set - asides , such as employee relocations , vehicle acquisitions , and background investigations ; and ( 4 ) discretionary funding .

for purposes of this review , the first three categories can be grouped together as expenses that either have first claim on a budget because they must be paid or are considered integral to an agency's operations .

although many of these expenses directly benefit field operations , most are centrally - funded at headquarters .

the last category — discretionary funding — funds personnel costs for other - than - permanent employees ; discretionary overtime ; travel ; cash awards ; some types of procurements ; and day - to - day operating expenses , such as equipment maintenance and lease of copiers .

table 1 shows data provided by ins on its end - of - year allocation for fiscal year 1998 compared with its current allocation for fiscal year 1999 , by spending categories .

to determine ( 1 ) ins' overall fiscal condition , and ( 2 ) how factors such as overhiring and a decline in examinations fee applications have affected ins' fiscal situation , we interviewed officials in ins' offices of budget , personnel , facilities , and field operations .

to get additional perspectives on ins' funding status , we interviewed officials in doj's justice management division and omb's justice and general services administration branch .

we reviewed ins budget documents prepared for fiscal year 1999 that were submitted to the justice department , omb , and congress , as well as those prepared for internal use , to document and analyze changes in funding .

in addition , ins provided memorandums and briefing documents relevant to our work and additional supporting material prepared specifically for our review .

our work was performed in washington , d.c. , during february and march 1999 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

since 1996 , ins has been making a concentrated effort to fill both its existing vacancies and many new positions authorized by congress each year .

however , throughout this period , attrition of staff already on - board and reported difficulties in hiring new staff have impeded ins from filling many positions .

in an attempt to remedy this situation , ins allowed field offices to hire 4 percent more than their number of funded positions during fiscal year 1998 .

as discussed below , this policy , combined with other fiscal pressures , resulted in most ins programs having less discretionary funding in fiscal year 1999 than in fiscal year 1998 .

between the end of fiscal years 1995 and 1998 , ins' on - board staff increased from 18,823 to 27,941 .

ins anticipates adding another 3,000 staff by the end of fiscal year 1999 .

however , according to ins officials , throughout this period , the number of staff on board generally lagged behind authorized levels .

ins officials attribute the lag to ( 1 ) significant new authority to hire provided by congress each year , ( 2 ) high rates of attrition of on - board staff throughout the year , and ( 3 ) difficulty in recruiting and retaining a group of qualified candidates from outside of ins to fill vacancies as they arise .

since 1996 , ins has taken several steps to overcome these difficulties .

first , to ensure that its workforce would expand rather than shift internally , ins directed field staff to hire for only entry level positions .

second , ins allowed field managers to select a larger pool of candidates to consider for employment than they were authorized to hire because it was anticipated that a number of candidates would ( 1 ) not make it through the pre - appointment process , or ( 2 ) no longer be available by the time ins could make an offer of employment .

third , with approval , field managers were permitted to hire 2 percent more than their number of funded positions .

the over - hiring was supposed to occur in field offices where attrition or new hiring authority was anticipated .

the over - hired positions were supposed to be used to fill vacancies as soon as they occurred so that field office hiring would not exceed funded levels for the year .

at the start of fiscal year 1998 , regional directors requested , and the commissioner approved , an increase in the over - hire authority to 4 percent .

during fiscal year 1998 , the number of ins staff on board increased from 86 to nearly 97 percent of ins' funded level .

the large amount of fiscal year 1998 hiring created fiscal stress for the agency by increasing certain payroll costs beyond budgeted levels .

according to ins officials , beginning in fiscal year 1998 , there was a rapid acceleration in the on - board rate of border patrol agents , investigators , and detention and deportation officers .

these positions were over - hired for substantial periods during fiscal year 1998 .

this created a funding problem because ins allocated personal services and benefits ( ps&b ) for funded positions only - - not over - hired ones .

as of may of 1998 , ins projected that the ps&b portion of one of its accounts — salaries and expenses — would have a deficit of $16.1 million by the end of the fiscal year .

the border patrol program accounted for most of the projected deficit .

the nine other accounts that also provide funding for ps&b were projected to have surpluses or have negligible deficits .

ins officials attributed the deficit in part to previous and projected over - hiring by field offices .

ins officials told us that some field offices would over - hire , but then not use the over - hired position to fill their vacancies .

in some cases , they said this occurred because there was a mismatch between the positions that had been over - hired and the vacancies that occurred .

they said another reason for the deficit was a miscoding of $2.5 million in obligations for newly hired personnel to the salaries and expenses account instead of the violent crime reduction trust fund ( vcrtf ) account .

in response to the anticipated deficit , in may 1998 , the office of budget issued guidance to executive staff .

the guidance said the over - hire policy was not intended to permit field offices to remain up to 4 percent over the authorized number of positions for extended periods of time .

the guidance listed four actions to be taken: ( 1 ) correct miscoding of new hires from the salaries and expenses account to the vcrtf account ; ( 2 ) ensure all new hires are coded to the correct account ; ( 3 ) manage subsequent hiring to resolve over - hiring of officer positions ; and ( 4 ) redirect , by the office of budget , $6.5 million to cover the remainder of the anticipated year - end ps&b deficit .

the guidance warned that if hiring continued to exceed authorized levels , discretionary funds would have to be used to cover the projected deficit in ps&b funds .

however , as of august 1998 , the projected deficit of ps&b funds in the salaries and expenses account had increased to $20 million .

to respond to this situation , according to budget officials , field staff were directed to reduce staff on board to funded levels .

at the end of fiscal year 1998 , however , certain enforcement positions were still over - hired .

according to an ins budget official , the over - hired positions accounted for about $12 million in ps&b deficits .

approximately 50 percent of that amount was covered by unobligated discretionary funds that were reallocated by ins regions to ps&b .

in the past , according to ins and justice department officials , ps&b funding that was not used to pay personnel costs was reallocated to help fund other spending .

to successfully implement the policy of hiring up to funded levels during fiscal year 1998 , ins had to commit a larger share of its budget to pay for personnel costs .

this meant that a smaller share of funds would be available to address other needs .

for example , to pay an $80 million settlement with the investigation union , ins has been paying in annual $10 million installments from its investigations lapsed ps&b funds .

as a result of the increased hiring in fiscal year 1998 , the investigations program reportedly did not have sufficient lapsed dollars to fund the $10 million installment .

as a result , the office of budget set aside $10 million of investigations funding at the beginning of fiscal year 1999 to pay the current year installment .

this meant that the investigations program received substantially fewer dollars for discretionary spending .

to illustrate the impact of hiring up to funded levels on ins' budget , if ins remained at the 86 percent on - board level that existed at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 , then about $250 million in ps&b funds would have been available to spend on other needs .

but , ins finished fiscal year 1998 with nearly 97 percent of its funded positions filled .

if ins remained at the 97 percent on - board level throughout fiscal year 1999 , it would have $60 million in ps&b funds after meeting payroll costs .

this would be $190 million less than ps&b funds available with an 86 percent on - board level .

after meeting payroll expenses , mandatory costs , and other expenses set aside for centrally - funded items that support service - wide needs , ins currently had about $71.8 million more in discretionary funds , overall , than it had in fiscal year 1998 .

within ins , the office of field operations , which distributes funding to field offices , had more discretionary funds than it had in fiscal year 1998 , while all other headquarters offices received less discretionary funds .

although , overall , the office of field operations received more discretionary funds than in fiscal year 1998 , some programs within the office of field operations received less .

table 2 provides a breakdown of how the 11 programs under the office of field operations fared .

initially , in december 1998 , when the office of budget communicated to the office of field operations how much it would have available in discretionary funds , the total amount appeared to be $199 million less than was allocated in fiscal year 1998 .

however , according to ins officials , this amount did not yet include $270.7 million that was available from examinations fee funds , salaries and expenses funds for adjudications and naturalization program initiatives , and working capital funds .

the amounts available from these funds had not yet been allocated because detailed spending plans needed to be developed first .

including the $270.7 million , the office of field operations would have had $71.7 million more in discretionary funds , overall .

in january 1999 , the $270.7 million was allocated and , following feedback from the field about the inadequacy of the funds initially communicated , headquarters executive staff redirected $47.7 million to field operations for discretionary funds .

these actions resulted in a total allocation that was $120.6 million more than in fiscal year 1998 .

five of the 11 programs under the office of field operations had less discretionary funds than in fiscal year 1998 .

according to a doj official , these problems were not communicated to congress until january 22 , 1999 .

according to ins office of budget officials , the potentially difficult fiscal situation for fiscal year 1999 was conveyed internally at meetings with ( 1 ) resource management staff in july 1998 , ( 2 ) executive staff and regional directors in august 1998 during the third quarterly financial review , and ( 3 ) ins managers in october 1998 at the annual commissioner's conference .

however , initial budget allocations were not made until december 11 , 1998 , nearly the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 1999 .

according to budget officials , the allocations were made in december because of the complicated nature of the appropriation .

office of field operations officials said they were surprised by the magnitude of the reductions in discretionary funds .

ins continues to pursue the goal of hiring to its authorized level .

however , as of january 6 , 1999 , the executive associate commissioner for field operations cancelled the over - hire authority for all programs except , in certain circumstances , those funded by the examinations fee account .

in formulating its fiscal year 1999 budget , ins projected in november 1997 that it would receive 6.9 million adjudications and naturalization applications , and that these would produce $862 million in revenues for its examinations fee account .

in july 1998 , ins was projecting 5.6 million applications and $560 million in revenues for this account .

ins overestimated the number of applications — in particular , the number of naturalization applications - - that would be submitted to ins , and because of computer problems , it was not able to detect the downturn in applications in a timely fashion .

in august 1998 , doj submitted a reprogramming request for $171 million , of which $88 million was to help cover the decline in examinations fee revenues .

accounts , and ( 4 ) the fiscal year 1999 reprogramming for naturalization initiatives that was submitted as a separate request in august .

concerning the activities of immigrant groups .

none of these sources anticipated the decline in applications and revenues that occurred in fiscal year 1998 .

a specific type of naturalization application , referred to as n - 400 by ins , made up the single largest component , both in terms of the number of applications ( estimated to be 21 percent in fiscal year 1999 ) and revenues generated ( estimated to be 39 percent in fiscal year 1999 ) , of the examinations fee account .

ins projected in november 1997 that in fiscal year 1999 , it would receive nearly 1.5 million n - 400 applications , and that these would produce approximately $334 million in examinations fee revenue .

in june 1998 , ins lowered its fiscal year 1999 projections to 700,000 applications and $127 million in revenue .

ins officials have developed some hypotheses , including the following , to explain the unanticipated drop in applications: based on contacts with several community based organizations ( cbos ) , ins believed that cbos were stockpiling naturalization applications in an effort to help eligible aliens meet a january 1998 deadline for filing certain types of adjustment of status applications .

ins officials expected that naturalization applications would surge after the deadline .

however , it turned out that cbos were not stockpiling naturalization applications , and the expected surge did not occur .

legislative changes restored some benefits for aliens , reportedly causing a reduction in the demand for naturalization .

naturalization applications have peaked from among the 2.7 million aliens who were granted amnesty by the immigration reform and control act of 1986 .

however , evidence of this did not become clear until well into fiscal year 1998 .

ins had a large backlog of n - 400 applications , perhaps creating a disincentive for applicants to apply for naturalization .

ins did not have timely information to determine that the number of n - 400 applications had begun to decline .

the key reason for this was that computer programming errors were not detected and resolved for an 8- month period in fiscal year 1998 .

during this period , ins did not know how many n - 400 applications were received .

in december 1997 , ins tried to change its naturalization case processing and tracking system , the redesigned naturalization application casework system ( rnacs ) , to show the date that naturalization applications were received at ins , not the date that they began to be processed by ins adjudicators .

however , when ins began to use rnacs with the applications receipt date incorporated into it , the system only recognized those applications that were received and processed in the same month .

if the application was received in one month and processed in another month , the end - of - month summary report produced by ins' office of information resources management did not capture the information on date of receipt .

ins headquarters officials were reportedly skeptical of the low naturalization numbers derived from rnacs .

however , it took several months for ins officials to determine that there was a problem with rnacs because ( 1 ) it generally takes 5 to 6 weeks for ins field offices to generate statistical information for headquarters which , in turn , is compiled and reported by headquarters' office of statistics , and ( 2 ) ins headquarters officials were not certain whether the unexpectedly low numbers of naturalization applications represented real behavior or a reporting error .

it then took several months to correct the computer problem and generate new reports .

as a result , between october 1997 and may 1998 , ins' examinations fee working group did not have reliable data on which to base revised estimates of n - 400 applications for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 .

we also examined whether and why ins' rental payment to the general services administration ( gsa ) for fiscal year 1999 may exceed ins' amount of appropriation identified for rent .

we found that ins' rental payment is expected to exceed the amount appropriated by $13.2 million .

for several reasons , justice officials said , it is difficult to accurately project rent costs , and the shortfall in ins' funds for rent is not inconsistent with what it has incurred in prior years .

as of march 1999 , the anticipated gsa rental payment for ins for the current fiscal year is $160.1 million .

this is $9.9 million above what was requested in the president's budget for rent and $13.2 million higher than the $146.9 million appropriated by congress .

arriving at an accurate projection of rental payments is difficult for ins and other justice components , according to justice officials .

ins' gsa rental payment exceeded its appropriation by $15 million in fiscal year 1998 , $9 million in fiscal year 1997 , and $5 million in fiscal year 1996 .

according to ins and and justice officials , year - to - year fluctuations in the accuracy of rent estimates could be caused by such factors as ( 1 ) the actual gsa rental payment for fiscal year 1999 being higher than that anticipated by ins at the time that it formulates its budget ; ( 2 ) changes in ins programs after the end of the budget cycle ( eg , information on new projects requiring space become available after the budget cycle has ended ) ; and ( 3 ) the difficulty of projecting requirements in an environment of high growth , such as that experienced by ins in recent years .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

