the military services and defense agencies have long procured and operated multiple long - haul telecommunications systems to meet their individual mission needs .

as a result , defense's communications environment has been fragmented and redundant .

to eliminate costly duplication and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of its communication services , defense began in 1991 to plan and implement the defense information systems network ( disn ) as the common - user , long - haul telecommunications network for all defense components .

to ensure the success of the disn program , the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence ( asd / c3i ) established policies that ( 1 ) directed defense components to develop comprehensive inventories of their own long - haul telecommunications networks and directed the defense information systems agency ( disa ) to develop a defense - wide inventory of long - haul networks , ( 2 ) directed disa to report annually on telecommunications services acquisitions , trends , and associated costs , ( 3 ) mandated components to use common - user networks — such as disn or fts 2000 — for long - haul communications , and ( 4 ) directed disa to establish a waiver process to let components procure independent networks when their telecommunications needs could not be met by common - user networks .

this report responds to your request that we ( 1 ) identify those defense long - haul telecommunications networks operating outside of the common - user disn , ( 2 ) evaluate the department of defense's progress in implementing its policies for managing disn , and ( 3 ) evaluate defense's progress in developing performance measures for disn , which defense agreed to do in response to our previous review of the disn program .

our objectives were to ( 1 ) identify those defense long - haul telecommunications networks operating outside of the common - user disn , ( 2 ) evaluate the department of defense's progress in implementing its policies for managing telecommunications services , which include: developing a comprehensive inventory of telecommunications equipment and services , reporting on telecommunications services acquired , trends , and costs , mandating the use of common - user networks , and developing a waiver process to grant exceptions from using common - user networks , and ( 3 ) evaluate defense's progress in developing performance measures for disn to ensure effective and efficient use of the department's telecommunications resources .

to determine what long - haul telecommunications networks were planned or operating in defense , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums regarding the use of common - user networks .

we met with officials from disa and oasd / c3i to assess defense's progress in developing a comprehensive inventory of telecommunications equipment and services .

we met with representatives of the joint staff for command , control , communication and computers ( j - 6 ) ; the department of defense's office of inspector general ; the army , the navy , the marines , the air force , the defense logistics agency , and the defense commissary agency to assess component efforts to develop inventories .

when we learned that no comprehensive inventories of networks exist at the department or component level , we sent a questionnaire to the four military services requesting that , for every non - disn long - haul network , they report: the name of the network ; functional description ; types of telecommunications services supported ; estimated annual costs ; whether the network was planned or operational , and if planned , its status , life - cycle costs , and whether it was scheduled to be replaced by disn , and when .

we did not independently verify the information provided by the services .

however , we consulted with them to confirm our understanding of their responses and to discuss and ask questions we had about information they provided .

appendix i details the results of our survey .

to assess progress in reporting on telecommunications services acquired , trends , and costs , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums and discussed defense's implementation of these requirements with officials from asd / c3i and disa .

we analyzed information on costs maintained by disa and reviewed a recent contractor evaluation of disa business processes .

to assess defense's progress in enforcing its policy mandate that defense components acquire services from common - user networks , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums and met with officials from asd / c3i , disa , and the defense components .

during these interviews we asked for documentation showing that existing policies on telecommunications management and the use of common - user networks were being implemented and enforced .

we obtained and analyzed network plans , requirements , and other acquisition documentation to determine if defense components were complying with telecommunications management policies .

to assess defense's progress in developing a waiver process to grant exceptions from using common - user networks , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums .

we met with officials from asd / c3i and disa to discuss their plans to implement an interim waiver process and to develop a strategy detailing how and when independent networks will be replaced by their common - user counterparts .

because the interim process began during our review , we met again with disa officials in april 1998 to assess the agency's progress to date in granting waivers .

to assess defense's progress in developing performance measures for disn , we met with officials from disa and reviewed disa's draft documentation on the issue , which consisted of draft performance measures for information technology acquisitions .

we reviewed the clinger - cohen act of 1996 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 , the chief financial officers act of 1990 , the government performance and results act of 1993 , and the paperwork reduction act of 1995 to determine applicable legislative requirements for developing performance measures .

we relied on work we performed in developing our recent guide on performance measurement , executive guide: measuring performance and demonstrating results of information technology investments ( gao / aimd - 98-89 , march 1998 ) .

in addition , we examined network performance measurements used in the private sector .

our review was conducted from december 1996 through april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we obtained written comments from defense on a draft of this report .

these comments are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section of this letter and are reprinted in appendix ii .

the military services , defense agencies , and other defense components have traditionally acquired and operated many unique telecommunications networks to support a range of mission requirements .

as a result , defense components operate many stovepiped telecommunications systems that are not interoperable and cannot share information across functional and organizational boundaries .

for example , between 1988 and 1992 defense reported several interoperability problems including some arising during the persian gulf war .

defense components were unable to use their telecommunications networks and information systems to coordinate the issuance of air tasking orders , the use of air space , and the use of fire support for joint operations .

to improve the interoperability of its military communications services as well as to reduce costs associated with operating redundant systems , defense began in 1991 to plan and implement disn to serve as the department's primary worldwide telecommunications and information transfer network .

the disn strategy focuses on replacing older data communications systems , using emerging technologies and cost - effective acquisition strategies that provide secure and interoperable voice , data , video , and imagery communications services .

under the disn program , the military services and defense agencies are still responsible for acquiring telecommunications services for their local bases and installations as well as deployed communications networks .

disa is responsible for acquiring the long - haul services that will interconnect these base - level and deployed networks within and between the continental united states , europe , and the pacific .

defense issued a number of policies and directives in 1991 aimed at ensuring that the department could identify and replace redundant networks with disn and manage disn efficiently and effectively .

these policies directed components to develop comprehensive inventories of their telecommunications equipment and services , and disa to develop a comprehensive defense - wide inventory ; directed disa to report annually on telecommunications equipment acquisitions , trends , and associated costs ; mandated the use of common - user networks ; and directed disa to develop a waiver process to grant exceptions from using common - user networks when these networks could not satisfy defense components' requirements .

in a previous review of the disn program , we found that defense was not doing enough to ensure that the program would be managed efficiently and effectively .

specifically , the department lacked performance measures that would help defense track whether disa was meeting its objectives , efficiently allocating resources , and learning from mistakes .

in response , defense agreed to establish measures for the program .

in order for the disn program to work , defense needs to know how many networks are operating in the department and what functions they support .

this is the foundation for identifying redundant and stovepiped networks and ensuring that they are replaced by disn .

however , defense lacks the basic information necessary to determine how many networks are operating in the department , what functions they support , or what they cost .

in order to estimate the number and cost of networks that are operating outside of disn , we conducted our own survey , which identified 87 such networks operated by the military services alone .

disa initiated a similar data call to the military services and defense agencies after we began our survey and identified 153 networks planned or operating throughout defense .

the results of our survey are presented in appendix i and summarized in table 1 .

to manage telecommunications cost effectively , defense must know what networks are operating in the department .

in 1991 , defense directed disa to establish a central inventory of all long - haul telecommunications equipment and services in defense , and directed the heads of defense components to do likewise .

however , the central inventory was never established and disa staff are still discovering new networks as they process new telecommunications service requests from defense components .

defense components have also failed to develop inventories of their own networks .

during our initial meetings , army , navy , and air force officials stated that they could not readily identify all of their networks or describe what their functions are because they do not centrally manage their telecommunications resources .

our experience with the navy illustrates the depth of this problem .

the navy's initial response to our survey only identified three independent long - haul networks .

other navy networks known to exist , such as the naval aviation systems team wide area network ( navwan ) , were not reported in the survey .

navy's headquarters telecommunication staff acknowledged that they were unable to identify all of the navy's long - haul networks .

careful analysis is needed to determine whether any of the independent networks identified in our survey can or should be replaced by disn common user services .

however , on the basis of our interviews with the military services and our survey results , we were able to determine that overlaps exist between telecommunications services offered by independent networks and services offered by disn .

for example: navwan offers its users data communications services using internet protocol ( ip ) ; similar services are provided by disa on disn's unclassified but sensitive ( n - level ) ip router network ( niprnet ) .

the army's installation transition processing ( itp ) network also offers ip router services similar to those provided by disn's niprnet .

the navy sea systems command's enterprisewide network ( newnet , now known as smart link ) relies on asynchronous transfer mode - based data communications services ; similar services are now offered by disa on a limited basis .

the army's planned regional transition network ( artnet , now known as the circuit bundling initiative ) also relies on asynchronous transfer mode - based data services , similar to services offered by disa .

to ensure that a common - user network is efficiently and effectively managed , it is essential to closely monitor its acquisitions of telecommunications services , costs , and trends in usage , that is , the volumes and types of traffic it carries .

this monitoring helps an agency ensure that the network is properly sized ( i.e. , neither oversized nor undersized ) and offers cost - effective services .

since 1991 , disa has been required to report annually on telecommunications services acquired , trends ( volumes and types of traffic ) , and associated costs throughout defense .

however , it has not done so , and it lacks the data needed to begin developing such reports .

for example , as noted previously , disa lacks a comprehensive inventory of telecommunications equipment and services across the department .

therefore , it cannot effectively report annually on acquisitions .

in addition , disa has not collected data that would help it identify trends in network traffic throughout defense , which in turn would help it plan for future growth and identify the need for new telecommunications services .

this would include data on the number of anticipated users , the nature of business functions requiring telecommunications support , and the potential costs and benefits of new technologies .

further , defense managers lack reliable cost information on their networks .

for example , senior defense managers rely on defense components to voluntarily report telecommunications resource requirements during annual budget preparations .

but because communications resources are embedded in noncommunications budget items , this process does not allow defense to identify costs by network or to identify costs for services obtained by users outside of disa channels .

in addition , disa does not have a cost accounting system or any other effective means of determining disn's actual operating costs .

until defense managers have good data on status and trends in telecommunications equipment and services , acquisitions , and costs , they will not have a sound basis for making decisions on reducing telecommunications costs across the department , improving network operations , and reliably determining how efficiently and cost effectively to meet user needs .

under title 10 of the united states code , the military services have wide latitude to expend resources to train and sustain their forces .

because the mandate to use disn restricts this latitude , compliance will only be achieved if defense institutes an effective enforcement process .

since it began the disn program in 1991 , defense has never effectively enforced the use of common - user networks .

while oasd / c3i staff stated that financial pressure could be brought to bear in the budget process to enforce the mandate , they were unable to articulate how this enforcement would occur .

further , even though the military services have implemented several major long - haul networks during the past 5 years , oasd / c3i staff were unable to identify a single instance in which they formally analyzed the military services' plans for acquiring long - haul networks and insisted that common - user networks be used instead .

in may 1997 , asd / c3i issued a memorandum that reiterated defense policy mandating the use of common - user networks for long - haul telecommunications and reaffirming disa's role as the manager and sole provider of long - haul telecommunications .

defense is now preparing an update to this memorandum that it states will reflect the department's changing organization and mission , and changes in telecommunications technology .

however , unless defense defines and implements a process to enforce this policy , it will remain ineffective .

in august 1997 , disa began implementing an interim waiver process which outlined the steps that defense components must follow to operate independent networks: first , operators of all independent long - haul networks must , as of august 1997 , request a waiver to policy mandating common - user networks .

second , disa must assess the request and issue a waiver in those cases where telecommunications requirements cannot currently be technically or economically satisfied by disn or another common - user system such as fts 2000 / 2001 .

neither of these steps , however , is well - defined .

for example , the guidance does not describe data that the required justifications should include or criteria disa will use in evaluating them .

in addition , it does not specify how disa will determine if components' requirements can be cost effectively satisfied by disn or fts 2000 / 2001 .

to date , the services and defense agencies have largely ignored the interim waiver process .

only 9 percent of the operators of the 131 non - disa - managed independent networks that disa identified in its survey has requested a waiver from use of disn services .

performance measures are central to effectively managing any significant information system undertaking and are required by several federal statutes , including the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) of 1994 and the clinger - cohen act of 1996 .

for example , under fasa , the secretary of defense is required to establish and approve the cost , performance , and schedule goals for major defense acquisition programs and for each phase of the acquisition cycle .

under clinger - cohen , agencies must define mission - related performance measures before making information technology investments , and must determine actual mission - related benefits achieved from this information technology , to help ensure an adequate return on investment .

for the disn program , appropriate performance measures would be those that facilitate comparisons between disn and the independent networks , as well as those that identify potential problems ( for example , network reliability , network availability , and measures of customer service , including responsiveness to customer requests for maintenance or for new services ) .

in our 1996 report on the disn program , we recommended that defense establish performance measures for disn .

although it agreed to develop performance measures in response to that review , defense has never developed measures for the disn program .

until it does so , defense will not be able to demonstrate to the services and other components that disn is a better choice than their various independent networks , nor will it be able to target and direct management attention to problem areas .

in the 7 years that it has been implementing the disn program and striving to improve telecommunications management in the department , defense has done very little to implement the basic management controls it believed were needed to ensure success .

numerous independent networks continue to exist without disa's knowledge ; defense does not have a comprehensive inventory of telecommunications equipment and services ; disa does not collect data and report on acquisitions , trends , and costs ; defense does not enforce the use of common - user networks ; defense has not implemented an effective waiver process that includes the objective evaluation of alternative telecommunications solutions ; and defense has not established good performance measures .

as a result , defense has not achieved its goals for an interoperable telecommunications environment , cannot support any claims that the long - haul networks it operates are cost - effective , and cannot determine which independent long - haul networks should be replaced by common user networks such as disn or fts 2000 / 2001 .

we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence to ensure that existing policies are clearly defined , documented , and enforced .

specifically , asd / c3i should develop and maintain a comprehensive inventory of defense's telecommunications equipment and services ; track acquisitions of telecommunications services throughout defense , the actual costs of those services , and trends in usage ( that is , the volumes and types of traffic that networks carry ) ; define and institute an effective process for evaluating the cost - effectiveness of defense networks and mandating the use of common - user networks for long - haul telecommunications where appropriate .

as part of this process , define the criteria that disa will use to make waiver determinations , including how disa will measure technical , economic , and customer service factors in granting waivers .

in addition , we recommend that the secretary direct the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence to develop and adopt user - based provisioning , pricing , and performance metrics as minimum performance measures for disn .

the senior civilian official for the office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications , and intelligence ( asd / c3i ) provided written comments on a draft of this report .

defense concurred with all of our recommendations .

however , defense expressed concern that the body of the draft report may lead the reader to believe that defense has done nothing to implement or enforce its own long - haul telecommunications policies .

in its response , the department notes that it has: ( 1 ) established the defense information systems database ( disd ) as a comprehensive inventory of long - haul telecommunications networks throughout defense , ( 2 ) clarified existing policy by issuing an asd / c3i memorandum dated may 5 , 1997 , that reaffirms disa's role as the sole manager and provider of long - haul telecommunications systems and services , ( 3 ) developed a process for determining how individual telecommunications requirements can best be satisfied , ( 4 ) developed a process for granting temporary waivers , and ( 5 ) begun the process of establishing performance metrics for disn .

we incorporated additional information in the report to more clearly reflect actions disa has initiated .

however , while these plans are a necessary first step , they must be effectively implemented to bring about real improvements in telecommunications management , which is the focus of the body of our report .

defense recognizes this in its discussion and expresses its commitment to effectively implementing our recommendations .

defense's comments are presented in appendix ii .

detailed gao responses follow in the same appendix .

we will send copies of this report to the chairman of your committee ; the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on government reform and oversight , the house and senate appropriations committees , the house national security committee , the senate armed services committee , and other interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director of the office of management and budget .

copies will be made available to others upon request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 if you or your staff have any questions .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

naval education & training management systems network ( netmsn ) navsea enterprise wide area network ( newnet / smart link ) puget sound metropolitan area network ( man ) tidewater metropolitan area network ( man ) naval facilities engineering command wide area network ( navfac wan ) pensacola metropolitan area network ( man ) corpus christi metropolitan area network ( man ) nctams lant det .

video teleconferencing nctams lant det .

advanced digital multiplexer system ( adms ) nctams lant det .

u.s. atlantic command net ( usaconnet ) nctams lant det .

navy c2 system ( nccs ) guam unclassified metropolitan area network ( man ) guam administrative telephone switching system planned — san diego metropolitan area network ( man ) information on these networks came from disa's survey which does not include cost data .

the marine corps did not provide this information or provided insufficient information to determine costs by fiscal year .

the air force did not provide this information or provided insufficient information to determine costs by fiscal year .

the following are gao's comments on the department of defense letter dated july 16 , 1998 .

1 .

we acknowledge in this report that asd / c3i has clarified existing long - haul telecommunications policy by issuing a may 5 , 1997 , memorandum .

we have added information regarding defense's update of 1991 policy that will reflect changes in technology , organization , and mission .

nevertheless , defense's actions remain preliminary , and unless that policy is properly implemented and enforced it will remain ineffective .

2 .

as indicated in the reply , defense does not maintain a comprehensive inventory of independent long - haul telecommunications networks , and therefore does not know how many networks are operating throughout the department or what functions they support .

as defense notes in its comments , additional guidance and procedures are needed to ensure that all requirements for long - haul telecommunications equipment and services are identified and placed in the defense information systems database .

3 .

defense affirms in its comment what we state in this report , that disa currently lacks well - defined steps for determining whether a long - haul telecommunications requirement can be most effectively satisfied by a common - user network .

we note defense's plan to develop and employ a standard requirements evaluation model .

this model , if properly developed and implemented , could assist defense in making cost - effective decisions on individual telecommunications requirements .

however , the model may not be effective without the cooperation of defense components , which may choose not to submit their requirements through disa .

the model may also not be effective if other steps mentioned in this report , such as adequate data gathering on telecommunications trends and costs , and use of performance measures , are not taken .

4 .

two years ago we highlighted the need for disn performance measures in a report on the disn program ( gao / aimd - 97-9 , november 27 , 1996 ) .

we recognize that defense now intends to take action on our recommendation that it implement user - based performance measures for disn , and we agree that such metrics should be applied to all long - haul telecommunications .

we are unable to make further comment , however , until defense takes concrete steps to implement these performance measures .

franklin w. deffer , assistant director kevin e. conway , assistant director mary t. marshall , senior information systems analyst cristina t. chaplain , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

