you requested that we monitor and periodically report on the progress of the sports arena project in the district of columbia .

this report discusses the project's predevelopment costs , revenue collections , financing , interest rates received on the arena bonds , and construction status .

the district of columbia government ( acting through the mayor and the district's redevelopment land agency ) and district of columbia arena , l.p. ( dcalp ) — a limited partnership formed by the owner of the washington bullets and the washington capitals — have agreed that dcalp will build a sports arena ( estimated to cost about $175 million ) and the district will be responsible for financing certain predevelopment costs .

the district agreed to be responsible for the following predevelopment costs: acquiring land , including the purchase of property not then owned by the connecting the gallery place metrorail station to the sports arena , relocating district employees from two buildings on the site to other demolishing buildings , remediating soil , relocating utilities , and securing all regulatory approvals necessary for construction of the sports arena .

to finance the predevelopment costs of the arena , in august 1995 , the district received a $53 million loan commitment ( line of credit ) from a consortium of banks led by nationsbank and crestar bank .

in january 1996 , the rla issued about $60 million in revenue bonds backed by the arena tax and paid off the $36.6 million portion of the line of credit used .

the omnibus budget support act of 1994 ( arena tax act ) as amended , provides for a public safety fee ( arena tax ) to be levied on businesses located in the district based upon the annual district gross receipts of such businesses .

the arena tax is due on or before june 15 of each year .

the arena tax act also authorized the rla to pledge the arena taxes as security to repay loans to finance predevelopment activities .

further , the arena tax act provides that if , on or before december 1 of each year , the mayor estimates the arena tax revenue is less than $9 million , the mayor is required to raise the arena tax rates to provide for an estimated revenue of not greater than $9 million .

the arena tax was first levied in fiscal year 1995 .

during the first year of the arena tax , most of the arena tax collections were used to fund predevelopment activities .

in subsequent years , the arena tax will be used to pay principal and interest ( debt service ) on the bonds as required by the bond resolution .

as previously stated , the district is responsible for the predevelopment costs of the arena .

dcalp , the developer , is responsible for arranging and repaying the financing needed to pay all costs associated with the design , development , construction , and operation of the sports arena .

to obtain information on the status of the arena project , we reviewed relevant contract agreements , vendor invoices , and the bond trustee's disbursement records supporting the predevelopment costs .

we also reviewed various financial reports and bank statements for arena taxes collected and deposited as of august 1996 .

we interviewed district officials from the arena task force , the office of the corporation counsel , the office of the treasurer , the department of finance and revenue , and the rla .

we also met with trustees for the lockbox ( into which dedicated tax collections are deposited ) and the bonds .

in addition , we discussed the construction progress of the arena and the metrorail connection with officials from dcalp and the washington metropolitan area transit authority ( wmata ) .

further , we interviewed officials from merrill lynch regarding the structure and pricing of the bonds .

finally , we interviewed officials from standard & poor's rating service ( s&p ) and moody's investor service ( moody's ) concerning the rating of the bonds .

we did not audit the arena's predevelopment cost estimates or evaluate the financing to determine if the reported amounts were correct .

the amounts for the predevelopment costs and financing were provided by district officials and , where applicable , were verified to disbursement records maintained by third parties acting as trustees for either tax collections or bond proceeds .

accordingly , we do not express an opinion or any other form of assurance on the arena's predevelopment cost estimates or its financing .

we also did not audit the reported taxes collected and deposited for the sports arena project .

we , therefore , did not determine if the district government accurately identified the universe of taxpayers or reported all dedicated taxes for this project .

however , we reviewed monthly statements provided by the lockbox trustee to determine the amount of taxes collected and placed in escrow for this project .

our review built on previous work , and we conducted our review from march 1996 through december 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as of october 18 , 1996 , estimated predevelopment costs had increased from about $55.2 million to about $55.8 million or by a net amount of about $617,000 ( 1 percent ) , since our last report .

the district's predevelopment activities consist of four major categories: ( 1 ) acquiring land , ( 2 ) constructing the metrorail connection , ( 3 ) relocating district employees , and ( 4 ) demolishing two buildings , remediating soil , relocating utilities , and using consultants to secure regulatory approvals .

all land has been acquired for the arena site .

however , the final cost for one of the parcels of land acquired will be determined by the outcome of legal proceedings .

construction of the metrorail connection is about 25 percent complete as of october 18 , 1996 .

all district employees have been relocated ; however , office improvements on the new space have not been completed .

finally , the two old buildings have been demolished and relocating utilities and securing regulatory approvals are nearly complete as of october 18 , 1996 .

the district is awaiting final bills for these activities .

the district's project manager for the sports arena stated that based on the project's current status and known estimates for predevelopment costs , as of september 30 , 1996 , the district does not expect to exhaust the $5 million capital reserve fund established to cover cost overruns .

we verified that no funds had been expended from the capital reserve fund .

the changes to the predevelopment costs are highlighted in the following table .

as of october 18 , 1996 , the total cost for the gallery place metrorail connection was estimated at about $19.4 million , a $2.4 million increase from our last report ; but the district's cost remains the same — $3 million .

the majority ( $2 million ) of the increase reflects the cost of needed construction changes to the station because of the sports arena .

for example , new vent shafts will be added in order to accommodate the construction of the sports arena .

this increase was offset by the developer's contribution of $2 million to the cost of the metrorail connection .

the other $360,000 increase reflects a decision by wmata to upgrade the station elevators from hydraulic elevators to traction elevators .

the funding for this upgrade is being provided by wmata .

as of october 18 , 1996 , the metrorail connection budget contained a $1.1 million reserve for contingencies ( as shown by note c to table 1 ) — a decrease of $400,000 since our last report .

wmata officials stated that their maximum responsibility to the project is limited to their $2.4 million contribution .

they also stated that they will not absorb any unanticipated costs .

wmata officials stated that an example of unanticipated costs is the discovery of asbestos in sections of the duct work running through the station's mezzanine .

according to the district's project manager for the sports arena , the $50,000 approximate cost for the removal of the asbestos is being funded out of the metrorail connection contingency reserve .

the demolition of the two buildings formerly located on the arena property has been completed , and final bills are forthcoming .

the budget of $1 million has not changed .

costs to remove hazardous and contaminated soil have increased as excavation progresses .

the revised budget for soil remediation was $3.52 million as of october 18 , 1996 , an increase of about $2.58 million from the $940,000 reported in our last report .

in a testimony before the rla board , the district's deputy corporation counsel stated that the district will take legal action against the source of the contaminants if compensation is not made to the district by the source .

the property on which the arena is being built contains contaminated and hazardous soil based on archeological digs , tests performed for the environmental impact statement , and tests performed by the developer .

the extent of the amount of contaminated soil was underestimated by the original tests , which estimated that the site contained about 7,400 tons of petroleum contaminated soil and hazardous waste .

as discussed below , the actual amount of contaminated soil was almost 15 times the original estimate .

the site originally had residential and commercial buildings .

according to the district's project manager for the sports arena and an official from dcalp , when the land was cleared some 20 years ago , oil storage tanks in buildings and in the ground were not removed .

as a result of the demolition of the buildings , contaminants were leaked into the soil .

both contaminated ( petroleum ) and hazardous ( cleaning fluid ) substances have been found in the soil .

as part of its agreement to purchase the parcel of land owned by wmata and the far east trade center associates , l.p. ( fetca ) , the district received a credit of about $569,000 from fetca for the removal of contaminated material .

as of october 1996 , according to the district's project manager for the sports arena , 13 underground oil tanks and 4 water separators were removed from the site , along with 109,000 tons of contaminated soil and approximately 5,100 tons of hazardous soil .

most of the excavation of the hazardous and contaminated soil has been completed .

according to a dcalp official , in the spring of 1997 , it will be necessary to remove a temporary dirt ramp from the site to complete the excavation process .

tests done on the soil on both sides of the ramp show the soil to be contaminated .

therefore , the district's final cost for soil remediation will not be known until the spring of 1997 .

the district has hired a firm , environmental consultants and contractors , inc. , to monitor the removal of all contaminated and hazardous material .

our last report showed a budget of $4.6 million for utility relocation — $4.3 million for bell atlantic to relocate utility lines under g street and $300,000 for the relocation of other utilities .

included in the $4.3 million budget was an estimate of $1.4 million for overtime costs to meet the revised november 30 , 1995 , deadline to relocate bell atlantic utility lines .

as of october 18 , 1996 , the budget for bell atlantic utility lines has been reduced from $4.3 million to $2.5 million or by $1.8 million ; while the amount of $300,000 for the relocation of the other utilities has remained the same .

the revised budget for total utility relocation is now about $2.8 million .

according to the district's project manager for the sports arena , bell atlantic was able to accomplish the relocation of the utility lines within the scheduled time frame without having to use premium time ( overtime ) as originally estimated .

if bell atlantic had had to use premium time to relocate the utility lines , the hourly charges would have been one and a half to twice the cost of normal time .

to begin construction of the arena project , the district demolished two office buildings that previously provided office space for its employees .

the employees were relocated into district - owned and leased office buildings .

to pay for office improvements , a budget was established at $5 per square foot or about $972,000 .

since we last reported , this budget for leasehold improvements has increased by $372,000 and , as of october 18 , 1996 , totaled about $1.34 million .

according to the district's project manager for the sports arena , the increase in the budget for office improvements is attributable to increases in improvements at the leased space at 800 9th street , sw , which were not provided for in the original budget but were requested by the agency occupying the space — the department of human services .

the district leased four floors of office space at 800 9th street sw and is required by the lease to pay for the renovation to the new space .

according to the district's project manager for the sports arena , this cost is considered a qualifying predevelopment cost of the arena project .

however , we found that this cost was funded from the district government's appropriated funds rather than from funds available to pay allowable arena predevelopment costs .

we informed the district's chief financial officer of this matter , and he agreed to recoup the funds from the arena project's predevelopment funds .

according to the district's debt manager , arena tax collections for 1995 totaled approximately $9.3 million , exceeding the original projection of $9 million .

the district forecasts arena tax collections of $9 million for each year the bonds are outstanding .

we verified that the $9.3 million was collected for 1995 and transferred by the lockbox trustee to the escrow account .

between may 15 and may 23 , 1996 , notices were sent to district taxpayers informing them that the 1996 arena tax was due on june 15 , 1996 .

according to the district's debt manager , approximately $9.4 million had been collected for the 1996 arena tax through november 30 , 1996 .

we also verified that this amount was transferred from the lockbox to the bond trustee .

in contrast to the 1995 tax collections , most of which were used to pay the arena's predevelopment costs before the rla bonds were issued , the 1996 tax collections , as required by the bond resolution , were used to make the payment — principal and interest of $5.9 million — due november 1 , 1996 , on the rla bonds .

the bond resolution requires that any additional tax collected over the required payment be placed in a fund and be used to redeem the term bonds earlier than their due date .

as mentioned , $9.4 million in arena taxes were collected through november 30 , 1996 .

in addition , interest of $165,337 was earned on deposits in the debt service accounts .

of these amounts , about $5.9 million paid the debt service due on november 1 , 1996 , $2.2 million was deposited into the super sinker fund , and the remaining $1.5 million will be applied toward the may 1997 debt service payment .

the district's projections of arena tax revenues at the current level of $9 million annually appear sufficient to redeem the bonds by the year 2002 .

in august 1995 , the district secured a $53 million loan commitment from a syndicate of banks led by nationsbank and crestar bank to finance predevelopment costs for the arena project .

this loan was subsequently paid off in january 1996 from the proceeds of an approximate $60 million bond sale arranged by the rla .

the funds originally available to pay the arena's predevelopment costs and establish a debt service reserve totaled $66.6 million .

the make up of these funds consisted of ( 1 ) $57.4 million in net bond proceeds ( after financing costs ) from the sale of rla revenue bonds in january 1996 and ( 2 ) $9.3million in 1995 tax collections from the dedicated sports arena tax .

of the $66.6 million available , $11 million is held in reserve in two parts .

a mandatory $5 million capital reserve required by the bond resolution was established to pay for cost overruns .

in addition , a $6 million reserve was established for debt service .

as shown in table 1 , the current estimate of total predevelopment costs is $55.8 million .

the unreserved amount of $55.6 million and the $5 million capital reserve for cost overruns are available to pay this current estimate .

as of september 30 , 1996 , we verified that no funds have been used from the mandatory capital reserve .

in addition , barring unforeseen cost increases over established reserves , the district has sufficient funds to pay its estimated predevelopment costs .

during the july 1996 testimony before your subcommittee , concerns were raised regarding the interest rates to be paid on the bonds issued to finance the sports arena's predevelopment costs .

we analyzed relevant information regarding this matter .

the rla was advised by a number of investment bankers , as part of its financing strategy , that in order to improve the desirability of the bonds to investors , the bonds must be structured in a way to reduce default risk .

specifically , the bonds had to have: a dedicated revenue stream , with the legal requirement to increase the arena tax , if revenues at any time did not cover debt service , a lock - box mechanism under the direct control of a trustee who directly collects dedicated revenue receipts pledged for debt repayment , and a super sinking fund to allow the district to redeem bonds early at par .

when the bonds were issued in january 1996 , the bond resolution reflected the advice of the investment bankers as described above .

at that time , the rla sold $44.5 million of term bonds redeemable on november 1 , 2010 , at an interest rate of 6.05 percent and about $15.4 million of serial bonds redeemable between the years 1996 and 2000 at interest rates ranging from 4.5 percent to 5.4 percent .

prior to the bond sale , the bonds received a split rating from two rating agencies — moody's and s&p .

moody's rated the bonds as investment grade ( baa ) and s&p rated the bonds as noninvestment grade ( b ) .

an official of s&p told us that it did not give an investment grade rating to these bonds because they were unable to separate the district's financial condition and its credit from this transaction .

moody's rating of “baa” is its lowest rating of four ratings for investment grade bonds .

according to officials from moody's , the rating was based upon legal provisions insulating the arena tax revenues from the district's financial difficulties and pledged arena revenues offering adequate debt service coverage .

even though one of the two ratings the bonds received was noninvestment grade , merrill lynch officials stated that relative to prevailing market conditions at the time of the bonds issuance and the split rating , the bonds were well received by investors .

this was indicated by strong demand from investors which resulted in various bond series being oversubscribed between 2 to 10 times the amount of bonds being sold .

given this demand , the merrill lynch officials stated that the rla bonds were repriced .

in addition , merrill lynch officials stated that the bonds were priced ( carried interest rates ) based primarily upon ( 1 ) their structure rather than the district's financial condition and ( 2 ) the prevailing conditions in the bond market at the time the bonds were sold .

consequently , they said that they believed the bonds' interest rates were similar to interest rates on investment grade rated securities .

as of december 10 , 1996 , according to a dcalp official , the erection of structural steel beams for the roof of the arena had started .

dcalp officials expect the roof to take about an additional 4 months to complete , depending on weather conditions .

the roof is expected to be in place by summer of 1997 .

dcalp stated that the arena should open in late 1997 .

we obtained oral comments from the mayor of the district of columbia and the chief financial officer on a draft of this report .

they concurred with the information presented .

we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate and house appropriations committees' subcommittees on the district of columbia ; senate committee on governmental affairs , subcommittee on oversight of government management and the district of columbia ; and the ranking minority member of your subcommittee .

if you need further information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9510 .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix i .

richard t. cambosos , senior attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

