we appreciate the opportunity to testify on the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) program to modernize its national airspace system ( nas ) , a multibillion dollar investment comprising over 200 separate projects .

in late 1981 , faa began this program to replace and upgrade the system's equipment and facilities to meet the expected increase in traffic volume , enhance the margin of air safety , and increase the efficiency of the air traffic control ( atc ) system — the principal component of the nas .

however , the modernization program has experienced many problems in meeting cost , schedule , and performance goals .

as a result , many of the promised benefits from using the new equipment have been delayed and the aviation community's confidence in faa's ability to manage the modernization program has been weakened .

because of the complexity , the cost , and the problem - plagued past of faa's modernization program , gao designated it a high - risk information technology initiative in 1995 and again in 1997 .

faa is currently developing a new modernization approach .

our testimony today , which is based on completed and ongoing work , discusses ( 1 ) the status of key modernization projects , ( 2 ) faa's actions to implement recommendations to correct modernization problems , and ( 3 ) the opportunities and challenges facing faa as it embarks upon its new modernization approach .

in summary , we found the following: since 1982 , the congress has appropriated over $25 billion to the modernization program .

while faa has fielded some equipment , historically , the agency has experienced considerable difficulty in delivering systems within promised cost and schedule parameters .

as a result , faa has been forced to implement costly interim projects .

meanwhile , two key systems — the wide area augmentation system and the standard terminal automation replacement system — have encountered cost increases and schedule delays .

our work has pinpointed the root causes of faa's modernization problems and has recommended actions to overcome them .

most recently , we found shortcomings in the areas of systems architecture or the overall modernization blueprint , cost estimating and accounting , software acquisition , and organizational culture .

although faa has begun to implement many of our recommendations , sustained management attention is required to improve the management of the modernization program .

faa is collaborating with and seeking commitment from users in developing a new approach to make the modernization less costly and to provide earlier user benefits .

the challenge for faa is to have disciplined processes in place in order to deliver projects as promised .

the agency will also need to quickly address the looming year 2000 computer crisis to ensure that critical atc systems do not malfunction or produce inaccurate information simply because the century has changed .

as the principal component of the nas , faa's atc system must operate continuously — 24 hours a day , 365 days a year .

under federal law , faa has primary responsibility for operating a common atc system — a vast network of radars ; automated data processing , navigation , and communications equipment ; and traffic control facilities .

faa meets this responsibility by providing such services as controlling takeoffs and landings and managing the flow of air traffic between airports .

users of faa's services include the military , other government users , private pilots , and commercial aircraft operators .

projects in faa's modernization program are primarily organized around seven functional areas — automation , communications , facilities , navigation and landing , surveillance , weather , and mission support .

over the past 16 years , faa's modernization projects have experienced substantial cost overruns , lengthy schedule delays , and significant performance shortfalls .

to illustrate , the centerpiece of that modernization program — the advanced automation system ( aas ) — was restructured in 1994 after estimated costs to develop the system tripled from $2.5 billion to $7.6 billion and delays in putting significantly less - than - promised system capabilities into operation were expected to run 8 years or more over original estimates .

the congress has appropriated over $25 billion for atc modernization between fiscal years 1982 and 1998 .

faa estimates that it plans to spend an additional $11 billion through fiscal year 2003 on projects in the modernization program .

of the over $25 billion appropriated to date , faa has reported spending about $5.3 billion on 81 completed projects and $15.7 billion on about 130 ongoing projects .

of the remaining funds , faa has reported spending about $2.8 billion on projects that have been cancelled or restructured and $1.6 billion for personnel - related expenses associated with systems acquisition .

 ( see app .

i for a list of completed projects. ) .

faa has fielded some equipment , most recently a new voice communications system .

however , delays in other projects have caused the agency to implement costly interim projects .

furthermore , the agency is still having difficulties in acquiring new systems within agreed - to schedule and cost parameters .

faa has been fielding new atc systems .

for example , in february 1997 , faa commissioned the last of 21 voice switching and control system ( vscs ) units .

as one of the original projects in the 1983 modernization plan , the vscs project encountered many difficulties during its early years .

since the project was restructured in 1992 , faa has been successful in completing the first phase of the project — installing the equipment into existing en route controller workstations .

the second phase is now underway — making vscs interface with the new display replacement equipment that is being installed in the en route centers .

during the past year , faa has commissioned 183 additional systems or units of systems .

for example , faa commissioned an additional 97 units for its automated surface observing system , which brings the total of commissioned units to 230 out of 597 that are planned .

 ( see app .

ii for details on the implementation status of 17 major ongoing modernization projects and app .

iii for data on changes in their cost and schedules. ) .

problems with modernization projects have caused delays in replacing faa's aging equipment , especially the automation equipment in the en route and terminal facilities .

we found that faa has added four interim projects — three for the tracons and one for the en route centers — reported to cost about $655 million — to sustain and enhance current automated air traffic control equipment .

faa began its first program for the tracons in 1987 and expects to complete its third program in 2000 .

in general , these programs provide new displays and software and upgrade hardware and data - processing equipment to allow tracons to handle increased traffic .

one program for the en route centers — the display complex channel rehost — was completed in 1997 .

under this program , faa transferred existing software from obsolete display channel computers to new more reliable and maintainable computers at five en route centers .

the cost for interim projects could go even higher if faa decides to implement an interim solution to overcome hardware problems and resolve year 2000 date requirements with the host computer system .

faa is assessing the host computer's microcode — low - level machine instructions used to service the main computer — with a plan to resolve any identified year 2000 date issues , while at the same time preparing to purchase and implement new hardware — interim host — for each of its 20 en route centers before january 1 , 2000 .

faa expects to incur costs of about $160 million during fiscal years 1998 and 1999 for the interim host .

two key components of the modernization effort — the wide area augmentation system ( waas ) and the standard terminal automation replacement system ( stars ) — have encountered delays and cost increases .

in september 1997 , faa estimated total life cycle costs for waas at $2.4 billion ( $900 million for facilities and equipment and $1.5 billion for operations ) .

in january 1998 , the estimate had increased by $600 million to $3 billion ( $1 billion for facilities and equipment and $2 billion for operations ) .

the increased costs for facilities and equipment are attributable to faa's including previously overlooked costs for periodically updating waas' equipment .

the revised cost estimate for operations and maintenance is largely attributable to higher than expected costs to lease geostationary satellites .

in developing waas , faa has also encountered delays .

when signing the original development contract with wilcox electric in august 1995 , faa planned for the initial system to be operational by december 1997 .

because of concerns about the contractor's performance , however , faa terminated the original contract and signed a development contract with raytheon ( formerly hughes aircraft ) in october 1996 that called for the initial system to be operational by april 1999 .

the 16-month schedule slippage was caused by problems with the original contractor's performance , design changes , and increased software development .

last year , we reported that the implementation of stars — particularly at the three facilities targeted for operating the system before fiscal year 2000 — will likely be delayed if faa and its contractor experience any difficulties in developing the software .

these difficulties have materialized .

in january 1998 , faa reported that more delays are likely because software requirements could increase to resolve air traffic controllers' dissatisfaction with the system's computer - human interface .

faa also reported an unexpected cost increase of $35 million for stars during fiscal year 1998 .

it attributed the increase to such factors as adding resources to maintain the program's schedule and the effects of any design changes to address new computer - human interface concerns .

also , the estimated size of software development — measured in source lines of code — is now 50 percent larger than the original november 1996 estimate .

faa has requested a reprogramming of fiscal year 1998 funds to address this cost increase .

our reviews have identified some of the root causes of long - standing problems with faa's modernization and have recommended solutions to them .

among the causes of these problems were the lack of a complete and enforced systems architecture , unreliable cost information , lack of mature software acquisition processes , and an organizational culture that did not always act in the agency's long - term best interest .

while faa has begun to implement many of our recommendations , it will need to stay focused on continued improvement .

faa has proceeded to modernize its many atc systems without the benefits of a complete systems architecture , or overall blueprint , to guide their development and evolution .

in february 1997 , we reported that faa has been doing a good job of defining one piece of its architecture — the logical architecture .

that architecture describes faa's concept of operations , business functions , high - level descriptions of information systems and their interrelationships , and information flows among systems .

this high - level architecture will guide the modernization of faa's atc systems over the next 20 years .

we identified shortcomings in two main areas .

faa's system modernization lacked a technical architecture and an effective enforcement mechanism .

faa generally agreed with the recommendation in our february 1997 report to develop a technical architecture and has begun the task .

we will continue to monitor faa's efforts .

also , to be effective , the architecture must be enforced consistently .

faa has no organizational entity responsible for enforcing architectural consistency .

until faa defines and enforces a complete atc systems architecture , the agency cannot ensure compatibility among its existing and future programs .

we also recommended in the february 1997 report that faa develop a management structure for enforcing the architecture that is similar to the provisions of the clinger - cohen act of 1996 for department - level chief information officers ( cio ) .

faa disagrees with this recommendation because it believes that the current location of its cio , within the research and acquisition line of business , is effective .

we continue to believe that such a structure is necessary .

faa's cio does not report directly to the administrator and does not have organizational or budgetary authority over those who develop atc systems or the units that operate and maintain them .

furthermore , the agency's long history of problems in managing information technology projects reflects weaknesses in its current structure .

in january 1997 , we reported that faa lacks reliable cost - estimating processes and cost - accounting practices needed to effectively manage investments in information technology , which leaves it at risk of making ill - informed decisions on critical multimillion , even billion , dollar air traffic control systems .

without reliable cost information , the likelihood of poor investment decisions is increased , not only when a project is initiated , but also throughout its life cycle .

we recommended that faa improve its cost - estimating processes and fully implement a cost - accounting system .

our recent review of the reliability of faa's reported financial information and the possible program and budgetary effects of reported financial statement deficiencies again highlights the need for reliable cost information .

the audit of faa's 1996 financial statement disclosed many problems in reporting of operating materials and supplies and property and equipment .

many of these problems resulted from the lack of a reliable system for accumulating project cost accounting information .

although faa has begun to institutionalize defined cost - estimating processes and to acquire a cost - accounting system , it will be awhile before faa and other decisionmakers have accurate information to determine and control costs .

in march 1997 , we reported that faa's processes for acquiring software — the most costly and complex component of atc systems — are ad hoc , sometimes chaotic , and not repeatable across projects .

as a result , faa is at great risk of acquiring software that does not perform as intended and is not delivered on time and within budget .

furthermore , faa lacks an effective approach for improving its processes for acquiring software .

in the march 1997 report , we recommended that faa improve its software acquisition capabilities by institutionalizing mature acquisition processes and reiterated our prior recommendation that faa establish a management structure similar to the department - level cios to instill process discipline .

faa concurred with part of our recommendation and has initiated efforts to improve its software acquisition processes .

these efforts , however , are not comprehensive , are not complete , and have not yet been implemented agencywide .

furthermore , faa disagrees with our recommendation related to its management structure .

without establishing strong software acquisition processes and an effective management structure , faa risks making the same mistakes it did on failed systems acquisition projects .

in august 1996 , we reported that an underlying cause of faa's atc acquisition problems is its organizational culture — the beliefs , the values , and the attitudes and expectations shared by an organization's members that affect their behavior and the behavior of the organization as a whole.we found that faa's acquisitions were impaired when employees acted in ways that did not reflect a strong commitment to mission focus , accountability , coordination , and adaptability .

we recommended that faa develop a comprehensive strategy for cultural change that ( 1 ) addresses specific responsibilities and performance measures for all stakeholders throughout faa and ( 2 ) provides the incentives needed to promote the desired behaviors and achieve agencywide cultural change .

in response to our recommendations , faa issued a report outlining its overall strategy for changing its acquisition culture and describing its ongoing actions to influence organizational culture and improve its life cycle acquisition management processes .

for example , the acquisition and research ( ara ) organization has proposed restructuring its personnel system to tie pay to performance based on 15 measurable goals , each with its own performance plan .

ara's proposed personnel system is under consideration by the administrator .

in our august 1996 report , we also noted that the integrated product development system , based on integrated teams , was a major faa initiative to address the shortcomings with its organizational culture .

according to an ara program official , faa has 15 integrated product teams , the majority of which have approved plans .

the official indicated that all team members have received training to prepare them for their roles and that ara is developing a set of standards to measure the performance of the integrated teams .

however , the official also acknowledged that faa has had difficulty in gaining commitment to the integrated team concept throughout the agency because offices outside of ara have been resistant to integrated teams .

to help overcome institutional cultural barriers , faa and external stakeholders have been discussing the establishment of a special program office responsible for the acquisition of free flight systems .

although , the details of how such an office would operate have not been put forward , one option would be for this office to have its own budget and the authority to make certifications and regulations and to determine system requirements .

such an office could be viewed as the evolutionary successor to the integrated product team system .

another approach being considered by faa is the establishment of a single nas manager at the level of associate administrator to eliminate traditional “stovepipes” between the acquisition and air traffic organizations .

as faa considers recommendations to create a new structure , we believe that it would be advantageous for faa to implement our recommendation to create a management structure similar to the department - level cio as called for in the clinger - cohen act .

having an effective cio , with the organizational and budgetary authority to implement and enforce a complete , agencywide systems architecture would go a long way towards eliminating traditional “stovepipes” between integrated product teams , as well as between the acquisition and air traffic organizations .

furthermore , the agency could gain valuable insight from the experiences of other organizations that have implemented similar structures .

regardless of future direction , faa recognizes that considerable work is needed to modify behaviors and create comprehensive cultural change .

a continued focus on cultural change initiatives will be critical in the years ahead .

while faa is involving external and internal stakeholders in revising its approach to the modernization program , it will need to stay focused on implementing solutions to the root causes of past problems , ensure that all aspects of its acquisition management system are effectively implemented , and quickly address the looming crisis with the year 2000 date requirements .

the faa administrator has begun an outreach effort with the aviation community to build consensus on and seek commitment to the future direction of the agency's modernization program .

similar to our findings on the logical architecture , a review of this program by the nas modernization task force concluded that the architecture under development builds on the concept of operations for the nas and identifies the programs needed to meet the needs of the user community .

however , the task force found that the architecture is not realistic because of ( 1 ) an insufficient budget ; ( 2 ) the preponderance of risks associated primarily with certifying and deploying new equipment and with users' cost to acquire equipment ; and ( 3 ) unresolved institutional issues and a lack of user commitment .

the task force recommended a revised approach that would be less costly and would be focused more on providing near - term user benefits .

under this revised approach , faa would ( 1 ) implement a set of core technologies to provide immediate user benefits ; ( 2 ) modify the flight 2000 initiative to address critical risk areas associated with key communications , navigation , and surveillance programs ; and ( 3 ) proceed with implementing critical time - driven activities related to the host computer and the year 2000 problems and with implementing such systems as stars , surveillance radars , and en route displays to replace aging infrastructure .

the details on how faa intends to implement the task force's recommendations are not yet known .

however , from our discussions with task force officials , their practical effect would be that the development and the deployment of some current programs would be accelerated while others would be slowed down .

meanwhile , faa would continue developing programs like stars and the display system replacement and work to ensure that its computers recognize the year 2000 .

for example , under the revised approach , the waas program would be slowed down after phase i , which is scheduled to provide initial satellite navigation capabilities by 1999 , to enable faa to resolve technical issues and explore how costs could be reduced .

further development would be subject to review and risk mitigation under the expanded flight 2000 initiative .

faa faces both opportunities and challenges as it revises the modernization program .

on the one hand , faa has an opportunity to regain user confidence by delivering systems that benefit them .

on the other hand , faa is challenged to follow through with its investment management process improvements .

we urge faa to proceed cautiously as it attempts to expedite the deployment of key technologies to avoid repeating past practices , such as undue concern for schedules at the expense of disciplined systems development and careful , thorough testing .

faa will need to resist this temptation , as the results are typically systems that cost more than expected , are of low quality , and are late as well .

concerned that burdensome procurement rules were a primary contributor to faa's acquisition problems , the congress exempted faa from many procurement rules .

in response , the agency implemented its acquisition management system ( ams ) on april 1 , 1996 , to improve its acquisition of new technology .

ams is intended to provide high - level acquisition policy and guidance and to establish rigorous investment management practices .

we are currently reviewing faa's investment management approach , including its practices and processes for selecting , controlling , and evaluating projects , and expect to report later this year .

as faa continues to implement ams and embarks on a revised modernization approach , it will need to establish baselines for individual projects and performance measurements to track key goals .

under ams , an acquisition project should have a baseline , which establishes the performance , life - cycle cost , schedule , and benefit boundaries within which the program is authorized to operate .

having an effective investment analysis capability is important in developing these baselines .

in its may 1997 report on ams , faa noted that it has focused more attention on investment management analyses .

the agency reported that it has established several investment analysis teams of individuals with expertise in such areas as cost estimating , market analysis , and risk assessment to help prepare program baselines to use in determining the best way to satisfy mission needs .

although faa has begun efforts to establish new baselines for projects that were underway prior to ams , program evaluation officials question the availability and the quality of operations and maintenance data that are being used to estimate life - cycle project costs .

faa's history of unplanned cost increases , most recently seen with its stars and waas programs , coupled with past deficiencies in cost estimating processes and practices point to the need to use reliable and complete data to establish realistic baselines .

as for performance measurements , faa does not have a unified effort underway to effectively measure progress toward achieving acquisition goals .

faa has established a goal to reduce the time to field systems by 50 percent and to reduce the cost of acquisitions by 20 percent during the first 3 years under ams .

faa also plans to measure performance in such other critical areas as customer satisfaction and the quality of products and services .

according to faa's evaluation , while individual organizations are attempting to measure progress in meeting the two goals , a coordinated agencywide measurement effort is lacking .

faa's failure to field systems on time and within cost indicates the need for a comprehensive system of performance measurements that can help provide systematic feedback about accomplishments and progress in meeting mission objectives .

the need for such measurements will become even more critical as faa expedites the deployment of some projects .

clearly identified performance measurements will help faa , the congress , and system users assess how well the agency achieves its goals .

on january 1 , 2000 , computer systems worldwide could malfunction or produce inaccurate information simply because the century has changed .

unless corrected , such failures could have a costly , widespread impact .

the problem is rooted in how dates are recorded and computed .

for the past several decades , systems have typically used two digits to represent the year , such as “97” for 1997 , to save electronic storage space and reduce operating costs .

this practice , however , makes 2000 indistinguishable from 1900 , and the ambiguity could cause systems to malfunction in unforeseen ways or to fail completely .

faa's challenge is great .

correcting this problem will be difficult and expensive , and must be done while such systems continue to operate .

in less than 2 years , hundreds of computer systems that are critical to faa's operations , such as monitoring and controlling air traffic , could fail to perform as needed unless proper date - related calculations can be made .

faa's progress in making its systems ready for the year 2000 has been too slow .

we have reported that , at its current pace , it will not make it in time .

the agency has been severely behind schedule in completing basic awareness and assessment activities — critical first and second phases in an effective year 2000 program .

for example , just this month faa appointed a program manager who reports to the administrator .

delays in completing the first two phases have left faa little time for critical renovation , validation , and implementation activities — the final three phases in an effective year 2000 program .

with less than 2 years left , faa is quickly running out of time , making contingency planning for continuity of operations even more critical .

if critical faa systems are not year 2000 compliant and ready for reliable operation on january 1 of that year , the agency's capability in several areas — including the monitoring and controlling of air traffic — could be severely compromised .

the potential serious consequences could include degraded safety , grounded or delayed flights , increased airline costs , and customer inconvenience .

we have made a number of recommendations aimed at expediting the completion of overdue awareness and assessment activities .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

we will be happy to answer any questions from you or any member of the subcommittee .

automated radar terminal system ( arts ) iiia assembler ( 22-02 ) additional arts iiia at faa technical center ( 22-05 ) consolidated notice to airmen system ( 23-03 ) visual flight rules air traffic control tower closures ( 22-14 ) altitude reporting mode of secondary radar ( mode - c ) ( 21-10 ) enhanced target generator displays ( arts iii ) ( 22-03 ) national airspace data interchange network ia ( 25-06 ) hazardous in flight weather advisory service ( 23-08 ) ( continued ) en route automated radar tracking system enhancements ( 21-04 ) sustain new york terminal radar approach control ( tracon ) ( 22-18 ) national radio communication system ( 26-14 ) direct access radar channel system ( 21-03 ) national airspace data interchange network ii ( 25-07 ) modernization of unmanned faa buildings and equipment ( 26-08 ) large airport cable loop systems ( 26-05 ) interfacility data transfer system for edwards air force base radar approach control ( 35-20 ) acquisition of flight service facilities ( 26-10 ) ( continued ) radar pedestal vibration analysis ( 44-43 ) low - level wind shear alert system ( 23-12 ) brite radar indicator tower equipment ( 22-16 ) national implementation of the “imaging” aid for dependent converging runway approaches ( 62-24 ) integrated communications switching system ( 23-13 ) system engineering and integration contract ( 26-13 ) national airspace data interchange network ii continuation ( 35-07 ) instrument landing system and visual navaids engineering and sparing ( 44-24 ) oceanic display and planning system ( 21-05 ) integrated communications switching system logistics support ( 43-14 ) replacement of controllers chairs ( 42-24 ) arts iiia - expand 1 capacity and provide mode c intruder capability ( 32-20 ) ( continued ) civil aviation registry modernization ( 56-24 ) precision automated tracking system ( 56-16 ) national airspace integrated logistic support ( 56-58 ) long range radar radome replacement ( 44-42 ) installed at en route centers to allow processing of existing air traffic control software on new equipment .

project comprised a variety of tower and terminal replacement and modernization projects .

project was continued in the capital investment plan under projects 42-13 and 42-14 .

also known as the radio communications link project , it was designed to convert aging “special purpose” radar microwave link system into a “general purpose” system for data , voice , and radar communications among en route centers and other major faa facilities .

project was activated to sustain and upgrade air traffic control operations and acquire eight terminal radars awaiting the full implementation of the advanced automation system .

project comprised a variety of diverse support projects and has been continued in the capital investment plan under continued general support ( 46-16 ) .

over the past decade , we have reported on faa's progress in meeting schedule commitments for last - site implementation , which signals completion of the project .

prior to this year , we have used the dates from the 1983 nas modernization plan .

this year , after discussions with faa officials , we are measuring faa's progress against an interim date — which in most cases represents the date of contract award or investment decision .

we will continue to show the original date , but will only measure progress against the interim date .

57 tdls i57 tdls iistage 0: 21 stage 1 and 2: 21 0 tdls is the tower data link services .

tdls i ( predeparture clearance / flight data input / output crt / rank emulation ) has been commissioned at all 57 sites ; tdls ii ( digital - automatic terminal information service ) has been installed at all 57 sites and commissioned at 48 sites .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

