the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) established the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program — a loan program intended to foster the creation of new , consumer - governed , nonprofit health insurance issuers known as co - ops to offer qualified health plans in the individual and small group health insurance markets .

for this purpose , ppaca appropriated funding and authorized the awarding of two types of loans: ( 1 ) start - up loans , which help cover costs associated with establishing a co - op ; and ( 2 ) solvency loans , which help meet states' solvency requirements associated with licensure as a health insurance issuer .

 ( cms ) — the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that administers and monitors the co - op program — awarded start - up loans totaling about $363 million and solvency loans totaling the centers for medicare & medicaid services $2.1 billion .

the funding disbursed under these loans helped establish 23 co - ops , which currently offer health plans in 23 states .

in creating these 23 co - ops , the co - op program seeks to enhance competition in the states' markets for health insurance sold directly to individuals and small employers , which potentially could reduce health plan premiums , while improving choice for consumers and encouraging accountability to members .

however , questions have been raised about the effects that the co - ops will ultimately have on states' health insurance markets .

for example , in late 2009 , when the congressional budget office estimated the direct spending and revenue effects of ppaca , the agency indicated that it seemed unlikely that the co - ops given would establish a significant market presence in many areas .

these questions , you asked us to review the co - op program .

in this report we examine 1. the status of the co - op program loans awarded to date ; 2. how premiums for co - op health plans compared to premiums for other health plans during 2014 ; and 3. enrollment in co - op health plans during 2014 .

to examine the status of the co - op program loans , we obtained data from cms on the amounts awarded , disbursed , and awarded but undisbursed as of january 9 , 2015 .

we also obtained data on co - op funding that remained available for obligation as of the same date .

congressional budget office , letter to u.s. senate majority leader ( washington , d.c.: nov. 18 , 2009 ) .

cms for the 14 states that had a federally facilitated exchange in which co - ops participated during the first enrollment period ( october 1 , 2013 , through march 31 , 2014 ) .

we also obtained comparable premium data from the eight states that had state - based exchanges in which co - ops participated .

for each rating area in each state and for health plans at each metal level , as well as catastrophic plans , we calculated and compared the average premiums for co - op health plans and the average premiums for other health plans for 10 different categories of policyholder: adult individuals aged 30 , 40 , 50 , and 60 and adult couples aged 30 , 40 , and 50 with and without children .

we also interviewed officials from eight co - ops that were selected based on the total amount of loans awarded to the co - op , its geographic region , and the type of health insurance exchange ( i.e. , federally facilitated or state - based exchange ) operated in the state where the co - op offered health plans .

to analyze co - op health plan enrollment during the first open enrollment period , we obtained data from cms .

the data covered co - op enrollment for each of the 22 states where a co - op participated on the exchange .

we also obtained estimates of projected enrollment for each co - op that were used , in part , to determine the initial co - op program loan awards and compared those estimates to actual enrollment .

to assess the reliability of the data we obtained from cms on the co - op program loans , co - op and other issuer premiums , and co - op enrollment , we performed manual and electronic testing to identify missing data and other anomalies and interviewed agency officials to confirm our understanding of the data .

to assess the reliability of the data we obtained from states on co - op and other issuer premiums , we performed manual and electronic testing to identify missing data and other anomalies and followed up with state officials and incorporated corrections as necessary .

we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from january 2014 to april 2015 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

ppaca establishes certain conditions governing participation in the co - op program .

specifically , ppaca defines a co - op as a health insurance issuer organized under state law as a nonprofit , member corporation of which the activities substantially consist of the issuance of qualified health plans in the individual and small group markets in the state where co - ops are licensed to issue such plans .

ppaca prohibits organizations that were health insurance issuers on july 16 , 2009 , or sponsored by a state or local government from participating in the co - op program .

ppaca also requires that ( 1 ) governance of a co - op be subject to a majority vote of its members ; of a co - op incorporate ethics and conflict of interest standards protecting against insurance industry involvement and interference ; and ( 3 ) the operation of a co - op have a strong consumer focus , including timeliness , responsiveness , and accountability to its members .

in addition , ppaca directs cms to prioritize the award of co - op loans to ( 2 ) the governing documents applicants that plan to offer qualified health plans statewide , plan to utilize integrated models of care , and have significant private support .

consistent with ppaca , cms established two types of loans: start - up loans and solvency loans .

start - up loans cover approved start - up costs including salaries and wages , fringe benefits , consultant costs , equipment , supplies , staff travel , and approved indirect costs .

after the initial disbursement of start - up loan funds , subsequent disbursements are to be made according to a disbursement schedule established in the loan agreement between cms and each loan recipient .

subsequent disbursements are also contingent upon evidence demonstrating the loan recipient's successful achievement of milestones also established as part of the loan agreement between cms and each loan recipient .

milestones could include obtaining health insurance licensure and submitting timely reporting information in the required format .

loan recipients can coordinate with cms to adjust the disbursement schedule and milestones as needed .

each disbursement for a start - up loan must be repaid within 5 years of the disbursement date .

solvency loans assist co - ops in meeting state insurance solvency co - ops may request disbursements for and reserve requirements.solvency loans “as needed” to meet states' reserve capital and solvency requirements .

reasons for co - ops needing additional solvency disbursements could include enrollment growth and higher than anticipated claims from members .

co - op requests are subject to cms review of necessity and sufficiency .

each disbursement of a solvency loan must be repaid within 15 years of the disbursement date .

the co - op program is a direct loan program .

for a direct loan , the estimated long - term cost to the government — known as the credit subsidy cost — is calculated as the net present value of estimated cash flows over the life of each loan .

credit subsidy costs are estimated when the present value of estimated payments by the government ( such as loan disbursements ) exceeds the present value of estimated payments to the government ( such as principal repayments , fees , interest payments , and recoveries ) .

credit subsidy costs are required to be covered by an appropriation .

therefore , if cms awards a $10 million solvency loan to a co - op , the $10 million represents the payments by the government .

if cms calculates the present value for estimated payment to the government to be $6 million , the loan's subsidy cost would be the net difference of $4 million and would need to be covered by the co - op appropriation .

to ensure that applicants met the conditions for participating in the co - op program , cms required applications for the co - op program loans to include information about organizational structure and governance , as well as provide bylaws , a business plan , and a feasibility study .

cms and a contractor reviewed applications .

the contractor was responsible for evaluating applications and recommending loan amounts and a disbursement schedule based on information in the application package and supporting documents .

when making the final decisions regarding the loan awards , cms officials considered the contractors' recommendations and other factors , including the size of the loan request and anticipated results of funding the application .

by december 2012 , cms had awarded co - op program loans to 24 organizations .

several laws had the effect of reducing the $6 billion ppaca originally appropriated for the co - op program by about 65 percent and limiting program participation .

in 2011 , two separate appropriations acts rescinded $2.6 billion of the co - op appropriation .

additionally , in january 2013 , the american tax payer relief act of 2012 rescinded another $1.3 billion of the unobligated co - op program appropriation , leaving about $1.1 billion of the original $6 billion co - op appropriation available for the credit subsidy costs of co - op program loan awards and the american tax payer relief act of co - op program administration.2012 also transferred any remaining appropriation to a contingency fund for providing assistance and oversight to co - op loan awardees , which essentially restricted co - op program participation to the 24 organizations that received co - op loan awards prior to january 2013 .

one organization in vermont was unable to obtain a license as a health insurance issuer from its state's insurance commissioner .

as a result , cms terminated the organization from the co - op program .

hampshire and the co - op from montana expanded to idaho , and all offered health plans on the exchanges of those states for the first time .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

ppaca establishes rules governing how issuers can set premium rates .

for example , while issuers are no longer able to consider gender or health status in setting premiums , issuers may consider family size , age , and tobacco use .

also , issuers may vary premiums based on areas of residence .

states have the authority to use counties , metropolitan statistical areas , zip codes , or any combination of the three in establishing geographic locations by which premiums may vary , known as rating areas.a low of 1 to a high of 67 .

most states have 10 or fewer rating areas .

the number of rating areas per state varies , ranging from ppaca also requires that coverage sold include certain categories of benefits at standardized levels of coverage specified by metal level — bronze , silver , gold , and platinum .

each metal level corresponds to a proportion of allowable charges that a health plan is expected to pay on average , known as the actuarial value .

health plans within a metal level have the same actuarial value , meaning each plan pays approximately the same proportion of allowable charges as others .

plans from different metal levels have different actuarial values and pay a higher or lower proportion of allowable charges .

for example , a gold health plan is more generous overall than a bronze health plan .

actuarial values for health plans under ppaca range from 60 to 90 percent by metal level as follows: bronze ( 60 percent ) , silver ( 70 percent ) , gold ( 80 percent ) , or platinum ( 90 percent ) .

issuers may also offer “catastrophic” health plans to individuals under 30 and individuals exempt from the individual mandate .

catastrophic plans have actuarial values that are less than what is required to meet any of the other metal levels .

while these plans are required to cover three primary care visits and preventive services at no cost prior to an enrollee reaching the plan's deductible , they generally do not cover costs for other health care services until a high deductible is met .

as of early january 2015 , cms has disbursed about $1.6 billion ( 64 percent ) of the $2.4 billion in loans awarded to the 23 co - ops .

specifically , cms has disbursed $351 million in start - up loans and $1.2 billion in solvency loans .

the $351 million in start - up loan disbursements represents about 98 percent of the total amount of start - up loans awarded , whereas the $1.2 billion in solvency loan disbursements represents about 59 percent of the total amount of solvency loans awarded .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

cms has disbursed nearly all of the start - up loans awarded to the 23 co - ops .

as figure 3 shows , disbursements to 11 co - ops equaled 100 percent of their start - up loan awards .

disbursements to the remaining 12 co - ops were more than 85 percent of awards .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

in contrast to start - up loans , the percentage of awarded solvency loans disbursed to the 23 co - ops has varied depending on their needs .

disbursements to 3 of the 23 co - ops — cooportunity health , kentucky health cooperative , inc. , and healthyct — equal 100 percent of their solvency loan awards .

however , disbursements to 9 co - ops are less than 50 percent with disbursements to 2 co - ops — land of lincoln health and maine community health options — being less than 30 percent of awards .

the percentage of solvency loan funding disbursed to the remaining 11 co - ops ranged from 53 percent to 92 percent .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

the percentages of solvency loan awards disbursed to co - ops reflect each co - op's need for additional resources to meet state solvency and reserve requirements , which may be the result of enrollment growth or higher than anticipated claims from members .

as of early january 2015 , about $22 million of the co - op program appropriation was still available for obligation .

according to cms officials , the agency intends to use the remaining funds for administering the co - op program over the next few years .

in the 22 states where co - ops offered health plans on the states' health insurance exchanges in 2014 , the average premiums for co - op health plans in all tiers were lower than the average premiums for other health plans in more than half of the rating areas .

co - ops offered bronze , silver , and gold tier health plans in 91 percent of the rating areas , but offered catastrophic and platinum tier health plans in fewer rating areas .

for 4 of 5 tiers , the average premiums for co - op health plans were lower than the average premiums for other health plans in 54 to 63 percent of rating areas where both a co - op and at least one other for platinum , the average premiums for issuer offered health plans.co - op health plans were lower than the average premium for other health plans in 89 percent of rating areas where co - ops and other issuers offered health plans .

 ( see table 1. ) .

the percentage of rating areas where the average premium for co - op health plans was lower than the average premium for other issuers varied significantly by each state and tier .

 ( see fig .

5 for variation in silver plans and appendixes ii through xxiii for more details on how co - ops in each state were priced in relation to other health plans. ) .

for example , in six states the average premiums for co - op silver plans were higher than the average premiums for other silver plans in all the states' rating areas where a co - op offered a plan .

in five other states the average premiums for co - op silver plans were lower than the average premiums for other silver plans in all of the states' rating areas where a co - op offered a plan .

there was also variation across rating areas in the difference between the average premiums for co - op health plans and for other health plans .

for example , for all rating areas in which co - ops offered silver tier health plans , average co - op premiums were priced between 10 and 30 percent lower in 31 percent of rating areas and between 10 and 30 percent higher in 21 percent of rating areas .

co - op premiums were more than 30 percent lower in 4 percent of rating areas and more than 30 percent higher in 12 percent of rating areas .

 ( see fig .

6. ) .

the 22 co - ops that participated in the first open enrollment period enrolled over 469,000 ( 19 percent ) of the nearly 2.5 million people who selected individual market health plans in states with co - ops .

however , total enrollment was short of the overall projections of about 559,000 that co - ops included in their original loan applications and 8 co - ops accounted for about 385,000 ( 85 percent ) of the total number of co - op enrollees .

these 8 co - ops , in particular , exceeded their enrollment projections for the first open enrollment period with 5 more than doubling their projected enrollment .

the remaining 14 co - ops did not meet their enrollment projections for the first enrollment period .

and 10 of those co - ops enrolled less than half of their projected enrollment numbers .

 ( see fig 7. ) .

we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment .

in its written comments which appear in appendix xxiv , hhs stated its commitment to beneficiaries of the co - op program and taxpayers , and described various activities used to monitor the co - op program .

the department provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dsouzav@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix xxiv .

table 2 provides the total loan amounts awarded to each of the 23 consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) as of january 2014 .

the consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) in arizona offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's seven rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 8 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in arizona tended to be among the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

8. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) in colorado offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's 11 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 9 compares co - op premiums to those of all other plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in colorado tended to be among the least expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

9. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) in connecticut offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's eight rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 10 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in connecticut were among the most expensive premiums for catastrophic and silver health plans .

for bronze health plans , the co - op's premiums tended to vary widely within each rating area , generally ranging from the most expensive premium to among the least expensive .

the co - op's premiums for gold health plans varied in relation to other issuers' premiums across the rating areas .

 ( see fig .

10. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in illinois offered bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's 13 rating areas , but did not offer catastrophic or platinum health plans .

figure 11 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figures show the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in illinois tended to be among the most expensive plans offered .

however , in many rating areas , there was also a co - op offering that had a premium close to or below the middle .

 ( see fig.11. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in iowa offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's seven rating areas .

figure 12 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in iowa varied widely , ranging from the least to most expensive .

 ( see fig .

12. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in kentucky offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's eight rating areas .

figure 13 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in kentucky tended to be among the least expensive .

however , in several rating areas , the co - op premiums were also among the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

13. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in louisiana offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's eight rating areas .

figure 14 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in louisiana varied depending on the rating area and tier , ranging from among the least to the most expensive .

 ( see fig .

14. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in maine offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's four rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 15 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in maine were generally among the least expensive premiums .

in rating area 1 , however , co - op premiums ranged from the least to most expensive for silver health plans and were among the most expensive for catastrophic and bronze health plans .

 ( see fig .

15. ) .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in maryland offered bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's four rating areas , but did not offer catastrophic or platinum health plans .

figure 16 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in maryland were among the most expensive premiums for bronze plans .

however , the co - op premiums for silver and gold plans varied widely within each rating area , ranging from among the least to the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

16. ) .

appendix x: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in maryland plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix x: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in maryland rating area 1 includes anne arundel , baltimore , baltimore city , harford , and howard counties .

rating area 2 includes calvert , caroline , cecil , charles , dorchester , kent , queen anne's , somerset , st. mary's , talbot , wicomico , and worcester counties .

rating area 3 includes montgomery and prince george's counties .

rating area 4 includes allegany , carroll , frederick , garrett , and washington counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in massachusetts offered plans in all tiers in 5 of the state's 7 rating areas .

figure 17 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in massachusetts tended to be among the least expensive across all tiers and rating areas .

 ( see fig .

17. ) .

appendix xi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in massachusetts plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in massachusetts rating area 1 includes 3-digit zip codes 010 , 011 , 012 , and 013 .

rating area 2 includes 3-digit zip codes 014 , 015 , and 016 .

rating area 3 includes 3-digit zip codes 017 and 020 .

rating area 4 includes 3-digit zip codes 018 and 019 .

rating area 5 includes 3-digit zip codes 021 , 022 , and 024 .

rating area 6 includes 3-digit zip codes 023 and 027 .

rating area 7 includes zip codes that begin with 025 and 026 .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in michigan offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in 13 of the state's 16 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 18 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in michigan tended to be the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

18. ) .

appendix xii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in michigan appendix xii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in michigan plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in michigan rating area 1 includes monroe and wayne counties .

rating area 2 includes macomb and oakland counties .

rating area 3 includes st. clair county .

rating area 4 includes lenawee and washtenaw counties .

rating area 5 includes genesee and shiawassee counties .

rating area 6 includes tuscola county .

rating area 7 includes ingham and jackson counties .

rating area 8 includes arenac , bay , gratiot , and saginaw counties .

rating area 9 includes cass and van buren counties .

rating area 10 includes branch , calhoun , and kalamazoo counties .

rating area 11 includes allegan and barry counties .

rating area 12 includes ionia , kent , lake , mason , mecosta , montcalm , muskegon , newaygo , oceana , osceola , and ottawa counties .

rating area 13 includes clare , gladwin , isabella , and midland counties .

rating area 14 includes antrim , benzie , charlevoix , emmet , grand traverse , kalkaska , leelanau , manistee , missaukee , and wexford counties .

rating area 15 includes alcona , alpena , cheboygan , chippewa , crawford , iosco , mackinac , montmorency , ogemaw , oscoda , otsego , presque isle , and roscommon counties .

rating area 16 includes alger , baraga , delta , dickinson , gogebic , houghton , iron , keweenaw , luce , marquette , menominee , ontonagon , and schoolcraft counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in montana offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's four rating areas .

figure 19 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in montana were generally among the least expensive premiums for catastrophic and gold plans .

co - op premiums for bronze and silver plans varied widely , ranging from among the least to most expensive .

 ( see fig .

19. ) .

appendix xiii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in montana plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xiii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in montana rating area 1 includes carbon , musselshell , stillwater , sweet grass and yellowstone counties .

rating area 2 includes broadwater , cascade , chouteau , clark , deer lodge , gallatin , judith basin , lewis and jefferson , silver bow , and teton counties .

rating area 3 includes flathead , lake , and missoula counties .

rating area 4 includes beaverhead , big horn , blaine , carter , custer , daniels , dawson , fallon , fergus , garfield , glacier , golden valley , granite , hill , liberty , lincoln , madison , mccone , meagher , mineral , park , petroleum , phillips , pondera , powder river , powell , prairie , ravalli , richland , roosevelt , rosebud , sanders , sheridan , toole , treasure , valley , wheatland , and wibaux counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in nebraska offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's four rating areas .

figure 20 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - ops tended to be among the least expensive premiums , with some exceptions such as catastrophic plans in rating area 1 .

 ( see fig .

20. ) .

appendix xiv: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in nebraska plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xiv: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in nebraska rating area 1 includes 3-digit zip codes 680 and 681 .

rating area 2 includes 3-digit zip codes 683 , 684 , and 685 .

rating area 3 includes 3-digit zip codes 686 , 687 , 688 , and 689 .

rating area 4 includes 3-digit zip codes 690 , 691 , 692 , and 693 .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in nevada offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's four rating areas .

platinum plans were only offered in rating area 1 .

figure 21 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , it shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in nevada varied depending on the tier and rating area .

in rating areas 2 and 3 , co - op premiums were among the most expensive .

 ( see fig .

21. ) .

appendix xv: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in nevada appendix xv: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in nevada plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes clark and nye counties .

rating area 2 includes washoe county .

rating area 3 includes carson city , douglas , lyon , and storey counties .

rating area 4 includes churchill , esmeralda , eureka , humboldt , lander , lincoln , elko , mineral , pershing , and white pine counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in new jersey offered a health plan in all tiers in the state's single rating area .

figure 22 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for the health plans offered by the co - op in new jersey were among the more expensive premiums for bronze and silver health plans and in the middle for catastrophic and gold plans .

co - op premiums for platinum health plans were among the least expensive .

 ( see fig .

22. ) .

appendix xvi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new jersey plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xvi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new jersey rating area 1 includes atlantic , bergen , burlington , camden , cape may , cumberland , essex , gloucester , hudson , hunterdon , mercer , middlesex , monmouth , morris , ocean , passaic , salem , somerset , sussex , union , and warren counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in new mexico offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's five rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 23 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in new mexico were often among the less expensive premiums for bronze , silver , and gold health plans and were generally in the middle for catastrophic plans .

 ( see fig .

23. ) .

appendix xvii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new mexico appendix xvii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new mexico plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes bernalillo , sandoval , torrance , and valencia counties .

rating area 2 includes san juan county .

rating area 3 includes don ana county .

rating area 4 includes santa fe county .

rating area 5 includes catron , chaves , cibola , colfax , curry , debaca , eddy , grant , guadalupe , harding , hidalgo , lea , lincoln , los alamos , luna , mckinley , mora , otero , quay , rio arriba , roosevelt , san miguel , sierra , socorro , taos , and union counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in new york offered bronze , silver , gold , and platinum health plans in each of the state's eight rating areas , but did not offer a catastrophic health plan .

figure 24 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op were consistently among the least expensive premiums across all eight rating areas in new york .

 ( see fig .

24. ) .

appendix xviii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new york plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

appendix xviii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in new york rating area 1 includes albany , columbia , fulton , greene , montgomery , renesselaer , saratoga , schenectady , schoharie , warren , and washington counties .

rating area 2 includes allegany , cattaraugus , chautauqua , erie , genesee , niagara , orleans , and wyoming counties .

rating area 3 includes delaware , dutchess , orange , putnam , sullivan , and ulster counties .

rating area 4 includes bronx , queens , kings , new york , richmond , rockland , and westchester counties .

rating area 5 includes livingston , monroe , ontario , seneca , wayne , and yates counties .

rating area 6 includes broome , cayuga , chemung , cortland , onondaga , schuyler , steuben , tioga , and tompkins counties .

rating area 7 includes chenango , clinton , essex , franklin , hamilton , herkimer , jefferson , lewis , madison , oneida , oswego , otsego , and st. lawrence counties .

rating area 8 includes nassau and suffolk counties .

the two consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) in oregon offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's seven rating areas , but only platinum health plans in four rating areas .

figure 25 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - ops tended to vary widely , ranging from among the least to the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

25. ) .

appendix xix: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in oregon appendix xix: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in oregon plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes clackamas , multnomah , washington , and yamhill counties .

rating area 2 includes benton , lane , and linn counties .

rating area 3 includes marion and polk counties .

rating area 4 includes deschutes , klamath , and lake counties .

rating area 5 includes columbia , coos , curry , lincoln , and tillamook counties .

rating area 6 includes crook , gilliam , grant , harney , hood river , jefferson , malheur , morrow , sherman , umatilla , union , wallowa , wasco , and wheeler counties .

rating area 7 includes douglas , jackson , and josephine counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in south carolina offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's 46 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 26 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in south carolina tended to be among the least expensive premiums .

however , co - op premiums were among the most expensive premiums in some rating areas .

 ( see fig .

26. ) .

appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina appendix xx: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in south carolina plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in tennessee offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in five of the state's eight rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 27 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in tennessee tended to be among the most expensive premiums .

 ( see fig .

27. ) .

appendix xxi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in tennessee appendix xxi: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in tennessee plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes carter , greene , hancock , hawkins , johnson , sullivan , unicoi , and washington counties .

rating area 2 includes anderson , blount , campbell , claiborne , cocke , grainger , hamblen , jefferson , knox , loudon , monroe , morgan , roane , scott , sevier , and union counties .

rating area 3 includes bledsoe , bradley , franklin , grundy , hamilton , marion , mcminn , meigs , polk , rhea , and sequatchie counties .

rating area 4 includes davidson , montgomery , robertson , rutherford , sumner , trousdale , williamson , and wilson counties .

rating area 5 includes benton , carroll , chester , crockett , decatur , dyer , gibson , hardeman , hardin , henderson , henry , lake , madison , mcnairy , obion , and weakley counties .

rating area 6 includes fayette , haywood , lauderdale , shelby , and tipton counties .

rating area 7 includes cannon , clay , cumberland , dekalb , fentress , jackson , macon , overton , pickett , putnam , smith , van buren , warren , and white counties .

rating area 8 includes coffee , dickson , giles , hickman , houston , humphreys , lawrence , lewis , lincoln , marshall , maury , moore , perry , stewart , and wayne counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in utah offered bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's six rating areas , but did not offer a catastrophic or platinum health plan .

figure 28 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in utah were among the least expensive premiums in three of the state's six rating areas and tended to be in the middle for the other rating areas .

 ( see fig .

28. ) .

appendix xxii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in utah appendix xxii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in utah plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes cache and rich counties .

rating area 2 includes box elder , davis , morgan , salt lake , summit , and weber counties .

rating area 3 includes tooele and wasatch counties .

rating area 4 includes utah county .

rating area 5 includes iron and washington counties .

rating area 6 includes duchesne , emery , garfield , grand , juab , kane , millard , piute , san juan , sanpete , sevier , uintah , and wayne counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in wisconsin offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in six of the state's 16 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 29 compares co - op premiums to those of all plans .

specifically , the figure shows the percentile range in which co - op premiums fell after rank - ordering all plans .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in wisconsin tend be among the less expensive premiums .

however , co - op premiums varied widely for silver health plans in rating areas 1 , 9 , and 12 , ranging from among the least to the most expensive .

 ( see fig .

29. ) .

appendix xxiii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in wisconsin appendix xxiii: consumer operated and oriented plan premiums relative to other issuers' premiums in wisconsin plans in the same metal level have the same actuarial value .

catastrophic plans are not required to meet actuarial value targets , but must have actuarial values less than 60 percent .

rating area 1 includes milwaukee county .

rating area 2 includes dane county .

rating area 3 includes polk , pierce , and st. croix counties .

rating area 4 includes chippewa , dunn , eau claire , and pepin counties .

rating area 5 includes ashland , bayfield , burnett , douglas , sawyer , and washburn counties .

rating area 6 includes buffalo , jackson la crosse , monroe , and trempealeau counties .

rating area 7 includes crawford , grand , iowa , lafayette , and vernon counties .

rating area 8 includes clark , price , rusk , and taylor counties .

rating area 9 includes racine and kenosha counties .

rating area 10 includes lincoln , marathon , portage , and rusk counties .

rating area 11 includes calumet , dodge , fond du lac , sheboygan , and winnebago counties .

rating area 12 includes ozaukee , washington , and waukesha counties .

rating area 13 includes florence , forest , iron , langlade , oneida , and vilas counties .

rating area 14 includes columbia , green , jefferson , rock , and walworth counties .

rating area 15 includes adams , green lake , juneau , marquette , richland , and sauk counties .

rating area 16 includes brown , door , kewaunee , manitowoc , menominee , oconto , and shawano counties .

vijay d'souza , ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dsouzav@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , robert copeland , assistant director ; dee abasute ; sandra george ; giselle hicks ; aaron holling ; drew long ; and christina serna made key contributions to this report .

