the department of veterans affairs ( va ) spent about $20 billion on goods and services in fiscal year 2015 .

the wide range of goods and services that va procures — including construction , information technology , medical supplies , and many other categories — is essential to meeting its mission to provide health care , pensions , and other benefits to the nation's military veterans .

prior assessments of va management , both internal and external , have found shortcomings in va procurement .

in 2015 , gao added va health care to our high risk list because of issues including ambiguous policies , inconsistent processes , and inadequate oversight and accountability .

my remarks today are based on our recently issued report on va contracting , and i will summarize a few key findings from that report .

i will address 1 ) the organizational structure of va's procurement function , 2 ) va procurement policies , and 3 ) the extent to which opportunities exist to improve va's key procurement functions and to save money .

as part of our work for our september 2016 report , in order to evaluate va's procurement organizational structure , we reviewed policy documents and interviewed officials in leadership , local contracting office management , and contracting officer roles .

to assess va's procurement policies , we obtained and analyzed policy documents , and interviewed officials responsible for making and implementing procurement policy .

to assess opportunities to improve va's key procurement functions and to save money , we obtained and analyzed information regarding va's medical - surgical prime vendor program and interviewed officials with roles in management , contracting , and operations for the program .

we also reviewed a non - generalizable sample of 37 contracts and 19 associated task orders from fiscal years 2013 through 2015 .

the selected contracts were chosen from the national contracting offices and local veterans health administration ( vha ) contracting offices we visited , and the basis for selection included dollar value and whether these contracts were competed or not .

additionally , we interviewed contracting officers responsible for each of the selected contracts .

more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology for our work can be found in our september 16 , 2016 report .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

va serves veterans of the u.s. armed forces , and provides health , pension , burial , and other benefits .

in fiscal year 2015 , va spent about $20 billion on goods and services via contracts — more than a quarter of its discretionary budget .

as shown in the organizational chart below , these contracts were awarded by va's eight heads of contracting activity ( hcas ) .

the department's three operational administrations — vha , the veterans benefits administration , and the national cemetery administration — operate largely independently from one another .

in addition to the operating administrations , several va procurement organizations have department - wide roles: the office of acquisition , logistics , and construction ( oalc ) is a va headquarters organization responsible for directing the acquisition , logistics , construction , and leasing functions within va .

the office of acquisition operations ( oao ) , which falls under oalc's purview , conducts procurement activities for customers across the department and has two primary operating divisions — the technology acquisition center ( tac ) , which focuses on it purchasing , and the strategic acquisition center ( sac ) , which is responsible for procurement of certain types of goods and services for the operating administrations , such as vha .

the office of acquisition and logistics ( oal ) is responsible for oversight of contracting across va , including setting policy and issuing warrants to contracting officers .

o the national acquisition center ( nac ) is an oal contracting organization which serves vha by providing contracting for certain health care - related goods and services .

vha provides medical care to veterans and is by far the largest administration in va , with a budget of $61.1 billion for fiscal year 2016 , representing the majority of va's $75 billion discretionary budget .

its 167 medical centers are currently organized into 19 veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) , regional networks that manage some aspects of operations .

vha has 19 network contracting offices , each of which serves one of the 19 visns .

va has some organizational and programmatic changes in progress that affect procurement .

in july 2015 , the secretary of veterans affairs announced an organizational transformation for the department called myva .

in a related effort , responsibility for the medical - surgical prime vendor ( mspv ) program — a logistics provider that facilitates ordering and delivery of supplies to medical centers from many different contractors — was recently transferred from nac to sac .

given va procurement's highly decentralized structure , a given customer — such as a department in a medical center or a program office — may need to work with multiple contracting entities to meet its procurement needs .

figure 2 illustrates the complex working relationship between contracting offices and their customers across va .

this can contribute to confusion .

several of the contracting officials we spoke with stated that they were , at times , uncertain about which contracting office handled what requirements .

va issued a memorandum in 2013 to clarify areas of responsibility for the national contracting organizations , but confusion remains .

va's acting chief acquisition officer stated that he is aware of overlap in the functions of some contracting organizations , especially the nac and the sac .

at one visn we visited , an official reported procuring one type of high - tech medical equipment through the sac even though this area is specifically designated as nac's responsibility because she expected that the sac could execute the purchase more quickly .

without clearly delineated organizational roles and customer relationships — beyond what was provided in the 2013 memorandum — the possibility of duplication in these roles and relationships is increased , and customers lack clear guidance on which organization to approach for certain types of procurements .

in our september 2016 report , we recommended that oalc assess whether additional policy or guidance is needed to clarify the roles of va's national contracting organizations .

the acting chief acquisition officer , oalc said that the department agreed with this recommendation .

key va procurement policies are outdated and difficult for contracting officers to use .

standards for internal control in the federal government state that it is important for an organization's management to update its policies over time to reflect changing statutes or conditions , and that those policies should be communicated to those who need to implement them .

however , many of va's regulations and policies are outdated , most notably the va acquisition regulation ( vaar ) , which has not been updated since 2008 .

the department has issued a patchwork of policy documents in the interim to fill this gap .

va asks contracting officers to refer to two different versions of the vaar , one from 1997 and the other from 2008 .

this causes confusion among contracting officers .

in addition , va communicates interim procurement policies in a number of different forms , some of which can be duplicative .

figure 3 illustrates the numerous sources that contracting officers must turn to for guidance .

the sheer volume and number of different forms of communications — many of which are outdated — are confusing and present challenges for contracting officials seeking appropriate guidance .

while va recently fully rescinded the 1997 vaar after our inquiries , the 2008 version remains out of date .

a new revision of the vaar is also in development , but has faced delays .

va began the process in 2011 but does not plan to finalize the new vaar until december 2018 , including the required rulemaking process .

the lengthy delay in updating this fundamental source of policy impedes contracting officers' abilities to effectively carry out their duties .

in our september 2016 report , we recommended that va identify measures to expedite the revision of the vaar , and take interim steps to clarify its policy framework ; the acting chief acquisition officer , oalc stated that the department agreed with both of these recommendations .

va medical centers use contractors called medical - surgical prime vendors to obtain many of the supplies they use on a daily basis , such as bandages and surgical sutures .

officials known as ordering officers , who work at the medical centers , regularly place orders .

in turn , the prime vendor delivers those orders via a local warehouse .

the prices for these medical supplies are established by va national contracts , which typically provide significant discounts over the federal supply schedule prices — an estimated 30 percent on average , according to a senior nac official .

use of these national contracts is also required by va policy and regulation .

figure 4 provides an overview of the mspv process .

however , the current mspv process is confusing and cumbersome .

most orders are placed through the integrated funds distribution control point activity , accounting and procurement ( ifcap ) system , a decades - old it system with a text - based interface , which does not include a tool to look up items that are available on the national contracts .

for instance , ordering officers must know the exact item number — which is different for each vendor — to enter into ifcap .

the existing tools to look up available national contracts are also cumbersome .

along with discounted items on national contracts , the mspv system also allows ordering officers to buy thousands of items directly from va's federal supply schedule contracts , which lack the degree of discounted pricing of the national contracts .

because of the challenges posed by the system , ordering officers in some cases purchase items directly from the federal supply schedules , and might miss opportunities to obtain discounts on the national contracts .

administration of the mspv program is being transferred from nac to sac , and , along with this transfer , vha and sac are making changes to the mspv program in an effort to address the issues discussed above and streamline the process .

to support the next generation mspv , sac has already awarded new prime vendor contracts and is in the process of awarding the supporting national contracts for individual types of supplies .

vha and sac also plan to implement a new online ordering interface , developed by a contractor for vha , which will provide ordering officers a more intuitive interface for the outdated and difficult - to - use ifcap system .

further , unlike the current system , this new interface will only permit ordering officers to purchase items from a specific catalog of items , not the wider range of federal supply schedule items .

va estimates that this catalog will eventually contain 8,000 to 10,000 items to meet the needs of its medical centers .

however , there have been some delays in vha's development of supply requirements and sac's award of new supply contracts , with only about 1,800 items on national contracts as of july 2016 .

va does not anticipate that sac will be able to award contracts for the full catalog by the time the new mspv contracts become operational in december 2016 .

in the interim , sac and vha officials stated that they will allow ordering of federal supply schedule items ( approximately 4,500 ) that are not on national contracts , to ease the transition .

work remains to ensure that the transition to this new approach will be successful .

updating the mspv process affects how essential supplies are ordered and delivered at 167 medical centers on a daily basis , and facility logistics staff , including ordering officers , must be able to implement the new approach .

vha has an outreach plan in place , but chief logistics officers at medical centers we visited expressed some concerns about the transition — for instance , one reported that his office's analysis found 14 items deemed critical to the function of the medical center were not on a preliminary list of supplies available through the new mspv , nor were acceptable substitutes .

if medical centers instead purchase items through their local contracting offices because the new mspv does not meet their needs , it will undermine the program's potential to increase efficiency and cost savings .

in our september 2016 report , we recommended that va take steps to facilitate the transition to the new mspv process , including ensuring that sac collects data to monitor the use of national contracts in the new system , that sac and vha establish achievable time frames for eliminating federal supply schedule items from the mspv catalog once national contracts are in place , and that the new ordering interface clearly distinguish between items on national contracts and the 4,500 items on the federal supply schedules .

the acting chief acquisition officer , oalc said that the department agreed with this recommendation .

va's substantial buying power presents many opportunities for procurement cost savings , but the department has not consistently taken advantage of them .

a key aspect of strategic sourcing is consolidating similar requirements to manage them collectively , reaping cost savings and efficiency gains .

va has done this successfully in some areas , such as pharmaceuticals , and the planned changes to the mspv program could result in greater use of discounted national contracts for medical supplies if they are successfully implemented .

there are opportunities to better apply strategic sourcing principles at the regional level , as well .

within vha , each of the 19 visns is responsible for a regional network of multiple medical centers and clinics .

individual medical centers within each visn procure many goods and services separately , despite the fact that their requirements are similar .

consolidating these requirements — such as security services , elevator maintenance , and eyeglasses for patients — can realize both cost savings and greater efficiency in awarding and administering contracts .

we found efforts underway to consolidate requirements at the regional level , but local autonomy and limited planning capacity pose obstacles .

for instance , one visn we visited recently began an initiative to consolidate requirements for purchases made by all of its medical centers , especially services .

visn managers explained that they began with the easiest requirements , such as landscaping services and parking administration .

they issued a draft memorandum with plans to broaden this approach to most purchases , but medical center staff provided feedback that they preferred their own local contracts and did not want visn - wide contracts to become the default approach .

in our review of 37 selected contracts , we did find several instances of visn and contracting officials consolidating requirements for greater efficiency and to obtain better pricing .

this indicates that consolidating procurement is possible with leadership buy - in , and that there are opportunities to share lessons learned across visns .

within vha , in visns where there is not a consistent push by local leadership to pursue consolidation , it is challenging for efforts driven by individual departments or contracting personnel to overcome cultural obstacles .

to provide the necessary leadership commitment to take advantage of these opportunities , we recommended in our september 2016 report that vha procurement and logistics conduct a review of visn - level strategic sourcing efforts , identify best practices , and , if needed , issue guidance .

the acting chief acquisition officer , oalc said that the department agreed with this recommendation .

chairman coffman , ranking member kuster , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact michele mackin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov .

in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to the report on which this testimony is based are lisa gardner , assistant director ; emily bond ; george bustamante ; margaret hettinger ; julia kennon ; katherine lenane ; ethan levy ; teague lyons ; jean mcsween ; sylvia schatz ; erin stockdale ; and roxanna sun .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

