i am pleased to be here today to discuss enrollment for health - care coverage obtained through the health - insurance exchanges , or marketplaces , established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) and , in particular , to discuss the preliminary results of our undercover testing of eligibility and enrollment controls for the federal health insurance marketplace ( marketplace ) and selected state marketplaces for the 2015 coverage year .

ppaca provides subsidies to those eligible to purchase private health - insurance plans who meet certain income and other requirements .

with those subsidies and other costs , the act represents a significant , long - term fiscal commitment for the federal government .

according to the congressional budget office , the estimated cost of subsidies and related spending under the act is $60 billion for fiscal year 2016 , rising to $105 billion for fiscal year 2025 , and totaling $880 billion for fiscal years 2016 – 2025 .

while subsidies under the act are not paid directly to enrollees , participants nevertheless benefit financially through reduced monthly premiums or lower costs due at time of service , such as copayments .

because subsidy costs are contingent on who obtains coverage , enrollment controls that help ensure only qualified applicants are approved for subsidized coverage are a key factor in determining federal expenditures under the act .

in addition , ppaca provided for the expansion of the medicaid program .

under the expansion , states may choose to provide medicaid coverage to nonelderly adults who meet income limits and other criteria .

under ppaca , the federal government is to fully reimburse states through fiscal year 2016 for the medicaid expenditures of “newly eligible” individuals who gained medicaid eligibility through the expansion .

according to the office of the actuary of the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , federal expenditures for the medicaid expansion are estimated at $430 billion from 2014 through 2023 .

ppaca provides for the establishment of health - insurance marketplaces to assist consumers in comparing and selecting among insurance plans offered by participating private issuers of health - care coverage .

under ppaca , states may elect to operate their own health - care marketplaces , or they may rely on the federal marketplace , known to the public as healthcare.gov .

these marketplaces were intended to provide a single point of access for individuals to enroll in private health plans , apply for income - based subsidies to offset the cost of these plans — which , as noted , are paid directly to health - insurance issuers — and , as applicable , obtain an eligibility determination or assessment of eligibility for other health - coverage programs , such as medicaid or the children's health insurance program .

cms , a unit of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for overseeing the establishment of these online marketplaces , and the agency maintains the federal marketplace .

to be eligible to enroll in a “qualified health plan” offered through a marketplace — that is , one providing essential health benefits and meeting other requirements under ppaca — an individual must be a u.s. citizen or national , or otherwise lawfully present in the united states ; reside in the marketplace service area ; and not be incarcerated ( unless incarcerated while awaiting disposition of charges ) .

to be eligible for medicaid , individuals must meet federal requirements regarding residency , u.s. citizenship or immigration status , and income limits , as well as any additional state - specific criteria that may apply .

marketplaces are required by ppaca to verify application information to determine eligibility for enrollment and , if applicable , determine eligibility for the income - based subsidies or medicaid .

these verification steps include validating an applicant's social security number , if one is provided ; verifying citizenship , status as a national , or lawful presence by comparison with social security administration or department of homeland security records ; and verifying household income and family size by comparison with tax - return data from the internal revenue service , as well as data on social security benefits from the social security administration .

in light of the government's substantial fiscal commitment under the act , congressional requesters originally asked us to examine enrollment and verification controls of the federal marketplace .

in july 2014 , we presented testimony on the results of our initial work , which focused on application for , and approval of , coverage for fictitious applicants for the 2014 coverage year — the first under the act — through the federal marketplace .

in july 2015 , we testified on the final results of that work , including the maintenance of the fictitious applicant identities and extension of coverage through 2014 and into 2015 , payment of federally subsidized premiums on policies we obtained , and the marketplace's verification process for applicant documentation .

we plan to issue a final report on the results of our undercover eligibility and enrollment controls testing for the 2014 coverage year shortly .

following the original request , you and other congressional requesters asked us to continue to examine enrollment and verification controls of the federal marketplace and state marketplaces as well , for the 2015 coverage year — the second under the act .

my statement today is based on the preliminary results and analysis from this ongoing work .

specifically , today's statement describes the preliminary results of our undercover testing of the federal marketplace and selected state marketplaces , for application , enrollment , and eligibility - verification controls , for both qualified health - care plans and medicaid , during the act's second open - enrollment period ending february 2015 .

we plan to issue a final report at a later date .

to perform our undercover testing of the federal and selected state eligibility and enrollment processes for the 2015 coverage year , we created 18 fictitious identities for the purpose of making applications for health - care coverage by telephone and online .

the undercover results , while illustrative , cannot be generalized to the full population of enrollees .

for all 18 applications , we used publicly available information to construct our scenarios .

we also used publicly available hardware , software , and materials to produce counterfeit or fictitious documents , which we submitted , as appropriate for our testing , when instructed to do so .

we then observed the outcomes of the document submissions , such as any approvals received or requests to provide additional supporting documentation .

because the federal government , at the time of our review , operated a marketplace on behalf of the state in about two - thirds of the states , we focused part of our work on two states using the federal marketplace — new jersey and north dakota .

we chose these two states because they had expanded medicaid eligibility and also delegated their medicaid eligibility determinations to the federal marketplace at the time of our testing .

in addition , we chose two state marketplaces , california and kentucky , for our undercover testing .

we chose these two states , in part , based on the states having expanded medicaid eligibility and differences in population .

for 10 applicant scenarios , we tested controls for verifications related to qualified health - plan coverage .

specifically , we created application scenarios with fictitious applicants claiming to have impossible social security numbers ; claiming to be working for an employer that offers health insurance , but not coverage that meets “minimum essential” standards ; or already having existing qualified health - plan coverage .

we made 4 of these 10 applications online and the other 6 applications by phone .

in these tests , we also stated income at a level eligible to obtain both types of income - based subsidies available under ppaca — a premium tax credit , to be paid in advance , and cost - sharing reduction .

for 8 additional applicant scenarios , we tested controls for verifications related to medicaid coverage .

specifically , our fictitious applicants provided invalid social security identities , where their information did not match social security administration records , or claimed they were noncitizens lawfully present in the united states and declined to provide social security numbers .

in situations where we were asked to provide immigration document numbers , we provided impossible immigration document numbers .

we made half of these applications online and half by phone .

in these tests , we also stated income at a level eligible to qualify for coverage under the medicaid expansion , where the federal government is responsible for reimbursing the states for 100 percent of the medicaid costs in 2015 .

in cases where we did not obtain approval for medicaid , we instead attempted , as appropriate , to obtain coverage for subsidized qualified health plans in the same manner as described earlier .

after concluding our undercover testing , we briefed officials from cms ; officials from the state marketplaces ; and medicaid officials from california , kentucky , and north dakota on our results .

we asked to brief medicaid officials from new jersey but they declined our request .

to protect our undercover identities , we did not provide the marketplaces with specific applicant identity information .

cms and selected state officials generally told us that without such information , they could not fully research handling of our applicants .

we also reviewed laws , regulations , and other policy and related information .

we are conducting the work upon which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we are conducting our related investigative work in accordance with investigative standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency .

our undercover testing for the 2015 coverage year found that the health - care marketplace eligibility determination and enrollment process remains vulnerable to fraud .

as shown in figure 1 , the federal marketplace or selected state marketplaces approved each of our 10 fictitious applications for subsidized qualified health plans .

we subsequently paid premiums to put these policies into force .

as the figure shows , for these 10 applications , we were approved for subsidized coverage — the premium tax credit , paid in advance , and cost - sharing reduction subsidies — for all cases .

the monthly amount of the advance premium tax credit for these 10 applicants totaled approximately $2,300 per month , or about $28,000 annually , equal to about 70 percent of total premiums .

for 4 of these applications , we used social security numbers that could not have been issued by the social security administration .

for 4 other applications , we said our fictitious applicants worked at a company — which we also created — that offered health insurance , but the coverage did not provide required minimum essential coverage under ppaca .

for the final 2 applications , we used an identity from our prior undercover testing of the federal marketplace to apply for coverage concurrently at two state marketplaces .

thus , this fictitious applicant received subsidized qualified health - plan coverage from the federal marketplace and the two selected state marketplaces at the same time .

for 8 applications among this group of 10 , we failed to clear an identity - checking step during the “front end” of the application process , and thus could not complete the process .

in these cases , we were directed to contact a contractor that handles identity checking .

the contractor was unable to resolve the identity issues and directed us to call the appropriate marketplace .

we proceeded to phone the marketplaces and our applications were subsequently approved .

the other two applicants were accepted by phone .

for each of the 10 undercover applications where we obtained qualified health - plan coverage , the respective marketplace directed that our applicants submit supplementary documentation .

the marketplaces are required to seek postapproval documentation in the case of certain application “inconsistencies” — instances in which information an applicant has provided does not match information contained in data sources that the marketplace uses for eligibility verification at the time of application , or such information is not available .

if there is an application inconsistency , the marketplace is to determine eligibility using the applicant's attestations and ensure that subsidies are provided on behalf of the applicant , if qualified to receive them , while the inconsistency is being resolved using “back - end” controls .

under these controls , applicants will be asked to provide additional information or documentation for the marketplaces to review in order to resolve the inconsistency .

as part of our testing , and to respond to the marketplace directives , we provided counterfeit follow - up documentation , such as fictitious social security cards with impossible social security numbers , for all 10 undercover applications .

for all 10 of these undercover applications , we maintained subsidized coverage beyond the period during which applicants may file supporting documentation to resolve inconsistencies .

in one case , the kentucky marketplace questioned the validity of the social security number our applicant provided , which was an impossible social security number .

in fact , the marketplace told us the social security administration reported that the number was not valid .

despite this , however , the kentucky marketplace notified our fictitious applicant that the applicant was found eligible for coverage .

for the four fictitious applicants who claimed their employer did not provide minimum essential coverage , the marketplace did not contact our fictitious employer to confirm the applicant's account that the company offers only substandard coverage .

in august 2015 , we briefed cms and california and kentucky state officials on the results of our undercover testing , to obtain their views .

according to these officials , the marketplaces only inspect for documents that have obviously been altered .

thus , if the documentation submitted does not appear to have any obvious alterations , it would not be questioned for authenticity .

in addition , according to kentucky officials , in the case of the impossible social security number , the identity - proofing process functioned correctly , but a marketplace worker bypassed identity - proofing steps that would have required a manual verification of the fictitious social security card we submitted .

the officials told us they plan to provide training on how to conduct manual verifications to prevent this in the future .

as for our employer - sponsored coverage testing , cms and california officials told us that during the 2015 enrollment period , the marketplaces accepted applicants' attestation on lack of minimum essential coverage .

as a result , the marketplaces were not required to communicate with the applicant's employer to confirm whether the attestation is valid .

kentucky officials told us that applicant - provided information is entered into its system to determine whether the applicant's claimed plan meets minimum essential coverage standards .

if an applicant receives a qualified health - plan subsidy because the applicant's employer - sponsored plan does not meet the guidelines , the kentucky marketplace sends a notice to the employer asking it to verify the applicant information .

the officials told us the employer letter details , among other things , the applicant - provided information and minimum essential coverage standards .

however , our fictitious company did not receive such notification .

cms , california , and kentucky officials also told us there is no current process to identify individuals with multiple enrollments through different marketplaces .

cms officials told us it was unlikely an individual would seek to obtain subsidized qualified health - plan coverage in multiple states .

we conducted this portion of our testing , however , to evaluate whether such a situation , such as a stolen identity , would be possible .

cms officials told us the agency would need to look at the risk associated with multiple coverage .

kentucky officials told us that in response to our findings , call center staff have been retrained on identity - proofing processes , and that they are improving training for other staff as well .

they also said they plan changes before the next open - enrollment period so that call center representatives cannot bypass identity - proofing steps , as occurred with our applications .

further , they said they plan to improve the process for handling of applications where employer - sponsored coverage is at issue .

also in response to our findings , california officials said they are developing process improvements and system modifications to address the issues we raised , and would share details later .

finally , in the case of the federal marketplace in particular , for which , as noted , we conducted undercover testing previously , we asked cms officials for their views on our second - year results compared to the first year .

they told us the eligibility and enrollment system is generally performing as designed .

according to the officials , a key feature of the system , when applicant information cannot immediately be verified , is whether proper inconsistencies are generated , in order that they can be addressed later , after eligibility is granted at time of application .

earlier , cms officials told us the overall approach is that cms must balance consumers' ability to effectively and efficiently select marketplace coverage with program - integrity concerns .

in addition to our applications for subsidized private health plans , we also made eight additional fictitious applications for medicaid coverage in order to test the ability to apply for that program through the marketplaces .

as shown in figure 2 , in these tests , we were approved for subsidized health - care coverage for seven of the eight applications .

for three of the eight applications , we were approved for medicaid , as originally sought .

for four of the eight applications , we did not obtain medicaid approval , but instead were subsequently approved for subsidized qualified health - plan coverage .

the monthly amount of the advance premium tax credit for these four applicants totaled approximately $1,100 per month , or about $13,000 annually .

for one of the eight applications , we could not obtain medicaid coverage because we declined to provide a social security number .

as with our applications for qualified health plans described earlier , we also failed to clear an identity - checking step for six of eight medicaid applications .

in these cases , we were likewise directed to contact a contractor that handles identity checking .

the contractor was unable to resolve the identity issues and directed us to call the appropriate marketplace .

we proceeded to phone the marketplaces .

however , as shown in figure 2 , the california marketplace did not continue to process one of our medicaid applications .

in this case , our fictitious phone applicant declined to provide what was a valid social security number , citing privacy concerns .

a marketplace representative told us that , to apply , the applicant must provide a social security number .

the representative suggested that as an alternative , we could apply for medicaid in person with the local county office or a certified enrollment counselor .

after we discussed the results of our undercover testing with california officials , they told us their system requires applicants to provide either a social security number or an individual taxpayer - identification number to process an application .

as a result , because our fictitious applicant declined to provide a social security number , our application could not be processed .

for the four medicaid applications submitted to the federal marketplace , we were told that we may be eligible for medicaid but that the respective medicaid state offices might require more information .

for three of the four applications , federal marketplace representatives told us we would be contacted by the medicaid state offices within 30 days .

however , the medicaid offices did not notify us within 30 days for any of the applications .

as a result , we subsequently contacted the state medicaid offices and the federal marketplace to follow up on the status of our applications .

for the two new jersey medicaid applications , we periodically called the state medicaid offices over approximately 4 months , attempting to determine the status of our applications .

in these calls , new jersey representatives generally told us they had not yet received medicaid information from the federal marketplace and , on several occasions , said they expected to receive it shortly .

after our calls to new jersey medicaid offices , we phoned the federal marketplace to determine the status of our medicaid applications .

in one case , the federal marketplace representative told us new jersey determined that our applicant did not qualify for medicaid .

as a result , the phone representative stated that we were then eligible for qualified health - plan coverage .

we subsequently applied for coverage and were approved for an advance premium tax credit plus the cost - sharing reduction subsidy .

in the other case , the federal marketplace representative told us the marketplace system did not indicate whether new jersey received the application or processed it .

the representative advised we phone the new jersey medicaid agency .

later on that same day , we phoned the federal marketplace again and falsely claimed that the new jersey medicaid office denied our medicaid application .

based on this claim , the representative said we were eligible for qualified health - plan coverage .

we subsequently applied for coverage and were approved for an advance premium tax credit plus the cost - sharing reduction subsidy .

the federal marketplace did not ask us to submit documentation substantiating our medicaid denial from new jersey .

we asked to meet with new jersey medicaid officials to discuss the results of our testing , but they declined our request .

cms officials told us that new jersey had system issues that may have accounted for problems in our medicaid application information being sent to the state .

cms officials told us that this system issue is now resolved .

in addition , cms officials told us they do not require proof of a medicaid denial when processing qualified health - plan applications ; nor does the federal marketplace verify the medicaid denial with the state .

cms officials said that instead , they accept the applicant's attestation that the applicant was denied medicaid coverage .

for our north dakota medicaid application in which we did not provide a social security number but did provide an impossible immigration document number , we called the north dakota medicaid agency to determine the status of our application .

an agency representative told us the federal marketplace denied our medicaid application and therefore did not forward the medicaid application file to north dakota for a medicaid eligibility determination .

we did not receive notification of denial from the federal marketplace .

subsequently , we called the federal marketplace and applied for subsidized qualified health - plan coverage .

the federal marketplace approved the application , granting an advance premium tax credit plus the cost - sharing reduction subsidy .

because we did not disclose the specific identities of our fictitious applicants , cms officials could not explain why the federal marketplace originally said our application may be eligible for medicaid but subsequently notified north dakota that it was denied .

for the north dakota medicaid application for which we did not provide a valid social security identity , we received a letter from the state medicaid agency about a month after we applied through the federal marketplace .

the letter requested that we provide documentation to prove citizenship , such as a birth certificate .

in addition , it requested a social security card and income documentation .

we submitted the requested documentation , such as a fictitious birth certificate and social security card .

the north dakota medicaid agency subsequently approved our medicaid application and enrolled us in a medicaid plan .

after our undercover testing , we briefed north dakota medicaid officials and obtained their views .

they told us the agency likely approved the medicaid application because our fake social security card would have cleared the social security number inconsistency .

the officials told us they accept documentation that appears authentic .

they also said the agency is planning to implement a new system to help identify when applicant - reported information does not match social security administration records .

as with our applications for coverage under qualified health plans , described earlier , the state marketplace for kentucky directed two of our medicaid applicants to submit supplementary documentation .

as part of our testing and in response to such requests , we provided counterfeit follow - up documentation , such as a fake immigration card with an impossible numbering scheme for these applicants .

the results of the documentation submission are as follows: for the application where the fictitious identity did not match social security records , the kentucky agency approved our application for medicaid coverage .

in our discussions with kentucky officials , they told us they accept documentation submitted — for example copies of social security cards — unless there are obvious alterations .

for the medicaid application without a social security number and with an impossible immigration number , the kentucky state agency denied our medicaid application .

a kentucky representative told us the reason for the denial was that our fictitious applicant had not been a resident for 5 years , according to our fictitious immigration card .

the representative told us we were eligible for qualified health - plan coverage .

we applied for such coverage and were approved for an advance premium tax credit and the cost - sharing reduction subsidy .

in later discussions with kentucky officials , they told us the representative made use of an override capability , likely based on what the officials described as a history of inaccurate applicant immigration status information for a refugee population .

kentucky officials also said their staff accept documentation submitted unless there are obvious alterations , and thus are not trained to identify impossible immigration numbers .

finally , kentucky officials said they would like to have a contact at the department of homeland security with whom they can work to resolve immigration - related inconsistencies , similar to a contact that they have at the social security administration to resolve social security - related inconsistencies .

by contrast , during the medicaid application process for one applicant , california did not direct that we submit any documentation .

in this case , our fictitious applicant was approved over the phone even though the fictitious identity did not match social security records .

we shared this result with california officials , who said they could not comment on the specifics of our case without knowing details of our undercover application .

as noted earlier , the findings discussed in this statement are preliminary , and we plan to issue a final report later , upon completion of our work .

chairman pitts , ranking member green , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i look forward to the subcommittee's questions .

for questions about this statement , please contact seto bagdoyan at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or bagdoyans@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include matthew valenta and gary bianchi , assistant directors ; maurice belding , jr. ; mariana calderón ; ranya elias ; suellen foth ; maria mcmullen ; james murphy ; george ogilvie ; ramon rodriguez ; christopher h. schmitt ; julie spetz ; and elizabeth wood .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

