thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing .

as you know , we recently designated the 2010 decennial census as a high - risk area , citing a number of long - standing and emerging challenges facing the census .

these include weaknesses in managing information technology ( it ) , operational planning , and cost estimating , as well as uncertainty over dress rehearsal plans and the ultimate cost of the census .

for 2010 , the u.s. census bureau ( bureau ) planned to make greater use of technology .

among other things , the bureau planned to automate some of its field data collection activities as a way to reduce costs and improve data quality and operational efficiency .

in fact , census workers used new technology , handheld computers ( hhcs ) , during last spring's dress rehearsal operation .

the field data collection automation ( fdca ) program is a key it acquisition that includes systems , equipment , and infrastructure for field staff to use in collecting census data for the 2010 census .

last year , the bureau had estimated this and other it acquisitions would account for about $3 billion of the then - estimated $11.5 billion total cost of the census .

under the fdca program the bureau planned to use hhcs during operations such as address canvassing , nonresponse follow - up , and census coverage measurement .

last year , during address canvassing dress rehearsal field activities in california and north carolina , both we and bureau officials observed a number of performance problems with the hhcs ( such as slow and inconsistent data transmissions ) .

at a march 2008 hearing , the department of commerce ( commerce ) and the bureau stated that the fdca program was likely to incur significant cost overruns and said that a redesigning effort to get the decennial census back on track was under way .

the secretary of commerce outlined several alternatives for redesigning this central technology investment , including possibly dropping the hhcs from the nonresponse follow - up operation .

last week , the secretary chose to do just that .

additionally , he decided that the bureau would reduce deployment of field technology infrastructure by the contractor , and have the contractor provide hhcs for address canvassing and develop the information system for controlling field operations .

as requested , our testimony today will call upon our past work , including our observation of the use of the hhcs in the address canvassing dress rehearsal , to provide a description of implications of the redesign for ( 1 ) dress rehearsal and decennial census operations , ( 2 ) it acquisitions management , and ( 3 ) decennial census costs .

our remarks today are based primarily on reports that we issued from 2002 through december 2007 on the planning and development of the 2010 census , as well as the results of work nearing completion .

we visited census test sites in queens , new york ; several counties in rural south - central georgia ; austin , texas ; and the cheyenne indian reservation in south dakota .

during these visits we observed tests of the address canvassing operation , and we observed tests of the nonresponse follow - up operation .

in may and june 2007 , we observed address canvassing at the 2008 dress rehearsal in sites located in north carolina and california .

for it acquisitions we analyzed system documentation , including project plans , deliverables , cost estimates , earned value management data , other acquisition - related documents , and we interviewed bureau officials and contractors .

this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the decennial census is at a critical stage in the 2008 dress rehearsal , in which the bureau has its last opportunity to test its plans for 2010 under census - like conditions .

the dress rehearsal features a mock census day , now set for may 1 , 2008 .

last year at this time , the bureau carried out a major dress rehearsal operation — address canvassing — in which the bureau updated address lists and collected global positioning coordinates for mapspots .

the largest field operation of the dress rehearsal was to have begun this month .

in this operation ( nonresponse follow - up ) , field staff were to conduct face - to - face interviews with households that did not mail back their questionnaires .

prior to the redesigning effort , the bureau had already changed its plans for the dress rehearsal , in part , to focus greater attention on the testing of technology .

in a november 20 , 2007 , decision memo , the bureau announced that it would delay census day for the dress rehearsal by 1 month , to may 1 , 2008 .

the bureau also listed a number of operations it no longer planned to rehearse , including group quarters enumeration and census coverage measurement .

also in february 2008 , the bureau announced that it would remove from the scope of the fdca program contract the development of all systems and software associated with the census coverage measurement operation .

the redesign approach selected by the secretary will require that the bureau quickly develop and test a paper - based nonresponse follow - up operation .

any paper - based option has its own set of unique issues , such as setting up operations to support paper field data collection centers and seeking printing solutions for enumerator forms .

among other issues , decisions on a printing solution will need to be made soon .

although the bureau has carried out paper - based operations before , in some cases they now involve new procedures and system interfaces that as a result of their exclusion from the dress rehearsal , will not be tested under census - like conditions .

for nonresponse follow - up in 2010 the bureau will be using newly developed systems for integrating responses and controlling workload .

for example , the bureau will need to rely on a newly developed system called the decennial response integration system to identify households that have not returned census forms and for collecting the results of enumerators conducting nonresponse follow - up person interviews .

dropping the use of the hhcs for nonresponse follow - up and reverting to paper for that operation this late in the decade also precludes nonresponse follow - up from being fully tested in the dress rehearsal .

under the delayed dress rehearsal this operation was to begin next month , soon after households in dress rehearsal locations were to return their census forms .

a paper operation requires different training , maps , and other material to be prepared prior to the operation .

the bureau has announced no specific plans for conducting field testing of certain key operations , such as nonresponse follow - up .

without sufficient testing , operational problems can go undiscovered and the opportunity to improve operations will be lost .

the redesign's move from the use of hhcs to a paper - based nonresponse follow - up operation may limit the bureau's ability to reduce follow - up with persons who are late in returning their census questionnaires .

one of the primary advantages the bureau cited for using hhcs was the ability , as late mail returns came in , to remove those addresses from enumerators' assignments — preventing enumerators from doing unnecessary work .

according to the bureau , in 2000 enumerators visited over 4 million households that had returned their census form late .

in 2004 , the bureau tested the capability of an earlier prototype of the hhc to adjust workloads by identifying late mail returns .

we reported in 2007 that based on these tests it appears that if the bureau had possessed this capability during the 2000 census , it could have eliminated the need to visit nearly 773,000 late - responding households and saved an estimated $22 million ( based on our estimate that a 1 percentage point increase in workload could add at least $34 million in direct salary , benefits , and travel costs to the price tag of nonresponse follow - up ) .

the director of the census bureau stated that he believes that the bureau can still partially adjust enumerator workload to recognize late mail returns without the use of hhcs .

to achieve this objective , the bureau will need to specify the process it will use and conduct appropriate tests .

the redesign will also affect the 2010 census address canvassing operation .

the secretary's decision to use the hhcs for the 2010 address canvassing operation means that certain performance issues with the handheld technology must be addressed promptly .

field staff experienced difficulties using the technology during the address canvassing dress rehearsal .

for example , workers reported problems with hhcs when working in large assignment areas during address canvassing .

the devices could not accommodate more than 720 addresses — 3 percent of dress rehearsal assignment areas were larger than that .

the amount of data transmitted and used slowed down the hhcs significantly .

identification of these problems caused the contractor to create a task team to examine the issues , and the team recommended improving the end - to - end performance of the mobile solution by controlling the size of assignment area data delivered to the hhc both for address canvassing and nonresponse follow - up operations .

one specific recommendation was limiting the size of assignment areas to 200 total addresses .

however , the redesign effort took another approach that uses laptops and the software application used for the american community survey to collect information in large assignment areas .

it is not yet clear how this work - around will be carried out .

furthermore , the bureau will need to define specific and measurable performance requirements for the hhcs as we recommended in january 2005 .

another operational issue is the ability of the contractor to accept changes to its address files after it completes address canvassing updates .

this could preclude the bureau from conducting “restart / redo” operations for an area where the address file is discovered to be incorrect .

this function is critical in developing an accurate and complete address list .

without the ability to update the mailing list for “restart / redo” operations , the bureau would consider not mailing census questionnaires to addresses in that area and instead deliver census forms by hand .

this has the potential to significantly increase costs .

the bureau still needs to agree upon and finalize requirements for the fdca program .

in march 2006 , we reported that the fdca project office had not implemented the full set of acquisition management capabilities ( such as project and acquisition planning and requirements development and management ) that were needed to effectively manage the program .

for example , although the project office had developed baseline functional requirements for the acquisition , the bureau had not yet validated and approved them .

subsequently , in october 2007 , we reported that changes to requirements had been a contributing factor to both cost increases and schedule delays experienced by the fdca program .

in june 2007 , an assessment by an independent contractor of the fdca program reported on requirements management problems — much like those we reported in march 2006 .

similar to our recommendation , the independent assessors recommended that the bureau immediately stabilize requirements by defining and refining them .

the bureau has recently made efforts to further define requirements for the fdca program , and it has estimated that the revised requirements will result in significant cost increases .

on january 16 , 2008 , the bureau provided the fdca contractor with a list of over 400 requirements for the fdca program to reconcile .

although some of these new requirements will be dropped based on the secretary's recent decision , many will still need to be addressed to ensure that fdca will perform as needed .

commerce and bureau officials need to address critical weaknesses in risk management practices .

in october 2007 , we reported that the fdca project had weaknesses in identifying risks , establishing adequate mitigation plans , and reporting risk status to executive - level officials .

for example , the fdca project team had not developed mitigation plans that were timely or complete nor did it provide regular briefings on risks to senior executives .

the fdca project team's failure to report a project's risks to executive - level officials reduces the visibility of risks to executives who should be playing a role in mitigating them .

as of october 2007 , in response to the cost and schedule changes , the bureau decided to delay certain system functionality for fdca .

as a result , the operational testing that was to occur during the dress rehearsal period around may 1 , 2008 , would not include tests of the full complement of decennial census systems and their functionality .

operational testing helps verify that systems function as intended in an operational environment .

in late 2007 , according to bureau officials , testing plans for it systems were to be finalized in february 2008 .

therefore , we recommended that the bureau plan and conduct critical testing , including end - to - end testing of the decennial census systems .

as of march 2008 , the bureau still had not developed these test plans .

in the recent program redesign , the bureau included conducting end - to - end testing .

the inability to perform comprehensive operational testing of all interrelated systems increases the risk that further cost overruns will occur , that decennial systems will experience performance shortfalls , or both .

given the redesigning effort , implementing our recommendations associated with managing the it acquisitions is as critical as ever .

specifically , the bureau needs to strengthen its acquisition management capabilities , including finalizing fdca requirements .

further , it also needs to strengthen its risk management activities , including developing adequate risk mitigation plans for significant risks and improving its executive - level governance of these acquisitions .

the bureau also needs to plan and conduct key tests , including end - to - end testing , to help ensure that decennial systems perform as expected .

even without considering the recent expected cost increases announced by the bureau to accommodate the redesign of the fdca program , the bureau's cost projections for the 2010 census revealed an escalating trend from the 1970 census .

as shown in figure 1 , the estimated $11.8 billion cost ( expressed in constant 2010 dollars ) of the 2010 census , before the fdca program redesign , represented a more than tenfold increase over the $1 billion spent on the 1970 census .

the 1970 census was the first census to rely on mailing census forms to households and asking for a mail return — a major part of the data collection .

although some of the cost increase could be expected because the number of housing units — and hence the bureau's workload — has gotten larger , the cost growth has far exceeded the increase in the number of housing units .

the bureau estimated that the number of housing units for the 2010 census would increase by almost 14 percent over census 2000 levels .

as figure 2 shows , before the fdca program redesign , the bureau estimated that the average cost per housing unit for the 2010 census was expected to increase by approximately 26 percent over 2000 levels , from $69.79 per housing unit to $88.19 per housing unit in constant 2010 dollars .

when the projected cost increase that accompanies the fdca program redesign is considered , the average cost per housing unit will increase by an even greater percentage .

given the projected increase in spending , it will be imperative that the bureau effectively manage the 2010 census , as the risk exists that the actual , final cost of the census could be considerably higher than anticipated .

indeed , this was the case for the 2000 census , when the bureau's initial cost projections proved to be too low because of such factors as unforeseen operational problems and changes to the fundamental design .

the bureau estimated that the 2000 census would cost around $5 billion .

however , the final price tag for the 2000 census was more than $6.5 billion , a 30 percent increase in cost .

large federal deficits and other fiscal challenges underscore the importance of managing the cost of the census , while promoting an accurate , timely census .

we have repeatedly reported that the bureau would be challenged to control the cost of the 2010 census .

in january 2004 , we reported that under the bureau's approach for reengineering the 2010 census , the bureau might find it difficult to reduce operational risk because reengineering introduces new risks .

to manage the 2010 census and contain costs , we recommended that the bureau develop a comprehensive , integrated project plan for the 2010 census that should include the itemized estimated costs of each component , including a sensitivity analysis and an explanation of significant changes in the assumptions on which these costs were based .

in response , the bureau provided us with the 2010 census operations and systems plan , dated august 2007 .

this plan represented an important step forward at the time .

it included inputs and outputs and described linkages among operations and systems .

however , it did not yet include sensitivity analysis , risk mitigation plans , a detailed 2010 census timeline , or itemized estimated costs of each component .

going forward , it will be important for the bureau to update its operations plan .

the assumptions in the fiscal year 2009 president's budget life cycle cost estimate of $11.5 billion may not have included recent productivity data from last year's address canvassing dress rehearsal .

according to the bureau , initially , the cost model assumed productivity for address canvassing to be 25.6 addresses per hour for urban / suburban areas .

however , results from the address canvassing dress rehearsal showed productivity of 13.4 addresses per hour for urban / suburban areas .

while the life cycle cost estimate increased slightly to $11.5 billion in the fiscal year 2009 president's budget , these increases were attributed to other factors and not to lower - than - expected canvassing productivity .

best practices call for cost model assumptions to be updated as new information becomes available .

we previously reported that the life cycle cost estimate has not been updated to reflect changes in assumptions .

in july 2006 , we testified that the estimate had not been updated to reflect the results of testing conducted in 2004 .

as the bureau updates its estimate of the life cycle cost annually and as part of the redesigning effort , it will be important that it reflect changing assumptions for productivity and hours worked .

given its size and complexity , carrying out the decennial census presents significant challenges under any circumstances .

late changes in census plans and operations , long - standing weaknesses in it acquisition and contract management , limited capacity for undertaking these critical management functions , scaling back of dress rehearsal activities , and uncertainty as to the ultimate cost of the 2010 census puts the success of this effort in jeopardy .

managing these risks is critical to the timely completion of a reliable and cost - effective census .

implementing our recommendations would help the bureau effectively manage the myriad of interrelated operations needed to ensure an accurate and complete count in 2010 ( bureau officials have agreed with many of our recommendations , but have not fully implemented them ) .

the dress rehearsal represents a critical stage in preparing for the 2010 census .

this is the time when the congress and others should have the information they need to know how well the design for 2010 is likely to work , what risks remain , and how those risks will be mitigated .

we have highlighted some of the risks today .

going forward , it will be important for the bureau to specify how it will ensure that planned dress rehearsal operations will be successfully carried out , and how it will provide assurance that the largest operation — nonresponse follow - up — will be tested in the absence of a full dress rehearsal .

likewise , the bureau will need to establish plans for working around limitations in the technology to be used in address canvassing operations .

it is critical that the bureau ensure that the technology for conducting address canvassing is a success .

the bureau should implement prior recommendations in moving forward .

contractor - developed it systems and deliverables need to be closely monitored to ensure that contractors are performing within budget .

as we have stressed throughout this testimony and in our prior recommendations , the bureau needs to practice aggressive project management and governance over both the it and non - it components .

further , it is essential that the bureau implement our recommendations related to information technology .

the bureau must solidify the fdca program requirements , strengthen risk management activities , and plan and conduct critical testing of the decennial census systems .

mr .

chairmen , census day is less than 2 years away and address canvassing is 1 year away .

the challenges we highlighted today call for effective risk mitigation by the u.s. census bureau , and careful monitoring and oversight by the department of commerce , the office of management and budget , the congress , gao , and other key stakeholders .

as in the past , we look forward to supporting the committee and subcommittee's oversight efforts to promote an accurate and cost - effective census .

mr .

chairmen , this concludes our statement .

we would be glad to answer any questions you and the committee and subcommittee members may have .

if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact mathew scirè at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or sciremj@gao.gov or david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

other key contributors to this testimony include signora may , assistant director ; mathew bader ; thomas beall ; jeffrey demarco ; elizabeth hosler ; richard hung ; anne inserra ; andrea levine ; lisa pearson ; sonya phillips ; cynthia scott ; niti tandon ; jonathan ticehurst ; timothy wexler ; and katherine wulff .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

