in 2013 , an estimated 3.6 million veterans had a disability due to service - related injuries and illnesses .

due to advances in battlefield medicine a larger proportion of military personnel are surviving their injuries , though often with serious medical challenges including amputations , traumatic brain injuries , and post - traumatic stress disorder .

in part to promote the lifelong health of veterans and service members with disabilities through regular participation in physical activity and sports , federal law authorized an adaptive sports grant program in 2008 .

as reauthorized in 2013 , the law tasks the department of veterans affairs ( va ) with making grants to eligible entities for planning , developing , managing , and implementing programs to provide adaptive sports opportunities for veterans and members of the armed services with disabilities .

initially authorized through fiscal year 2013 , the program was reauthorized and amended in december 2013 , with the reauthorization stating that va can provide funding for adaptive sports opportunities occurring though fiscal year 2016 .

the reauthorization also included a provision that gao submit a report on the use of grants under the program .

our objectives in this review were to determine ( 1 ) how the va adaptive sports grant program selected grantees to provide adaptive sports activities for veterans and service members with disabilities ; ( 2 ) how the program monitors grantees' use of grant funds ; and ( 3 ) what programs and activities have been supported with fiscal year 2014 grant funds , and what is known about how veterans and service members with disabilities may have benefited from these programs and activities .

to address the objectives outlined above , we limited our review to program grants made using fiscal year 2014 funds , which supported grantee activities that were to take place in fiscal year 2015 .

because our audit work began and ended during va's first year of monitoring grantees , our work on va's grantee monitoring generally covered the first two quarters of fiscal year 2015 — october 2014 through march 2015 .

we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , government - wide and va grants management policies and other grants management criteria , va's july 2014 notice of funding availability , quarterly status reports submitted by selected grantees for the first half of fiscal year 2015 , and va site visit reports of the grantees completed through june 2015 .

we also obtained va data on grantee budgets and proposed activities .

we interviewed va officials about this data and determined that it was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

we also reviewed relevant grants management criteria , such as va's agency - wide grants management policies .

further , we obtained va data on grantee budgets and proposed activities .

to better understand va's approach to grantee selection and oversight , we also reviewed a sample of va's grant files — 16 of the 69 grants awarded in fiscal year 2014 .

we selected these grants to include all 10 grants of $250,000 or more , and 6 grants that were randomly selected in a manner to ensure that we obtained at least one grantee from each category of grantees — national , regional , and community - based organizations .

in addition , we ensured that selected grantees included representation of different geographic regions .

while this sample is not generalizable to all 69 grants , it accounts for about $3.7 million , or 46 percent , of the $8 million in the grant funds awarded in fiscal year 2014 .

we also conducted interviews with officials of va and the u.s. olympic committee ( usoc ) , the latter of which had previously been responsible for administering the program .

finally , we conducted site visits to three events sponsored by selected grantees in indiana , illinois , and north carolina .

we selected events that occurred during our review while also considering regional diversity and travel considerations .

during the visits , we observed sports events , and interviewed sponsoring organization officials , participant athletes , coaches , and instructors .

in addition , we reviewed relevant documents and interviewed va officials regarding changes to the grant application and review process in fiscal year 2015 .

we conducted this performance audit from november 2014 through september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence we obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

participation in adaptive sports — sports that have been specifically adapted or created for persons with disabilities — has been recognized by experts as an important means of rehabilitation for people with physical and other disabilities , including veterans and members of the armed services .

in 2008 , federal law authorized va to establish a grant program to fund adaptive sports for veterans and members of the armed services with disabilities .

first operated using fiscal year 2010 funds , the program is authorized to support activities that will facilitate , encourage , and sustain participation in adaptive sports activities .

under the program , grants are made to qualifying organizations , referred to in the law as eligible entities , that will plan , develop , manage and implement programs to provide adaptive sports opportunities .

to be eligible for a grant , an organization must be a non - federal entity with significant experience in managing a large - scale adaptive sports program .

such experience must be with programs that are either ( 1 ) affiliated with a national paralympic committee or a national governing body authorized to provide paralympic sports , ( 2 ) an adaptive sports program of a national governing body that meets certain other requirements , or ( 3 ) an adaptive sports program in which at least 50 persons with disabilities participate or in which the participants with disabilities reside in at least five different congressional districts .

since fiscal year 2010 , va has allocated $8 million per year for the program .

during the program's first four fiscal years — 2010 through 2013 — the usoc served an intermediary role in program management , receiving grant funds from va and sub - granting them to organizations that provided adaptive sports opportunities and events .

in 2012 , we reported on the program's actual or planned activities in fiscal years 2010 to 2012 , when usoc was involved .

at that time , we found several shortcomings in program reporting and oversight practices .

for example , we found that expenditure reporting practices for grantees were not consistent with federal internal control standards , and that va was not performing on - site or remote monitoring to verify how funds were being used .

in addition , we reported that in fiscal year 2011 $3.1 million of the $7.5 million annually provided by va — about 40 percent — was absorbed by usoc for its operations , personnel , and administrative costs .

we made several recommendations aimed at improving grantee reporting and encouraged va to review implementation of usoc's monitoring plan .

va's implementation of the program substantially addresses these recommendations .

as appropriate , we refer to these recommendations and related va actions to address them later in this report .

in december 2013 , the program was reauthorized with a number of changes .

the reauthorization eliminated usoc's role and instead provides that va can award grants to eligible entities .

in addition , the law placed specific limits on grantees' use of grant funds for administrative and personnel costs .

for grants supporting adaptive sports opportunities taking place during fiscal year 2015 , grantees can allocate no more than 7.5 percent to such costs ; in fiscal year 2016 and thereafter , grantees will be limited to 5 percent .

law and regulation include other requirements for va and grantees .

for example , the adaptive sports program's authorizing statute and regulations outline a number of criteria that guide grant application review and selection , including requirements that applicants clearly state the sports activities to be provided , clearly define program objectives , and describe the adequacy of their program management structure .

in addition , applications must include detailed descriptions of any partnerships and the grant funds that will be provided to any partners ; the anticipated personnel , travel , and administrative costs paid for with grant funding ; and the performance metrics to be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the activities carried out with grant funds .

va grant programs are also subject to government - wide grants management requirements .

in its first two years of awarding grants , va has awarded grants near the end of the fiscal year for use by grantees to support activities to be carried out in the following fiscal year .

for example , organizations that were awarded grants in fiscal year 2014 have used fiscal year 2014 funds to support adaptive sports activities during fiscal year 2015 .

similarly , grantees will use grants awarded in fiscal year 2015 to support adaptive sports activities that will occur primarily during fiscal year 2016 .

except where specifically noted , this report refers only to activities and events pertaining to grants awarded in fiscal year 2014 .

in fiscal year 2014 , the first year va was responsible for selecting eligible entities to receive grants under the adaptive sports grant program , va officials reported challenges because of tight time frames to obtain and review grant applications and the lack of a standard application form tailored for the adaptive sports grant program .

 ( see fig .

1 for a timeline of events. ) .

proposed program based in facts , good reasoning , sound judgment ( 20 points ) considerations: likelihood of success in aiding rehabilitation ; appropriateness of funding requested ; measurability of objectives ; benefits for disabled veterans .

low risk and high potential return .

for example , it sought to ensure that proposed activities were occurring in areas with a large population of veterans with disabilities .

in some cases , some aspects of a proposal were accepted and others rejected to make the proposed grant amount smaller .

at the end of this process , va selected 69 applications to which the $8 million allocated for the program in fiscal year 2014 was awarded .

sufficiency of management structure ( 20 points ) considerations: sufficient experience in providing activity ; certification of key personnel ; evidence of community outreach ; clear description of infrastructure to support planned activities .

geographic coverage ( 15 points ) considerations: cost - effective filling of adaptive sports needs in area ; appropriate for region and potential participants .

conformance with va program goals and objectives ( 15 points ) considerations: proposed activities advance program goals , fall within spectrum of adaptive sports , and have positive impacts .

strength of program concept and objectives ( 10 points ) considerations: concepts clearly linked to objectives ; likely to benefit health of disabled veterans .

va officials told us that completing all tasks necessary to award the grants before the end of fiscal year 2014 was very challenging — in part because of the limited time frame and because managing the solicitation and selection of grant applicants was a new experience for the responsible va unit .

however , va officials explained that the alternative would have been that no program activities would have been funded with fiscal year 2014 dollars .

officials told us that developing and publishing the interim final rule to govern the program within about 6 months required considerable effort .

va officials also told us that development and authorization of an application form tailored to the program was not possible within the deadlines they faced in fiscal year 2014 .

instead they opted to use a standard federal grant applications form — sf - 424 — developed by omb .

because law and regulation required the program's grant applications to include information that the sf - 424 forms are not designed to include — such as a description of the roles of any partner organization — va required narrative attachments to this standard application form .

these narratives varied greatly in length , detail , and format .

according to one va official , they ranged from about 7 pages to about 60 pages .

financial capability and value for funding ( 10 points ) as a result , according to va officials , the review and approval process for fiscal year 2014 was very labor - intensive , and va officials said staff had to engage in extensive communications and negotiations with applicants .

for example , va officials told us they conducted extensive negotiations with some applicants regarding the cost and scope of their proposals , with the aim of controlling costs and maximizing the benefits that program funds would provide to participants .

in addition , va officials said that , despite repeated va communication , some applicants did not understand the limitation on administrative expenses .

under this limitation , for activities taking place during fiscal year 2015 , grantees could allocate no more than 7.5 percent of the grant amount to administrative expenses , including any costs associated with employees other than those who directly provided coaching and training for participants .

this misunderstanding may have been unintentionally reinforced by the budget categories used in the standard federal application form , which do not distinguish between these two types of personnel costs .

for example , the standard form includes a line for personnel expenses , but does not distinguish between costs attributable to coaching and instruction , and other types of personnel costs .

federal law , va regulation , and grant management principles dictate that a number of requirements be followed during the application and selection process .

for example , the program statute and va regulations require that an applicant submit a detailed description of its financial controls , including methods to track expenditure of grant funds , that a grantee observe the applicable percent limit on administrative expenses , and that any partnerships be described , including the amount of funds that will be made available to each partner .

despite va's efforts to ensure completeness of grant applications , our review of 16 fiscal year 2014 grant files and other va documentation found that in some cases aspects of grant applications were not well documented .

for example , va developed a standard checklist — the va administrative and financial review questionnaire for grantees — for applicants to attest to various aspects of their administrative and financial policies and procedures .

while this checklist was not required , va officials told us that they treated the satisfactory completion of this form as sufficient evidence that the grantee could adequately safeguard and account for grant funds .

however , 3 of 16 grant files we reviewed contained neither this form nor any other documentation of the administrative and financial capabilities of the grantee .

the forms of 3 others indicated that these grantees lacked certain administrative and financial policies and procedures .

for example , one grantee indicated on its form that it did not have a written accounting manual or written policies and procedures for managing finances .

other aspects of some grantee applications were also limited .

for example , 7 of the 16 grant applications we reviewed lacked clear documentation that the 7.5 percent limit on administrative expenses had been observed in proposed budgets .

similarly , we found that in 3 cases , full documentation of intended grantee partnerships was not clear .

for example , one grantee's application narrative referred to partners but did not specify the role of the partner organizations .

as discussed in the next subsection , va subsequently took action to keep instances of such documentation issues from recurring in future grant application and award processes .

the fiscal year 2015 application process differed in significant ways from the fiscal year 2014 process .

importantly , va developed a new application form tailored to the adaptive sports grant program .

as summarized in table 1 , our review indicates that this new form addresses the review difficulties and documentation limitations the program experienced in fiscal year 2014 .

for example , whereas the fiscal year 2014 application form did not require applicants to distinguish between the two types of personnel costs so as to meet the limit on total administrative costs , the new form does .

similarly , the new form requires that applicants explicitly identify partner organizations , including their locations and roles .

in addition to the new form , other aspects of the fiscal year 2015 application process increased the likelihood that va would receive more complete application packages and conduct a more efficient review .

while applicants had 5 weeks to prepare and submit grant applications after publication of the notice of funding availability in fiscal year 2014 , in fiscal year 2015 they had 9 weeks .

in fiscal year 2015 va also required applicants to submit the administrative and financial review questionnaire , which was optional in fiscal year 2014 and which inquires about an applicant's administrative and financial policies , procedures , accounting , and management of grants .

because va was reviewing fiscal year 2015 grant applications at the time we were completing our audit work , we did not review the applications or accompanying documentation and cannot independently assess their quality compared to those submitted in fiscal year 2014 .

however , va officials told us in july 2015 that the new application resulted in a much improved and more efficient application and review process .

specifically , the application form instructs applicants to provide required information or leave a visible blank , and so va officials noted that the fiscal year 2015 applications have been more consistently complete and the rate of rejection of incomplete applications much lower .

also , they said va's review has been much less laborious in fiscal year 2015 .

finally , according to va , the new form facilitated a more comprehensive approach to comparing proposed budgets among the grant applications .

va's approach to monitoring grantees , as outlined in va grants management policy and an agency memorandum on monitoring techniques , includes regular grantee reporting , supplemented with monitoring through detailed site visits and desk audits of selected grantees .

this approach is consistent with the uniform guidance , and is intended to help ensure that grantees are providing adaptive sports opportunities to veterans and service members , according to the terms of their grant agreements with va .

it is also intended to help ensure that va grant funds are being managed according to federal requirements , as reflected in the grant agreements .

in addition , grantee monitoring can provide va with useful information to measure the grant program's performance and for reporting to the congress and the public .

va requires that all grantees submit quarterly and annual reports .

va reviews these reports to ensure that grantees are operating according to the terms of their grant agreements .

while only annual reports are required under the program's statute , va requires grantees to report on performance quarterly because , according to va officials , this helps to provide for more frequent monitoring of grantees .

to ensure that grantees' quarterly reports include consistent information in accordance with statutory and regulatory requirements , va created a standard quarterly report template , adapted from a usoc template .

as summarized in table 2 , va's quarterly report template contains data required from grantees under va's program regulations .

for each grant , va customized the template to show the activities the grantee agreed to provide ; and a budget showing the amount awarded , broken out into several categories .

according to va officials , they identified the activities and budget amounts by reviewing each grantee's application .

grantees are expected to submit an updated report each quarter to va .

the quarterly report format is consistent with gao's 2012 recommendations , in that it ( 1 ) requires reporting of the expenditure of va grant program funds , excluding funds from other sources ; and ( 2 ) is formatted to provide consistent and non - duplicative reporting of activities and numbers of participants .

table 2 summarizes how va translated the information required of grantees into the quarterly report format .

as indicated in table 2 , va's quarterly report template did not require grantees to provide all of the information required by program regulations .

for example , va program regulations require grantees to include in their reports detailed records of the time involved in providing adaptive sports activities through direct personal interaction with adaptive sports participants , such as coaching or instruction , versus time spent on other adaptive sports activities .

however , during fiscal year 2015 , va did not require grantees to add this information to the quarterly reports .

we pointed out this omission to va staff , and in august 2015 , they provided a draft revised quarterly report format , where grantees are to provide information on time spent providing direct instruction to participants .

a va official indicated that they intended to further revise the template so that it also required grantees to report staff time spent on matters other than direct personal interaction with participants , as required by regulations .

they expected to complete the template revision before the start of fiscal year 2016 .

va's program regulations also require grantees to identify the locations of their adaptive sports activities .

however , va did not provide a specific place for grantees to report the locations of their activities .

va has revised its quarterly report format to have grantees identify locations of their activities .

improved information from grantees could help va assess the extent of geographic coverage of adaptive sports opportunities .

in addition to quarterly reporting by all grantees , va's grantee monitoring approach calls for monitoring of selected grantees through conducting site visits and desk audits , although the reporting format for the latter has not been established .

a site visit involves a visit to a grantee's offices to review financial and other records , a visit to a grantee's adaptive sports event , or both .

the reviewing official is to assess the extent to which the grantee is providing activities according to the grant agreement .

also , the reviewer is to assess the soundness of the grantee's financial management of va grant funds , as well as the grantee's financial controls .

to record the results of the assessments for use by va program officials , the reviewer prepares a site visit report using a standard va format .

a desk audit ( also known as a remote audit ) , according to va officials , involves asking the grantee to provide documentation to support an assessment of grantee financial management issues that might be of concern .

va may , for example , ask to see receipts for equipment or transportation ticket purchases or ask for documentation of how the calculation of staff days spent on providing services is made .

a va official stated that desk audits will likely be tailored to the circumstances as appropriate .

for both site visits and desk audits , va employs a selective monitoring approach — based on risk — to help focus its limited resources on grantees at highest risk of failing to perform or mismanaging funds .

such an approach is consistent with our prior work , which found that risk - based monitoring can help agencies identify grantees that need additional attention ; for example , using limited resources to visit higher - risk grantees .

according to va officials , one criterion for assessing risk is the awarded amount .

officials said that they tend to select grantees receiving less funding for desk audits , and grantees receiving more funding for site visits , because those receiving larger grants are at risk of losing more dollars in case of financial mismanagement .

va also said that they use information from application reviews , such as assessments of financial controls , and grantees' previous experience providing adaptive sports programs , in deciding whether a desk audit or site visit is warranted .

another consideration is the scope of a grantee's event .

a va official said that a site visit may be scheduled to a multi - sport event , such as one of the regional valor games , where a grantee may be collaborating with other adaptive sports providers , including other va grantees .

to economize on monitoring costs , va uses geographic considerations as well .

for example , va officials said that a site visit may be planned if it would cover several grantees headquartered in the same area .

although va officials provided us their policy on monitoring of grant funded activities , for most of fiscal year 2015 they did not have a written monitoring plan .

best practices in grants management suggest that risk - based monitoring helps agencies ensure adequate grantee financial management and performance .

also , planning is part of an agency's internal control system , which helps program managers achieve desired results through effective stewardship of public resources , such as grant funds .

for example , by documenting and using written criteria for determining which grantees need closer monitoring , va could be better positioned to help prevent mismanagement of funds and poor program performance .

we discussed this issue with va staff earlier in our review , and in august 2015 , they provided us with their draft monitoring plan .

according to a va official , va expects to complete this plan early in fiscal year 2016 .

va's draft plan describes a monitoring approach consistent with va grants management policy .

however , the draft plan lacks certain elements , such as information on the number and frequency of site visits and desk audits .

promising practices in ensuring adequate grantee financial systems and proper use of grant funds include an agency reviewing a target number of grantees each year .

for example , one agency requires reviews of 10 percent of all of its grantees each year as a mechanism to enhance grantee accountability .

a grantee monitoring plan that addresses the number and frequency of reviews throughout the year can help va ensure that it is monitoring grantees on an ongoing basis , to prevent , and promptly detect , misuse of grant funds .

at the time of our review , va was implementing two main methods of its monitoring approach — quarterly grantee reporting and va site visits .

almost all of the grantees whose files we reviewed submitted their quarterly reports on time .

for 13 of the 16 grants , the grantees submitted their first quarter fiscal year 2015 reports on time , and all submitted their second quarter reports on time .

we found that , in general , the grantees provided the information va requested .

also , in our review of the selected grantee files , we found evidence that va reviewed the quarterly reports to ensure that grantees were operating according to the terms of their grant agreements with va. for 6 of the first - quarter and 12 of the second - quarter reports we reviewed , we found that va identified issues for follow up , and requested additional information from grantees .

table 3 describes examples of the types of issues va identified in the quarterly reports we reviewed .

we reviewed reports on the results of 8 va site visits , covering 9 of its 69 grants , conducted from november 2014 through june 2015 .

six of the 8 site visits occurred at grantees' adaptive sports events ; the remaining 2 visits occurred at grantees' headquarters .

as summarized in table 4 , the reports identified several types of issues , although none of the issues reflected grantee noncompliance .

in each of the 8 reports we reviewed , va officials provided notes on how grantees operated their events and the financial management of va grant funds .

several of the reports also made suggestions for improvements in these areas .

through july 2015 , va officials told us that the agency had not conducted any desk audits of fiscal year 2014 grantees .

va officials explained that at the start of fiscal year 2015 , desk audits were intended to form a portion of the monitoring strategy , but they have been deferred due primarily to a large workload .

in august 2015 , a va official stated that they had initiated a desk audit of one grantee .

the 69 adaptive sports grants awarded by va in fiscal year 2014 supported a wide range of activities , with cycling , boating , snow skiing , and archery among the most frequent ( see fig .

2 ) .

some grants were focused on activities in a single location and / or sport , while others planned to support a variety of sports events .

for example , one grant targeted recreational rowing for veterans with disabilities in five locations across the country , while another grant aimed to provide a variety of physical fitness activities in one state .

another grantee committed to provide more than seven different sports for paralyzed veterans in more than 30 locations across the country .

the activities supported by these 69 grants also targeted athletes with a range of disabilities ( see table 5 ) .

a sport or an adaptation may be aimed at participants with a specific type of disability , or may be suitable for participants with a range of disabilities .

to support these activities , grantees planned to spend grant funds in various budget categories .

the largest categories for the 69 fiscal year 2014 grants were travel , including transportation , lodging , and subsistence for athletes , coaches , and other officials involved in meeting program objectives ; operations , including such expenses as facility rentals and ski lift tickets ; and supplies , including purchase of adaptive bicycles , watercraft , and bows and arrows ( see fig .

3 ) .

importantly , a total of about $459,000 — about 5.7 percent of the total $8 million awarded — was budgeted as administrative costs .

this included both normal administrative costs as well as personnel costs associated with grant activities but not attributable to time spent coaching or training participants .

the amount was below the 7.5 percent statutory limit for activities carried out in fiscal year 2015 .

participants , grantee officials , and coaches we interviewed generally said that adaptive sports activities are beneficial to veterans and service members in multiple ways ( see table 6. ) .

these benefits include improved family and social relationships , emotional health , levels of independence and life skills , and physical well - being .

several interviewees — including participants and grantee officials — said adaptive sports can have a transformative effect on a veteran with disabilities .

one official said he sees disabled veterans who have been inactive for many years participate in adaptive sports , resulting in a significant life change .

another official said some veterans with disabilities get accustomed to being taken care of , which can amplify their disabilities .

he recalled that at one sports clinic funded by the grant program , a blind veteran asked to be guided to another part of the sports facility and , after some good - natured ribbing by his teammates , was convinced he could navigate on his own .

several experts we spoke with stressed the importance of sustained involvement in adaptive sports as the key to long - term benefits .

according to one adaptive sports expert familiar with the grant program , the important thing is whether or not the event helps fuel a persistent participation in the sport and thereby contributes to a balanced and active life .

one of the grantees we visited considered the opportunity that applicants would have to continue their participation in a sport when selecting participants .

a grantee official said that in reviewing applications from veterans and service members wishing to join an event , they consider the proximity of the applicant to ongoing programs offering the same adaptive sport .

the aim is to ensure that veterans participating in the grant - funded event also stay involved in the sport for their ongoing well - being and health .

va officials agreed with this aim and said in the future they may consider grant applications , for example , that propose purchasing adaptive sports supplies and equipment to help benefit veterans over a number of years .

some grantee officials who we interviewed spoke of a high incidence of veteran no - shows at adaptive sports activities and events as an impediment to program success .

at one of our site visits — a sports clinic in which 7 of 10 registered participants attended — an official said some veterans may cancel on short notice , which deprives other interested veterans from participating .

in addition , the official was concerned that excessive no - shows may mean there are not enough athletes to form teams or hold an effective practice session .

another official said considerable time and money has been lost when veterans register but do not participate .

the official said some no - shows are understandable , such as when a veteran's plans are affected by a medical condition .

nonetheless , adaptive sports are about more than athletics and are aimed at strengthening “mind and heart” of participants as well , the official said .

some veterans can be victims of learned helplessness after they return from service , the official said , and goal - setting and an insistence on accountability can counter this .

another official said that while non - attendance of registered athletes at their high - profile summer sports camp is not a problem , it can be an issue at less prominent events , such as weeknight archery training sessions .

some grantees noted that asking participants to have a financial stake in an event could encourage attendance .

for example , one official suggested that registrants pay a refundable deposit of perhaps $250 so that they have some “skin in the game” and event sponsors have greater assurance of their attendance .

another grantee official explained that in her organization's experience , requiring an up - front financial commitment is effective .

at a 2013 multi - sport event , about 35 of the registered athletes did not attend , resulting in a huge waste of federal funds and missed opportunities for other veterans , she said .

to combat this , the organization required a credit card number from registrants for the 2014 event , and informed them they would be charged the cost of one - night's lodging if they failed to attend without prior notice .

under this policy , she said , 82 of the 84 registrants — 98 percent — took part .

another grantee official said that while requesting a deposit of some kind might have merit , it could also cause cash flow difficulties for some veterans .

he said some participants in weeknight training sessions have a hard time paying public transit fare , so the additional cost of a refundable deposit might be a barrier to participation .

va officials confirmed that no - shows are a problem .

they explained that while its regulations require that adaptive sports events supported by the grants be free of charge for eligible veterans , having strategies to incentivize attendance for those who register — such as charging for a first night's hotel expenses — are permissible .

they also said that they have provided informal guidance to some fiscal year 2014 grant recipients on ways to reduce no - show rates — typically this information has been shared with grantees sponsoring large scale events that involve travel .

however , va has not systematically gathered and disseminated permissible techniques for reducing no - show rates to all of its grantees .

according to federal internal control standards , program management is responsible for identifying , analyzing , and responding to risks it faces in achieving program objectives .

a systematic effort to gather and disseminate techniques to address the no - show issue would be consistent with this requirement .

in fiscal year 2014 , va assumed responsibility for selecting and overseeing grantees under the adaptive sports grant program and , despite challenges , awarded 69 grants supporting a wide variety of adaptive sports opportunities for veterans and members of the armed services with disabilities .

our review indicates that through the first half of fiscal year 2015 , grantees were substantially complying with reporting requirements and that site visits to selected grantees have identified opportunities for improvement .

further , va is amending its quarterly reporting template so that it will require a report of staff time spent on direct personal interaction with participants , and time spent on other matters , as required by program regulations .

however , va's draft monitoring plan does not include a regular schedule for site visits or desk audits , which risks the possibility that none will be performed in some years , or that they will be performed very late in the year .

promising practices in ensuring adequate grantee financial systems and proper use of grant funds include review of a certain number of grantees each year , and irregular scheduling risks the possibility that mismanagement or misuse of grant funds will not be promptly detected .

finally , a significant no - show factor means that program dollars may not be used to their fullest potential .

va officials are aware of this issue , and have taken some steps to address it .

however , they have not systematically gathered or disseminated techniques to reduce the no - show rate .

further attention to this matter could better enable va and grantees to serve as many eligible veterans as there are slots available in funded activities .

to help ensure the best use of the va adaptive sports grant program funds , we recommend the secretary of veterans affairs direct the undersecretary for public and intergovernmental affairs to take the following two actions: revise the draft monitoring plan to include guidance on the number and frequency of annual site visits and desk audits .

systematically gather and disseminate , to all its grantees , techniques that can reduce the no - show rate at funded events .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of veterans affairs for review .

we received formal written comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii .

va concurred with our conclusions and both of our recommendations .

with regard to the first recommendation , va indicated that it had established a requirement that a minimum of 10 percent of grantees would be subject to site visits and / or desk audits each fiscal year .

regarding the second recommendation , va stated that the agency plans to systematically gather and disseminate techniques from a variety of sources to reduce no - show rates .

va also provided several technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of veterans affairs , the assistant secretary for public and intergovernmental affairs , and other interested parties .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bertonid@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are found in appendix iii .

the objectives of this engagement were to determine ( 1 ) how the va adaptive sports grant program selected grantees to provide adaptive sports programs and activities for veterans and service members with disabilities ; ( 2 ) how va monitors grantees' use of funds ; and ( 3 ) what programs and activities have been supported with fiscal year 2014 funds , and what is known about how veterans and service members with disabilities have benefited from these programs and activities .

our work was limited to program grants using fiscal year 2014 funds , which supported grantee activities that were to take place in fiscal year 2015 .

because our audit work began and ended during va's first year of monitoring grantees , our work on va's grantee monitoring generally covered the first two quarters of fiscal year 2015 — october 2014 through march 2015 .

we addressed the first objective in several steps .

to determine how va reviewed and selected fiscal year 2014 adaptive sports grant applications , we reviewed key va documents — including relevant federal laws , program regulations , va's fiscal year 2014 notice of funding availability , and application instructions — and interviewed va officials .

we also reviewed relevant grants management criteria , including va's agency - wide grants management policies , and best grants management practices that had been identified by members of the domestic working group .

second , to determine how va staff followed program policies and key criteria , we reviewed the files of 16 fiscal year 2014 grants and examined available documents such as the grant applications and proposals , proposed budgets , evidence of grantees' financial and administrative capability , va's scoring of grantee proposals , and the grant agreement .

we selected grants based on type of organization , amount of grant funding and geography .

we selected grants to ensure that we obtained eight from national , four from regional and four from community - based organizations .

we selected all grants valued at $250,000 or more — seven from national organizations , three from regional organizations .

we then selected the remaining six sample grants randomly — one from a national organization , one from a regional organization , and all four from community - based organizations .

also , we ensured that selected grantees included representation of different geographic regions .

although this sample size does not allow us to project to the universe of the 69 fiscal year 2014 grants , it is nonetheless a substantial sample , representing $3.7 million , or 46 percent , of the $8 million granted in fiscal year 2014 .

in addition to our review of the 2014 application process , we reviewed relevant documents and interviewed va officials regarding changes to the grant application and review process in fiscal year 2015 .

to address the second objective , we interviewed va officials , reviewed relevant va policy documents and relevant grant oversight criteria , and reviewed selected va oversight documentation .

specifically , we reviewed va's standard quarterly report template to ensure it conformed to the reporting requirements contained in program regulations .

we also reviewed the quarterly reports for the 16 grants selected as described in the preceding paragraph for the first two quarters of fiscal year 2015 — the 3-month periods ending december 31 , 2014 and march 31 , 2015 .

we also identified issues that va had raised with the quarterly reports and , in selected instances , followed up with va on how its review comments were addressed .

we also obtained and reviewed reports of 8 va site visits that had been conducted by the end of june 2015 .

to address the third objective , we obtained data from va on the types of sports events to be provided by each fiscal year 2014 grantee and interviewed va program officials ; usoc officials who had been involved in administering sub - grants prior to december 2013 ; and representatives of three veterans service organizations — disabled american veterans , the american legion , and veterans of foreign wars .

we also obtained va data on grantee budgets and proposed activities .

we interviewed va officials about this data and determined that it was sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

to obtain further perspectives on the value of adaptive sports for veterans and service members , we attended three adaptive sports events funded through va grants .

we selected them in consultation with va program officials .

specifically , we selected events that were occurring during our review and also considered regional diversity and travel considerations .

the events selected , listed below , did not provide a representative sample of all va - funded adaptive sports activities .

february 2015 goalball camp conducted by the u.s. association of blind athletes in fort wayne , indiana ; march 2015 archery camp conducted by the rehabilitation institute of chicago , in chicago , illinois ; and may 2015 multi - sport event conducted by bridge ii sports in chapel hill and durham , north carolina .

at each event , we interviewed event organizers , coaches and trainers and event participants ; and observed the events .

we also interviewed event organizers prior to or during their events .

in addition to the contact named above , brett fallavollita ( assistant director ) , michael hartnett ( analyst - in - charge ) , greg whitney , and nyree ryder tee made key contributions to this report .

in addition , key support was provided by susan aschoff , james bennett , sheila mccoy , walter vance , and craig winslow .

