i am pleased to be here today to discuss information from our april 2013 report regarding the construction of new major department of veterans affairs' ( va ) medical facilities .

that report examined va's actions to address cost increases and schedule delays at four of its largest and most expensive major medical - facility construction projects — located in denver , colorado ; orlando , florida ; new orleans , louisiana ; and las vegas , nevada .

at the time of our review , va had 50 major medical - facility projects under way , including new construction and renovation of existing medical facilities , at a cost of more than $12 billion .

my statement today discusses va construction management issues , specifically ( 1 ) the extent to which the cost , schedule , and scope for the four selected medical - facility projects changed since this information was first submitted to va's authorizing committees and the reasons for these changes , ( 2 ) actions va has taken to improve its construction management practices , and ( 3 ) va's response to recommendations we made in our report for it to further improve its management of the costs , schedule , and scope of these construction projects .

this testimony is based on our april 2013 report and may 2013 , and april 2014 testimonies on this topic , as well as selected updates .

these selected updates include information on the status of va's major medical center projects in las vegas , orlando , new orleans and denver .

to conduct these updates , we obtained documentation and other information from va officials on the current status of its major medical - facility projects and actions it took to address our recommendations in april 2014 and again in january 2015 .

detailed information on the scope and methodology used for our april 2013 report and april 2013 and may 2014 testimonies can be found in those products .

we conducted the work for this statement in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in our april 2013 report , we found that costs increased and schedules were delayed for all four of va's largest medical - facility construction projects , when comparing november 2012 construction project data with the cost and schedule estimates first submitted to congress .

since our 2013 report , these projects have experienced further increases and delays .

when we compared the most recent construction project data,of december 2014 , with the cost and schedule estimates first submitted as to congress , cost increases ranged from 66 percent to 144 percent,representing a total cost increase of over $1.5 billion and an average increase of approximately $376 million per project .

for example , the cost for the new orleans project increased by nearly $40 million .

schedule delays have also increased since our april 2013 report .

specifically , in april 2013 we reported that the schedule delays ranged from 14 to 74 months with an average delay of 35 months per project .

the delays now range from 14 to 86 months .

for instance , the delays in orlando have extended from 39 months to 57 months .

table 1 presents updated information on cost increases and schedule delays for these four projects compared with original estimates .

we found in april 2013 that of the four largest medical - facility construction projects va had underway , denver had the highest cost increase .

we reported that the estimated cost increased from $328 million in june 2004 to $800 million , as of november 2012 .

further , va's initial estimated completion date was february 2014 ; subsequently va estimated the project would be completed in may 2015 .

however , in april 2014 , va's primary contractor on the project had expressed concerns that the project would ultimately cost more to complete .

in a january 2015 update , va stated that the final project cost and schedule will be determined pursuant to execution of interim cost plus fixed fee contract and issuance of a long term contract by the u.s. army corps of engineers .

in commenting on a draft of our april 2013 report , va stated that using the initial completion date from the construction contract would be more accurate than using the initial completion date provided to congress ; however , using the initial completion date from the construction contract would not account for how va managed these projects before it awarded the construction contract .

cost estimates at this earlier stage should be as accurate and credible as possible because congress uses these initial estimates to consider authorizations and make appropriations decisions .

we used a similar methodology to estimate changes to cost and schedule of construction projects in a previous report issued in 2009 on va construction projects .

we believe that the methodology we used in our april 2013 and december 2009 report on va construction provides an accurate depiction of how cost and schedules for construction projects can change from the time they are first submitted to congress .

it is at this time that expectations are set among stakeholders , including the veterans' community , for when projects will be completed and at what cost .

in our april 2013 report , we made recommendations to va , discussed later in this statement , to help address these cost and schedule delays .

in our april 2013 report , we found that different factors contributed to cost increases and schedule delays at each of the four locations we reviewed: changing health care needs of the local veteran population changed the scope of the las vegas project .

va officials told us that the las vegas medical center was initially planned as an expanded clinic co - located with nellis air force base .

however , va later determined that a much larger medical center was needed in las vegas after it became clear that an inpatient medical center shared with the air force would be inadequate to serve the medical needs of local veterans .

decisions to change plans from a shared university / va medical center to a stand - alone va medical center affected plans in denver and new orleans .

for denver and new orleans , va revised its original plans for shared facilities with local universities to stand - alone facilities after proposals for a shared facility could not be finalized .

for example , in denver , plans went through numerous changes after the prospectus was first submitted to congress in 2004 .

in 1999 , va officials and the university of colorado hospital began discussing the possibility of a shared facility on the former fitzsimons army base in aurora , colorado .

negotiations continued until late 2004 , at which time va decided against a shared facility with the university of colorado hospital because of concerns over the governance of a shared facility .

in 2005 , va selected an architectural and engineering firm for a stand - alone project , but va officials told us that the firm's efforts were suspended in 2006 until va acquired another site at the former army base adjacent to the new university medical center .

design restarted in 2007 before suspending again in january 2009 , when va reduced the project's scope because of lack of funding .

by this time , the project's costs had increased by approximately $470 million , and the project's completion was delayed by 14 months .

the cost increases and delays occurred because the costs to construct operating rooms and other specialized sections of the facility were now borne solely by va , and the change to a stand - alone facility also required extensive redesign .

changes to the site location by va delayed efforts in orlando .

in orlando , va's site location changed three times from 2004 to 2010 .

it first changed because va , in renovating the existing va hospital in orlando , realized the facility site was too small to include needed services .

however , before va could finalize the purchase of a new larger site , the land owner sold half of the land to another buyer , and the remaining site was again too small .

unanticipated events in las vegas , new orleans , and denver also led to delays .

for example , va officials at the denver project site discovered they needed to eradicate asbestos and replace faulty electrical systems from pre - existing buildings .

they also discovered and removed a buried swimming pool and found a mineral - laden underground spring that forced them to continually treat and pump the water from the site , which impacted plans to build an underground parking structure .

in our april 2013 report , we found that va had taken steps to improve its management of major medical - facility construction projects , including creating a construction - management review council .

in april 2012 , the secretary of veterans affairs established the construction review council to serve as the single point of oversight and performance accountability for the planning , budgeting , executing , and delivering of va's real property capital - asset program .

the council issued an internal report in november 2012 that contained findings and recommendations that resulted from meetings it held from april to july 2012 .

the report stated that the challenges identified on a project - by - project basis were not isolated incidents but were indicative of systemic problems facing va .

in our 2013 report we also found that va had taken steps to implement a new project delivery method — called the integrated design and construction ( idc ) method .

in response to the construction industry's concerns that va and other federal agencies did not involve the construction contractor early in the design process , va and the army corps of engineers began working to establish a project delivery model that would allow for earlier contractor involvement in a construction project , as is often done in the private sector .

we found in 2013 that va did not implement idc early enough in denver to garner the full benefits .

va officials explained that denver was initiated as a design - bid - build project and later switched to idc after the project had already begun .

according to va officials , the idc method was very popular with industry , and va wanted to see if this approach would effectively deliver a timely medical facility project .

thus , while the intent of the idc method is to involve both the project contractor and architectural and engineering firm early in the process to ensure a well coordinated effort in designing and planning a project , va did not hire the contractor for denver until after the initial designs were completed .

according to va , because the contractor was not involved in the design of the projects and formulated its bids based on a design which had not been finalized , these projects required changes that increased costs and led to schedule delays .

va staff responsible for managing the project said it would have been better to maintain the design - bid - build model throughout the entire process rather than changing mid - project because va did not receive the value of having contractor input at the design phase , as the idc method is supposed to provide .

for example , according to denver va officials , the architectural design called for curved walls rather than less expensive straight walls along the hospital's main corridor .

the officials said that had the contractor been involved in the design process , the contractor could have helped va weigh the aesthetic advantages of curved walls against the lower cost of straight walls .

in our april 2013 report we identified systemic reasons that contributed to overall schedule delays and cost increases , and recommended that va take actions to improve its construction management of major medical facilities: including ( 1 ) developing guidance on the use of medical equipment planners ; ( 2 ) sharing information on the roles and responsibilities of va construction project management staff ; and ( 3 ) streamlining the change order process .

our recommendations were aimed at addressing issues we identified at one or more of the four sites we visited during our review .

va has implemented our recommendations ; however , the impact of these actions may take time to show improvements , especially for ongoing construction projects , depending on several issues , including the relationship between va and the contractor .

since completing our april 2013 report , we have not reviewed the extent to which these actions have affected the four projects , or the extent to which these actions may have helped to avoid the cost overruns and delays that occurred on that specific project .

on august 30 , 2013 , va issued a policy memorandum providing guidance on the assignment of medical equipment planners to major medical construction projects .

the memorandum states that all va major construction projects involving the procurement of medical equipment to be installed in the construction will retain the services of a medical equipment specialist to be procured through the project's architectural engineering firm .

prior to issuance of this memorandum , va officials had emphasized that they needed the flexibility to change their heath care processes in response to new technologies , equipment , and advances in medicine .

given the complexity and sometimes rapidly evolving nature of medical technology , many health care organizations employ medical equipment planners to help match the medical equipment needed in the facility to the construction of the facility .

federal and private sector stakeholders reported that medical equipment planners have helped avoid schedule delays .

va officials told us that they sometimes hire a medical equipment planner as part of the architectural and engineering firm services to address medical equipment planning .

however , in our april 2013 report we found that for costly and complex facilities , va did not have guidance for how to involve medical equipment planners during each construction stage of a major hospital and has sometimes relied on local veterans health administration ( vha ) staff with limited experience in procuring medical equipment to make medical equipment planning decisions .

thus , we recommended that the secretary of va develop and implement agency guidance to assign medical equipment planners to major medical construction projects .

as mentioned earlier , in august 2013 , va issued such guidance .

in september 2013 , in response to our recommendation , va put procedures in place to communicate to contractors the roles and responsibilities of va officials that manage major medical facility construction projects , including the change order process .

among these procedures is a project management plan that requires the creation of a communications plan and matrix to assure clear and consistent communications with all parties .

construction of large medical facilities involves numerous staff from multiple va organizations .

officials from the office of construction and facilities management ( cfm ) stated that during the construction process , effective communication is essential and must be continuous and involve an open exchange of information among va staff and other key stakeholders .

however , in our april 2013 report , we found that the roles and responsibilities of cfm and vha staff were not always well communicated and that it was not always clear to general contracting firms which va officials hold the authority for making construction decisions .

this can cause confusion for contractors and architectural and engineering firms , ultimately affecting the relationship between va and the general contractor .

participants from va's 2011 industry forum also reported that va roles and responsibilities for contracting officials were not always clear and made several recommendations to va to address this issue .

therefore , in our 2013 report , we recommended that va develop and disseminate procedures for communicating — to contractors — clearly defined roles and responsibilities of the va officials who manage major medical - facility projects , particularly those in the change - order process .

as discussed earlier in this statement , va disseminated such procedures in september 2013 .

on august 29 , 2013 , va issued a handbook for construction contract modification ( change - order ) processing which includes milestones for completing processing of modifications based on their dollar value .

in addition , as of september 2013 , va had also hired four additional attorneys and assigned on - site contracting officers to the new orleans , denver , orlando , manhattan and palo alto major construction projects to expedite the processing and review of construction contract modifications .

by taking steps to streamline the change order process , va can better ensure that change orders are approved in a prompt manner to avoid project delays .

most construction projects require , to varying degrees , changes to the facility design as the project progresses , and organizations typically have a process to initiate and implement these changes through change orders .

federal regulations and agency guidance state that change orders must be made promptly , and agency guidance states in addition that there be sufficient time allotted for the government and contractor to agree on an equitable contract adjustment .

va officials at the sites we visited as part of our april 2013 review , including denver , stated that change orders that take more than a month from when they are initiated to when they are approved can result in schedule delays , and officials at two federal agencies that also construct large medical projects told us that it should not take more than a few weeks to a month to issue most change orders .

processing delays may be caused by the difficulty involved in va and contractors' coming to agreement on the costs of changes and the multiple levels of review required for many of va's change orders .

as discussed earlier , va has taken steps to streamline the change order process to ensure that change orders are approved in a prompt manner to avoid project delays .

chairman miller and ranking member brown , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you have any questions about this testimony , please contact david wise at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov .

other key contributors to this testimony include are ed laughlin ( assistant director ) , nelsie alcoser , george depaoli , raymond griffith , hannah laufe , amy rosewarne , nancy santucci , and crystal wesco .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

