thank you for inviting me to testify at today's hearing on the office of personnel management's ( opm ) system for processing federal employee retirement benefits .

the use of information technology ( it ) is integral to carrying out this important responsibility , and for over two decades , opm engaged in efforts to modernize the retirement process by automating paper - based functions and replacing antiquated information systems .

however , the agency experienced numerous challenges in managing its modernization initiatives .

reports that we issued in 2005 , 2008 , and 2009 on its efforts toward planning and implementing a modernized retirement system highlighted a long history of undertaking modernization projects that did not yield the intended outcomes .

at your request , my testimony today summarizes the history of opm's retirement modernization efforts along with our findings regarding the challenges that it faced in managing those efforts , and describes more recent actions the agency has reported taking to improve the retirement process .

the information in my testimony is primarily based on our previous work at opm .

we also reviewed the agency's plan and related information discussing its recent actions to improve retirement processing services .

we performed our work in support of this testimony during april and may 2013 .

all work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as the central human resources agency for the federal government , opm is tasked with ensuring that the government has an effective civilian workforce .

to carry out this mission , opm delivers human resources products and services including policies and procedures for recruiting and hiring , provides health and training benefit programs , and administers the retirement program for federal employees .

according to the agency , approximately 2.7 million active federal employees and nearly 2.5 million retired federal employees rely on its services .

according to opm , the retirement program serves current and former federal employees by providing ( 1 ) tools and options for retirement planning and ( 2 ) retirement compensation .

two defined - benefit retirement plans that provide retirement , disability , and survivor benefits to federal employees are administered by the agency .

the first plan , the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) , provides retirement benefits for most federal employees hired before 1984 .

the second plan , the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) , covers most employees hired in or after 1984 and provides benefits that include social security and a defined contribution system .

opm and employing agencies' human resources and payroll offices are responsible for processing federal employees' retirement applications .

the process begins when an employee submits a paper retirement application to his or her employer's human resources office and is completed when the individual begins receiving regular monthly benefit payments ( as illustrated in fig .

1 ) .

once an employee submits an application , the human resources office provides retirement counseling services to the employee and augments the retirement application with additional paperwork , such as a separation form that finalizes the date the employee will retire .

then the agency provides the retirement package to the employee's payroll office .

after the employee separates for retirement , the payroll office is responsible for reviewing the documents for correct signatures and information , making sure that all required forms have been submitted , and adding any additional paperwork that will be necessary for processing the retirement package .

once the payroll office has finalized the paperwork , the retirement package is mailed to opm to continue the retirement process .

payroll offices are required to submit the package to opm within 30 days of the retiree's separation date .

upon receipt of the retirement package , opm calculates an interim payment based on information provided by the employing agency .

the interim payments are partial payments that typically provide retirees with 80 percent of the total monthly benefit they will eventually receive.then starts the process of analyzing the retirement application and associated paperwork to determine the total monthly benefit amount to which the retiree is entitled .

this process includes collecting additional information from the employing agency's human resources and payroll offices or from the retiree to ensure that all necessary data are available before calculating benefits .

after opm completes its review and authorizes payment , the retiree begins receiving 100 percent of the monthly retirement benefit payments .

opm then stores the paper retirement folder at the retirement operations center in boyers , pennsylvania .

the agency recently reported that the average time to process retirement claims was 156 days in 2012 .

according to the deputy associate director for the center of retirement and insurance services , about 200 employees are directly involved in processing the approximately 100,000 retirement applications opm receives annually .

retirement processing includes functions such as determining retirement eligibility , inputting data into benefit calculators , and providing customer service .

the agency uses over 500 different procedures , laws , and regulations , which are documented on the agency's internal website , to process retirement applications .

for example , the site contains memorandums that outline new procedures for handling special retirement applications , such as those for disability or court orders .

further , opm's retirement processing involves the use of over 80 information systems that have approximately 400 interfaces with other internal and external systems .

for instance , 26 internal systems interface with the department of the treasury to provide , among other things , information regarding the total amount of benefit payments to which an employee is entitled .

opm has reported that a greater retirement processing workload is expected due to an anticipated increase in the number of retirement applications over the next decade , although current retirement processing operations are at full capacity .

further , the agency has identified several factors that limit its ability to process retirement benefits in an efficient and timely manner .

specifically , opm noted that current processes are paper - based and manually intensive , resulting in a higher number of errors and delays in providing benefit payments ; the high costs , limited capabilities , and other problems with the existing information systems and processes pose increasing risks to the accuracy of benefit payments ; current manual capabilities restrict customer service ; federal employees have limited access to retirement records , making planning for retirement difficult ; and attracting qualified personnel to operate and maintain the antiquated retirement systems , which have about 3 million lines of custom programming , is challenging .

recognizing the need to modernize its retirement processing , in the late 1980s opm began initiatives that were aimed at automating its antiquated paper - based processes .

initial modernization visions called for developing an integrated system and automated processes to provide prompt and complete benefit payments .

however , following attempts over more than two decades , the agency has not yet been successful in achieving the modernized retirement system that it envisioned .

in early 1987 , opm began a program called the fers automated processing system .

however , after 8 years of planning , the agency decided to reevaluate the program , and the office of management and budget requested an independent review of the program , which identified various management weaknesses .

the independent review suggested areas for improvement and recommended terminating the program if immediate action was not taken .

in mid - 1996 , opm terminated the program .

in 1997 , opm began planning a second modernization initiative , called the retirement systems modernization ( rsm ) program .

the agency originally intended to structure the program as an acquisition of commercially available hardware and software that would be modified in - house to meet its needs .

from 1997 to 2001 , opm developed plans and analyses and began developing business and security requirements for the program .

however , in june 2001 , it decided to change the direction of the retirement modernization initiative .

in late 2001 , retaining the name rsm , the agency embarked upon its third initiative to modernize the retirement process and examined the possibility of privately sourced technologies and tools .

toward this end , the agency determined that contracting was a viable alternative and , in 2006 , awarded three contracts for the automation of retirement processing , the conversion of paper records to electronic files , and consulting services to redesign its retirement operations .

in february 2008 , opm renamed the program retireez and deployed an automated retirement processing system .

however , by may 2008 the agency determined that the system was not working as expected and suspended system operation .

in october 2008 , after 5 months of attempting to address quality issues , the agency terminated the contract for the system .

in november 2008 , opm began restructuring the program and reported that its efforts to modernize retirement processing would continue .

however , after several years of trying to revitalize the program , the agency terminated the retirement system modernization in february 2011 .

opm's efforts to modernize its retirement system were hindered by weaknesses in several key it management disciplines .

our experience with major modernization initiatives has shown that having sound management capabilities is essential to achieving successful outcomes .

these capabilities include project management , risk management , organizational change management , system testing , cost estimating , progress reporting , planning , and oversight , among others .

however , we found that opm's capabilities in these areas were not sufficiently developed .

for example , in reporting on rsm in february 2005 , we noted weaknesses in project management , risk management , and organizational change management .

project management is the process for planning and managing all project - related activities , including defining how project components are interrelated .

effective project management allows the performance , cost , and schedule of the overall project to be measured and controlled in comparison to planned objectives .

although opm had defined major retirement modernization project components , it had not defined the dependencies among them .

specifically , the agency had not identified critical tasks and their impact on the completion of other tasks .

by not identifying critical dependencies among project components , opm increased the risk that unforeseen delays in one activity could hinder progress in other activities .

risk management entails identifying potential problems before they occur .

risks should be identified as early as possible , analyzed , mitigated , and tracked to closure .

opm officials acknowledged that they did not have a process for identifying and tracking retirement modernization project risks and mitigation strategies on a regular basis but stated that the agency's project management consultant would assist it in implementing a risk management process .

lacking such a process , opm did not have a mechanism to address potential problems that could adversely impact the cost , schedule , and quality of the retirement modernization project .

organizational change management includes preparing users for the changes to how their work will be performed as a result of a new system implementation .

effective organizational change management includes plans to prepare users for impacts the new system might have on their roles and responsibilities , and a process to manage those changes .

although opm officials stated that change management posed a substantial challenge to the success of retirement modernization , they had not developed a detailed plan to help users transition to different job responsibilities .

without having and implementing such a plan , effective implementation of new systems could be hindered by confusion about user roles and responsibilities .

we recommended that the director of opm ensure that the retirement modernization program office expeditiously establish processes for effective project management , risk management , and organizational change management .

in response , the agency initiated steps toward establishing management processes for retirement modernization and demonstrated activities to address our recommendations .

we reported again on opm's retirement modernization in january 2008 , as the agency was about to deploy a new automated retirement processing system .

we noted weaknesses in additional key management capabilities , including system testing , cost estimating , and progress reporting .

effective testing is an essential activity of any project that includes system development .

generally , the purpose of testing is to identify defects or problems in meeting defined system requirements or satisfying system user needs .

at the time of our review , 1 month before opm planned to deploy a major system component , test results showed that the component had not performed as intended .

we warned that until actual test results indicated improvement in the system , opm risked deploying technology that would not accurately calculate retirement benefits .

although the agency planned to perform additional tests to verify that the system would work as intended , the schedule for conducting these tests became compressed from 5 months to 2-1 / 2 months , with several tests to be performed concurrently rather than sequentially .

the agency stated that a lack of testing resources , including the availability of subject matter experts , and the need for further system development contributed to the delay of planned tests and the need for concurrent testing .

the high degree of concurrent testing that opm planned to meet its february 2008 deployment schedule increased the risk that the agency would not have the resources or time to verify that the planned system worked as expected .

cost estimating is the identification of individual project cost elements , using established methods and valid data to estimate future costs .

establishing a reliable cost estimate is important for developing a project budget and having a sound basis for measuring performance , including comparing the actual and planned costs of project activities .

although opm developed a retirement modernization cost estimate , it was not supported by the documentation that is fundamental to a reliable cost estimate .

without a reliable cost estimate , opm lacked a sound basis for formulating retirement modernization budgets or for developing the cost baseline that is necessary for measuring and predicting project performance .

earned value management ( evm ) is a tool for measuring program progress by comparing the value of work accomplished with the amount of work expected to be accomplished .

fundamental to reliable evm is the development of a baseline against which variances are calculated .

opm used evm to measure and report monthly performance of the retirement modernization system .

the reported results indicated that the project was progressing almost exactly as planned .

however , this view of project performance was not reliable because the baseline on which it was based did not reflect the full scope of the project , had not been validated , and was unstable ( i.e. , subject to frequent changes ) .

this evm approach in effect ensured that material variances from planned performance would not be identified and that the state of the project would not be reliably reported .

we recommended that the director of opm conduct effective system tests prior to system deployment and improve program cost estimation and progress reporting .

opm stated that it concurred with our recommendations and would take steps to address the weakness we identified .

nevertheless , opm deployed a limited initial version of the modernized retirement system in february 2008 .

after unsuccessful efforts to address system quality issues , the agency suspended system operation , terminated the system contract , and began restructuring the modernization effort .

in april 2009 , we again reported on opm's retirement modernization , noting that the agency still remained far from achieving the modernized specifically , we retirement processing capabilities that it had planned.noted that significant weaknesses continued to exist in the areas of cost estimating , progress reporting , and testing , while also noting two additional weaknesses related to planning and oversight .

although it concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to develop a revised cost estimate for the retirement modernization effort , opm had not completed initial steps for developing the new estimate by the time we issued our report in april 2009 .

we reported that the agency had not yet fully defined the estimate's purpose , developed an estimating plan , or defined the project's characteristics .

by not completing these steps , opm increased the risk that it would produce an unreliable estimate and not have a sound basis for measuring project performance and formulating retirement modernization budgets .

opm also concurred with our january 2008 recommendation to establish a basis for effective evm but had not completed key steps as of the time of our report .

specifically , despite planning to use evm to report the retirement modernization project's progress , the agency had not developed a reliable cost estimate and a validated baseline .

engaging in evm reporting without first taking these fundamental steps could have again rendered the agency's assessments unreliable .

as previously discussed , effective testing is an essential component of any project that includes developing systems .

to be effectively managed , testing should be planned and conducted in a structured and disciplined fashion .

beginning the test planning process in the early stages of a project life cycle can reduce rework later .

early test planning in coordination with requirements development can provide major benefits .

for example , planning for test activities during the development of requirements may reduce the number of defects identified later and the costs related to requirements rework or change requests .

opm's need to compress its testing schedule and conduct tests concurrently , as we reported in january 2008 , illustrates the importance of planning test activities early in a project's life cycle .

however , at the time of our april 2009 report , the agency had not begun to plan test activities in coordination with developing its requirements for the system it was planning at that time .

consequently , opm increased the risk that it would again deploy a system that did not satisfy user expectations and meet requirements .

project management principles and effective practices emphasize the importance of having a plan that , among other things , incorporates all the critical areas of system development and is to be used as a means of determining what needs to be done , by whom , and when .

although opm had developed a variety of informal documents and briefing slides that described retirement modernization activities , the agency did not have a complete plan that described how the program would proceed in the wake of its decision to terminate the system contract .

as a result , we concluded that until the agency completed such a plan and used it to guide its efforts , it would not be properly positioned to proceed with its restructured retirement modernization initiative .

office of management and budget and gao guidance call for agencies to ensure effective oversight of it projects throughout all life - cycle phases .

critical to effective oversight are investment management boards made up of key executives who regularly track the progress of it projects such as system acquisitions or modernizations .

opm's investment review board was established to ensure that major investments are on track by reviewing their progress and identifying appropriate actions when investments encounter challenges .

despite meeting regularly and receiving information that indicated problems with the retirement modernization , the board did not ensure that retirement modernization investments were on track , nor did it determine appropriate actions for course correction when needed .

for example , from january 2007 to august 2008 , the board met and was presented with reports that described problems the program was facing , such as the lack of an integrated master schedule and earned value data that did not reflect the “reality or current status” of the program .

however , meeting minutes indicated that no discussion or action was taken to address these problems .

according to a member of the board , opm had not established guidance regarding how the board is to communicate recommendations and needed corrective actions for investments it oversees .

without a fully functioning oversight body , opm lacked insight into the retirement modernization and the ability to make needed course corrections that effective boards are intended to provide .

our april 2009 report made new recommendations that opm address the weaknesses in the retirement modernization project that we identified .

although the agency began taking steps to address them , the recommendations were overtaken by the agency's decision in february 2011 to terminate the retirement modernization project .

in mid - january 2012 , opm released a plan to undertake targeted , incremental improvements to retirement processing rather than a large - scale modernization , which described planned actions in four areas: hiring and training 56 new staff to adjudicate retirement claims and 20 additional staff to support the claims process ; establishing higher production standards and identifying potential working with other agencies to improve the accuracy and completeness of the data they provide to opm for use in retirement processing ; and improving the department's it by pursuing a long - term data flow strategy , exploring short - term strategies to leverage work performed by other agencies , and reviewing and upgrading systems used by retirement services .

through implementing these actions , opm has said that it aims to eliminate the agency's retirement processing backlog and accurately process 90 percent of its cases within 60 days by july 31 , 2013 .

however , as we testified in february 2012 , that goal represents a substantial reduction from the agency's fiscal year 2009 retirement modernization goal to accurately process 99 percent of cases within 30 days .

moreover , the plan did not describe whether or how the agency intends to modify or decommission the over 80 legacy systems that it currently relies on to support retirement processing .

last month , opm officials described steps the agency has begun taking to implement the january 2012 plan for retirement services .

these steps include filling the 56 positions needed to adjudicate retirement claims and 20 positions needed to support the claims process ; implementing retirement processing improvements identified during an external review of its retirement claims process , such as reorganizing benefits claims officers into two tiers to allow the processing of more complex inquiries by higher - level officers ; and improving the accuracy and completeness of retirement data that other agencies provide to opm by conducting audits of the agencies' application submissions and providing more frequent feedback and follow - up training .

additionally , the officials identified existing and planned it improvements to support the retirement process .

these efforts include providing retirees with the ability to view the status of their cases through opm's web - based application , services online ; developing the capability to accept electronic data that are transferred from one of the seven federal payroll processing centers ; enhancing its internal web - based application , data viewer , to allow 11 other agencies to view retirement case packets ; upgrading its data storage capacity and production printer ; sponsoring a challenge , in cooperation with the national aeronautics and space administration , for developers to create a system with accounting tools for processing service credits ; updating reporting guides to include processes for sending electronic retirement data to opm ; and planning an initiative to develop an automated retirement case management system to replace the agency's existing document and case control system in fiscal year 2014 .

nonetheless , while opm is planning to replace its legacy document and case control system , agency officials stated that there were no major plans to decommission any of the agency's other legacy systems that support retirement processing .

although the associate director for retirement services stated that investing in it is important for improving the efficiency of retirement claims processing , the agency has not yet planned for improving or replacing the remaining legacy systems that support retirement processing .

in summary , despite opm's longstanding recognition of the need to improve the timeliness and accuracy of retirement processing , the agency has thus far been unsuccessful in several attempts to develop the capabilities it has long sought .

for over two decades , the agency's retirement modernization efforts were plagued by weaknesses in management capabilities that are critical to the success of such endeavors .

among the management disciplines the agency has struggled with are project management , risk management , organizational change management , cost estimating , system testing , progress reporting , planning , and oversight .

the incremental steps the agency recently reported taking include dedicating additional resources to retirement processing ; however , they do not address the more fundamental need to modernize its legacy it systems in order to significantly improve the efficiency of the process .

until opm tackles that challenge , and develops the management capabilities to carry it out successfully , it may face ongoing difficulties in meeting the needs of future retirees .

chairman farenthold , ranking member lynch , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

if you have any questions concerning this statement , please contact valerie c. melvin , director , information management and technology resources issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov .

other individuals who made key contributions include mark t. bird , assistant director ; david a. hong ; and lee a. mccracken .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

