intelligence officials believe that the united states will face a persistent and evolving terrorist threat and that the terrorist group al qaeda will intensify its efforts to put operatives here .

from january 2003 to september 2007 , we testified on three occasions before your committee to describe security vulnerabilities that terrorists could exploit to enter the country .

the vulnerabilities are related to traveler screening and border - protection efforts that were consolidated under customs and border protection ( cbp ) , a component of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , in march 2003 .

our first two testimonies were focused on covert testing at ports of entry — the air , sea , and land locations where international travelers can legally enter the united states .

for our third testimony , we focused on limited security assessments of unmanned and unmonitored border areas between ports of entry .

this report summarizes the findings of the covert tests and security assessment work performed for your committee and reported at hearings on january 30 , 2003 ; august 2 , 2006 ; and september 27 , 2007 .

it is important to note that fugitives , smugglers , illegal immigrants , or other criminals could also take advantage of the vulnerabilities we identified .

to summarize our work , we reviewed our prior testimonies and the work papers associated with them .

we also requested information in writing from dhs related to recent efforts to secure u.s. borders and address the vulnerabilities highlighted by our work .

for our testing at ports of entry , we entered the states of washington , idaho , michigan , and new york from canada ; the states of california , arizona , and texas from mexico ; the state of florida from jamaica ; and the state of virginia from the bahamas .

to create counterfeit documents we used software , hardware , and materials that are available to the public .

the tested ports of entry were a nonrepresentative selection we identified using publicly available information .

because we tested a nonrepresentative selection , it is not possible to project the results of our work to any other ports of entry .

the unmanned and unmonitored border areas we visited were defined as locations where cbp does not maintain a manned presence 24 hours per day or where there was no apparent monitoring equipment in place .

we performed limited security assessments at a nonrepresentative selection of these locations and did not attempt to evaluate all potential u.s. border security vulnerabilities .

where possible , and at your request , investigators attempted to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband to highlight the severity of the vulnerability at these border areas .

dhs considered some of our results to be law - enforcement sensitive and requested that we not include certain information in our report , such as the names of states we visited for our september 2007 work on unmanned and unmonitored locations .

we prepared this report from january to may 2008 .

however , all covert tests and security assessment work were performed prior to dhs's january 31 , 2008 , revised document procedures for u.s. citizens at ports of entry and it is therefore not possible to project our results to these new procedures .

we are reporting on the results of testing at land , sea , and air ports of entry ; however , the majority of our work was focused on land ports of entry .

further , the results of our covert testing and security assessments are applicable only to u.s. border security efforts and do not relate to efforts made by other governments .

our work was limited in scope and cannot be projected to represent systemic weaknesses in dhs border - protection efforts .

further , it does not address the entry of terrorists into the bahamas , canada , jamaica , or mexico .

as noted in our prior testimonies , we performed all covert testing and security assessment work in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency .

cbp is the lead federal agency in charge of securing the nation's borders .

when cbp was created , it represented a merger of components from three agencies — the u.s. customs service , the u.s. immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , and the animal and plant health inspection service .

under the immigration and nationality act , its implementing regulations , and cbp policies and procedures , cbp officers are required to establish , at a minimum , the nationality of individuals and whether they are eligible to enter the country at ports of entry .

all international travelers attempting to enter the country through ports of entry undergo primary inspection , which is a preliminary screening procedure to identify those legitimate international travelers who can readily be identified as admissible .

regarding land ports of entry , the united states shares over 5,000 miles of border with canada to the north ( including the state of alaska ) , and 1,900 miles of border with mexico to the south .

individuals attempting to legally enter the united states by land present themselves to a cbp officer at one of the 170 ports of entry located along these borders .

during the period of our investigations , u.s. citizens could gain entry to the united states by establishing their citizenship to the satisfaction of u.s. officials at a land port of entry .

while this frequently involved a citizen presenting their birth certificate , photo identification ( eg , a driver's license ) , or baptismal records , the law did not require u.s. citizens to present any of these documents as proof of citizenship .

until recently , u.s. citizens could enter the country at land ports of entry based only on oral statements .

however , as of january 31 , 2008 , u.s. citizens age 19 and older are required , under the western hemisphere travel initiative , to present both proof of identity and citizenship when attempting to enter the united states by land .

documents that would fulfill this requirement could include a passport , a military id with travel orders , or an enhanced driver's license .

in the absence of a single document that establishes both proof of identity and citizenship , u.s. citizens require multiple documents , such as a driver's license and a birth certificate , to enter the united states .

requirements for entering the united states by sea are similar to those for entering by land .

regarding air ports of entry , starting on january 23 , 2007 , u.s. citizens were required , under the western hemisphere travel initiative , to present a passport or secure travel document when entering the united states .

prior to the implementation of this initiative , u.s. citizens entering the country by air from such locations as the bahamas , mexico , and jamaica could establish their citizenship by oral assertions and documents such as drivers' licenses and birth certificates .

it is illegal to enter the united states at any location other than a port of entry .

the u.s. border patrol , a component of cbp , patrols and monitors areas between ports of entry .

however , given limited resources and the wide expanse of the border , the u.s. border patrol is limited in its ability to monitor the border either through use of technology or with a consistent manned presence .

commensurate with its perception of the threat , cbp has distributed human resources differently on the northern border than it has on the southern border .

according to cbp , as of may 2007 , it had 972 u.s. border patrol agents assigned to the northern border and 11,986 agents assigned to the southern border .

the number of agents actually providing border protection at any given time is far smaller than these figures suggest .

as mentioned above , in the september 2007 hearing on border security before your committee , a cbp official stated that roughly 250 u.s. border patrol agents were patrolling the u.s. – canada border at any given time — about a quarter of all agents reportedly assigned to patrol the northern border during that period .

we found two types of security vulnerabilities in our covert testing at ports of entry .

first , we found that , in the majority of cases , the government inspectors who reviewed our undercover investigators' counterfeit documentation did not know that they were bogus and allowed them to enter the country .

second , we found that government officials did not always ask for identification .

although it was not a requirement for government officials to ask for identification at the time we performed our tests , we concluded that this was a major vulnerability that could allow terrorists or other criminals to easily enter the country .

in table 1 below , each individual instance of an investigator crossing the border is noted separately , although , in some cases , investigators crossed the border in groups of two or more .

we consider our attempts to enter the country through sea and air ports of entry as different from our land crossings .

for one thing , we did not perform the same amount of testing that we performed at land ports of entry .

for another , the standard for admittance via air ports of entry continues to be stricter than via land and sea routes .

in table 2 below , each individual instance of an investigator entering the united states via air or sea is noted separately .

selected details related to these covert tests are discussed below .

for our 2003 testimony , investigators successfully entered the united states using counterfeit drivers' licenses and other bogus documentation through a land port of entry in washington .

they also entered florida via air from jamaica using the same counterfeit documentation .

similar follow - up work was performed throughout 2003 and 2004 , resulting in successful entry at locations in washington , new york , california , texas , and virginia using counterfeit identification .

in 2006 , investigators successfully entered the united states using counterfeit drivers' licenses and other bogus documentation through seven land ports of entry on the northern and southern borders , adding the states of michigan , idaho , and arizona to the list of states they had entered .

in the majority of cases , investigators entered the country by land using rental cars .

when requested , they displayed counterfeit virginia and west virginia drivers' licenses and birth certificates to the government officials at ports of entry .

they also used bogus u.s. passports and , in one case , a fake employee identification card in the name of a major u.s. airline .

government officials typically inspected the documentation while inquiring whether our undercover investigators were u.s. citizens .

on some occasions , the officials asked whether our investigators had purchased anything in canada or mexico .

in several instances , cbp officials asked our investigators to leave their vehicles and inspected the vehicles ; they appeared to be searching for evidence of smuggling .

in only one case on the northern border , one of our undercover investigators was denied entry because a cbp officer became suspicious of the expired u.s. passport with substituted photo offered as proof of citizenship .

for our 2003 testimony , we found that ins inspectors did not request identification at a sea port of entry in washington and a land port of entry in california .

our investigators' oral assertions that they were u.s. citizens satisfied the ins inspectors and they were allowed to enter the country .

later , while conducting our 2006 covert tests , we found that cbp officers did not request identification during several foot crossings from mexico .

for example , on february 23 , 2006 , two investigators crossed the border from mexico into texas on foot .

when the first investigator arrived at the port of entry , he was waved through without being asked to show identification .

at this point , the investigator asked the cbp officer whether he wished to see any identification .

the officer replied , “ok , that would be good.” the investigator began to remove his counterfeit virginia driver's license from his wallet when the officer said “that's fine , you can go.” the cbp officer never looked at the license .

however , the cbp officer did request identification from the investigator who was walking behind the first investigator .

in another test on march 15 , 2006 , two investigators entered arizona from mexico by foot .

they had received a phone call in advance from another investigator who had crossed the border earlier using genuine identification .

he said that the cbp officers on duty had swiped his driver's license through a scanning machine .

because the counterfeit drivers' licenses the other two investigators were carrying had fake magnetic strips , the investigators realized they could be questioned by cbp officers if their identification cards did not scan properly .

when the two investigators arrived at the port of entry , they engaged one of the officers in conversation to distract him from scanning their drivers' licenses .

after a few moments , the cbp officer asked the investigators if they were both u.s. citizens .

they said , “yes.” he then asked the investigators if they had purchased anything in mexico , and they responded , “no.” the cbp officer then said , “have a nice day” and allowed them to enter the united states .

he did not ask for any identification .

we first reported on potential security vulnerabilities at unmanned and unmonitored border areas in our 2003 testimony .

while conducting testing at u.s. – canada ports of entry , we found that one of our investigators was able to walk into the united states from canada at a park straddling the border .

the investigator was not stopped or questioned by law enforcement personnel from either canada or the united states .

in our september 2007 testimony , we reported on similar vulnerabilities at unmanned and unmonitored locations on the northern and southern borders .

the unmanned and unmonitored border areas we visited were defined as locations where cbp does not maintain a manned presence 24 hours per day or where there was no apparent monitoring equipment in place .

safety considerations prevented our investigators from performing the same assessment work on the u.s. – mexico border as performed on the northern border .

we found three main vulnerabilities during this limited security assessment .

first , we found state roads close to the border that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states .

second , we also located several ports of entry that had posted daytime hours and which , although monitored , were unmanned overnight .

investigators observed that surveillance equipment was in operation but that the only observable preventive measure to stop a cross - border violator from entering the united states was a barrier across the road that could be driven around .

finally , investigators identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a noticeable law enforcement presence during the time our investigators visited the sites .

see table 3 for a summary of the vulnerabilities we found and the activity of investigators at each location .

selected details related to these covert tests are discussed below .

according to cbp , the ease and speed with which a cross - border violator can travel to the border , cross the border , and leave the location of the crossing are critical factors in determining whether an area of the border is vulnerable .

we identified state roads close to the border that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states .

for example , on october 31 , 2006 , our investigators positioned themselves on opposite sides of the u.s. – canada border in an unmanned location .

our investigators selected this location because roads on either side of the border would allow them to quickly and easily exchange simulated contraband .

after receiving a signal by cell phone , the investigator in canada left his vehicle and walked approximately 25 feet to the border carrying a red duffel bag .

while investigators on the u.s. side took photographs and made a digital video recording , the individual with the duffel bag proceeded the remaining 50 feet , transferred the duffel bag to the investigators on the u.s. side , and returned to his vehicle on the canadian side .

the set up and exchange lasted approximately 10 minutes , during which time the investigators were in view of residents both on the canadian and u.s. sides of the border .

according to cbp records of this incident , an alert citizen notified the u.s. border patrol about the suspicious activities of our investigators .

the u.s. border patrol subsequently attempted to search for a vehicle matching the description of the rental vehicle our investigators used .

however , the u.s. border patrol was not able to locate the investigators with the duffel bag , even though they had parked nearby to observe traffic passing through the port of entry .

see figure 1 for a photograph of our investigator crossing the northern border at another unmanned , unmonitored location on the northern border with simulated contraband .

in contrast to our observations on the northern border , our investigators observed a large law enforcement and army national guard presence near a state road on the southern border , including unmanned aerial vehicles .

on october 17 , 2006 , two of our investigators left a main u.s. route about a quarter mile from a u.s. – mexico port of entry .

traveling on a dirt road that parallels the border , our investigators used a gps system to get as close to the border as possible .

our investigators passed u.s. border patrol agents and u.s. army national guard units .

in addition , our investigators spotted unmanned aerial vehicles and a helicopter flying parallel to the border .

at the point where the dirt road ran closest to the u.s. – mexico border , our investigators spotted additional u.s. border patrol vehicles parked in a covered position .

about three - fourths of a mile from these vehicles , our investigators pulled off the road .

one investigator exited the vehicle and proceeded on foot through several gulches and gullies toward the mexican border .

his intent was to find out whether he would be questioned by law enforcement agents about his activities .

he returned to the vehicle after 15 minutes , at which time our investigators returned to the main road .

our investigators did not observe any public traffic on this road for the 1 hour that they were in the area , but none of the law enforcement units attempted to stop our investigators and find out what they were doing .

according to cbp , because our investigators did not approach from the direction of mexico , there would be no expectation for law enforcement units to question these activities .

we also identified several ports of entry with posted daytime hours in one state on the northern border .

during the daytime these ports of entry are staffed by cbp officers .

during the night , cbp told us that it relies on surveillance systems to monitor , respond to , and attempt to interdict illegal border crossing activity .

for example , on november 14 , 2006 , at about 11:00 p.m. , our investigators arrived on the u.s. side of one port of entry that had closed for the night .

investigators observed that surveillance equipment was in operation but that the only visible preventive measure to stop an individual from entering the united states was a barrier across the road that could be driven around .

cbp provided us with records that confirmed our observations about the barrier at this port of entry , indicating that on one occasion a cross - border violator drove around this type of barrier to illegally enter the united states .

although the violator was later caught by state law enforcement officers and arrested by the u.s. border patrol , we were concerned that these ports of entry were unmanned overnight .

investigators identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a manned cbp presence during the time our investigators visited the sites .

for example , on january 9 , 2007 , our investigators entered federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

the investigators had identified a road running parallel to the border in this area .

our investigators were informed by an employee of a visitor center that because the u.s. government was building a fence , the road was closed to the public .

however , our investigators proceeded to the road and found that it was not physically closed .

while driving west along this road , our investigators did not observe any surveillance cameras or law enforcement vehicles .

a 4-foot - high fence ( appropriate to prevent the movement of a vehicle rather than a person ) stood at the location of the border .

our investigators pulled over to the side of the road at one location .

to determine whether he would activate any intrusion alarm systems , one investigator stepped over the fence , entered mexico , and returned to the united states .

the investigators remained in the location for approximately 15 minutes but there was no observed law enforcement response to their activities .

in another example , on january 23 , 2007 , our investigators arrived on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

in this area , the rio grande river forms the southern border between the united states and mexico .

after driving off - road in a 4x4 vehicle to the banks of the rio grande , our investigators observed , in two locations , evidence that frequent border crossings took place .

in one location , the investigators observed well - worn footpaths and tire tracks on the mexican side of the river .

at another location , a boat ramp on the u.s. side of the rio grande was mirrored by a boat ramp on the mexican side .

access to the boat ramp on the mexican side of the border had well - worn footpaths and vehicle tracks .

an individual who worked in this area told our investigators that at several times during the year , the water is so low that the river can easily be crossed on foot .

our investigators were in this area for 1 hour and 30 minutes and observed no surveillance equipment , intrusion alarm systems , or law enforcement presence .

our investigators were not challenged regarding their activities .

after performing our limited security assessment of these locations , investigators learned that a memorandum of understanding exists between dhs ( of which cbp is a component ) , the department of the interior , and the department of agriculture regarding the protection of federal lands adjacent to u.s. borders .

although cbp is ultimately responsible for protecting these areas , officials told us that certain legal , environmental , and cultural considerations limit options for enforcement — for example , environmental restrictions and tribal sovereignty rights .

we held corrective action briefings with cbp in 2006 and 2007 to discuss the results of our prior work .

cbp generally agreed with our august 2006 findings and acknowledged that its officers are not able to identify all forms of counterfeit identification presented at land border crossings .

in addition , in response to our august 2006 work , cbp officials stated that they supported the western hemisphere travel initiative and were working to implement it .

this initiative has several parts , the most recent of which went into effect on january 31 , 2008 .

in response to our september 2007 report , cbp indicated that resource restrictions prevent u.s. border patrol agents from investigating all instances of suspicious activity .

cbp stated that the northern border presents more of a challenge than the southern border for several reasons , including the wide expanse of the border and the existence of many antiquated ports of entry .

in response to this report , dhs provided a written update on numerous border protection efforts it has taken to enhance border security since 2003 .

to directly address vulnerabilities related to bogus documentation , dhs stated that measures have been implemented to enhance cbp officers' ability to detect fraudulent documents , such as providing updated fraudulent document training modules to the cbp academy for inclusion in its curriculum , implementing mandatory refresher training in detecting fraudulent documents , and providing the 11 ports of entry that have the highest rate of fraudulent document interceptions with advanced equipment to assist with the examination and detection of fraudulent documents .

dhs also pointed out that , effective january 31 , 2008 , it has ended verbal declarations of citizenship at border crossings and now requires documents for u.s. citizens .

if implemented effectively , this would address some of the vulnerabilities we identified in our 2003 and 2006 testimonies .

according to dhs , although the full implementation of its western hemisphere travel initiative has been delayed , the implementation will also address vulnerabilities cited in our testimonies .

in addition , dhs indicated that it has taken a number of actions related to the security of the northern border .

in particular , dhs states that , as of april 2008 , there were 1,128 agents assigned to the northern border — a 16 percent increase from the 972 agents identified in our 2007 report .

furthermore , dhs plans to double personnel staffing levels over the next 2 years to over 2,000 agents by the end of fiscal year 2010 .

dhs also indicates that cbp has established a field testing division to perform covert tests that appear similar to our own tests , with a particular focus on detecting and preventing illicit radioactive material from entering the united states .

we addressed dhs technical and sensitivity comments as appropriate .

we did not attempt to verify the information provided by dhs , but have included its full response in appendix i .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we will plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will provide copies of this report to the secretary of homeland security and interested congressional committees and members .

we will also make copies available to others upon request .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / gao.gov .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report included john cooney , assistant director ; andy o'connell , assistant director ; barbara lewis , andrew mcintosh , sandra moore , and barry shillito .

