internet access is crucial for communication , economic activity , and education , including for students at the elementary and secondary school levels .

according to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) , part of the department of commerce , the internet has taken on an increasingly prominent role in schools , and students who lack access are at risk of missing opportunities to advance their education .

internet access is crucial not only inside the classroom — where it enables teachers to provide a richer learning experience — but also outside the classroom , because access is frequently necessary for doing homework .

“underconnected” students — those with limited or no access at home — may have difficulty doing homework , putting them at risk of falling behind better - connected peers , a condition known as the “homework gap.” school - age children from lower - income households are more likely to be underconnected and therefore to face the homework gap .

according to an analysis of 2015 survey data , lower - income households with school - age children are more likely to lack a high - speed internet connection at home than higher - income households with school - age children .

school - age children without in - home high - speed internet may use other means of accessing the internet — such as mobile wireless or public wi - fi at libraries or coffee shops — to do homework .

however , these alternative methods may pose challenges to students using them to do homework .

as a result , some schools have begun to take steps to address the homework gap by providing internet access to underconnected students .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 included a provision for us to review wireless internet for low - income school - age children .

this report examines: challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access , and what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for their students , and the federal role in such efforts .

to examine challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access , we analyzed data on internet access and use from the census bureau's november 2017 current population survey ( cps ) : computer and internet use supplement , sponsored by ntia .

specifically , we used data on the ages of all household members to determine if the household had one or more school - age children and analyzed data on the use of in - home fixed and mobile wireless internet and use of various computing devices .

we included variables on household income to report results based on different income ranges .

to determine the reliability of these data , we reviewed technical documentation on the survey , interviewed ntia officials , and compared our estimates of certain variables with estimates presented by ntia on its website .

we found these data were sufficiently reliable for assessing household internet use and access by income .

we also conducted a literature search for studies published between 2013 and 2018 , and used relevant publications to support data we collected from other sources , including interviews .

we interviewed officials with the department of education ( education ) , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and ntia .

we also interviewed eight education or technology - industry associations or advocacy organizations , one education researcher , one technology industry researcher , and one technology company that provides internet services and products to schools .

finally , we reviewed a non - generalizable sample of six projects through which seven school districts provide wireless internet access outside of school to students who may lack internet access at home .

we selected those projects that were frequently cited in the press or by others we interviewed and to cover a variety of geographic locations , including those in both urban and rural areas , and to include a variety of approaches to addressing the homework gap .

specifically , we interviewed officials from five school districts and one technology company working with two school districts .

we conducted semi - structured interviews with these 17 stakeholders , including the industry associations , researchers , and school districts detailed above , and analyzed the content of the interviews to identify key challenges .

the results of these interviews are not generalizable .

to examine what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for students and the federal role in such efforts , we conducted semi - structured interviews with officials at the five school districts and one technology company mentioned above regarding relevant efforts .

we reviewed documentation from fcc and education regarding relevant federal efforts , including rulemaking documents and documents about fcc's schools and libraries universal service support mechanism ( also known as the e - rate program ) , which provides schools with discounts on telecommunications and internet services .

we also interviewed officials with education and fcc about their efforts related to school initiatives to expand wireless access for students .

we compared fcc efforts to federal internal control standards related to using quality information and communicating externally and pilot - program design best practices .

for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology , see appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2018 to july 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

school - age children can access the internet in a number of ways .

their households may subscribe to in - home fixed internet , which is generally provided by cable television or telephone companies .

school - age children , and other users , can connect a variety of devices to in - home fixed service through a wired connection or a wi - fi connection .

they may also access the internet through mobile wireless service , which is provided through cell towers , with data transmitted over radio frequency spectrum .

mobile service providers usually sell internet access as an option in mobile telephone - service plans .

a number of devices may connect to mobile wireless , such as smart phones , tablets , and mobile devices that enable laptops to connect to mobile wireless service .

finally , school - age children and others may access the internet outside the home through other ways , including publicly available wi - fi access at places such as libraries and coffee shops .

fcc has found that americans in lower - income areas are less likely to have access to both in - home fixed and mobile wireless internet than those in higher - income areas .

similarly , according to our analysis of data from the november 2017 cps: computer and internet use supplement , among all school - age children , those in lower - income households are less likely to use the internet at home than those in higher - income households ( see fig .

1 ) .

a number of factors explain the digital divide , or the varying levels of access among different populations .

for example , as we have reported in the past , rural areas tend to have conditions such as low population density or difficult terrain that can increase the costs for internet providers to deploy and maintain internet networks .

furthermore , lower - income households with access to the necessary infrastructure for internet service may not be able to afford it .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

while some in - home fixed internet providers offer low - cost service for lower - income households with school - age children , according to a 2016 survey , an estimated 5 percent of households with school - age children ages 6 to 13 and incomes at or below the federal poverty guidelines had ever signed up for such programs .

lower rates of internet access by lower - income households may make it more difficult for school - age children in those households to do homework .

according to a 2018 pew research center survey , a higher percentage of surveyed teens in lower - income households said that the lack of a dependable computer or internet connection sometimes prevents them from finishing their homework compared to teens in higher - income households .

in addition , according to the consortium for school networking , the lack of in - home access makes it more difficult for parents to support their children academically .

specifically , as much communication between schools and parents has moved online , the lack of access may make it difficult for parents to stay connected to teachers and be informed about school notices , homework assignments , and other important information .

fcc , which regulates commercial and other nonfederal spectrum , conducts activities that affect the ability of schools to address the homework gap .

specifically , it plays a role in expanding internet access by assigning licenses for educational broadband service ( ebs ) spectrum , which permits schools and other eligible entities to transmit educational materials electronically .

currently , ebs license holders are allowed to lease excess capacity to others , including commercial wireless providers , for up to 30 years as long as the license holder has 20 hours of educational use per week per licensed channel and reserve the right to access 5 percent of the capacity for educational use .

schools that have such leases may need to wait years to regain full use of their ebs license .

furthermore , the last opportunity for school districts to apply for new ebs licenses was in 1995 , and according to fcc , ebs licenses cover about half the geographic area of the united states , with rural areas west of the mississippi river generally lacking licenses .

however , fcc recently adopted a report and order with rules that , once effective , will change the eligibility requirements for ebs licenses , among other things .

in addition , fcc supports internet investments at schools through the e - rate program , which provides discounts on telecommunications and internet access services , internal connections , and basic maintenance of internal connections .

this program provides schools with higher percentages of lower - income students greater discounts on these services ; for example , the most disadvantaged schools , where at least 75 percent of students are eligible for free or reduced price school lunch , receive a 90 percent discount .

all services supported by the e - rate program must be used primarily for “educational purposes,” which fcc has defined as meaning “activities that are integral , immediate , and proximate to the education of students.” education's office of educational technology also plays a role related to internet access for students by developing national educational - technology policies and providing guidance to schools and school districts on technology use in schools .

for example , in january 2017 the office issued a letter to schools and school districts about education grant funds that could be used to support the use of technology to improve instruction and student outcomes .

it also issued a report in 2017 on the use of technology in schools ; the report provided guidance on how to modernize the technology needed for digital learning , such as schools' internet networks and internet - enabled devices .

education also collects , analyzes , and reports on a range of data from schools and school districts .

for example , every year from 1994 to 2005 ( except 2004 due to a lack of funding according to education officials ) , the department collected data on internet access in schools and classrooms .

in 2008 , education conducted three similar surveys at the district , school , and teacher levels on the availability and use of a range of educational technology resources , such as networks , computers , devices that enhance the capabilities of computers for instruction , and computer software .

due to a lack of funding , education did not conduct additional similar surveys .

however , the department recently finished administering a different survey effort , funded from different sources , that we discuss later in this report .

according to our analysis of november 2017 cps: computer and internet use supplement data , lower - income households with school - age children may be more likely than those in higher - income households to be reliant on mobile wireless service , such as through smart phones , for internet access .

as seen in figure 3 , among all households with school - age children , an estimated 22 percent with incomes of less than $25,000 per year use mobile wireless to access the internet but not in - home fixed high - speed internet service , in contrast to 8 percent with incomes of $75,000 or more per year .

school - age children whose households only have mobile wireless internet access may face challenges in using it for homework , including: device limitations .

students in mobile wireless - only households may have to rely on devices like smartphones that may not be well suited for academic tasks .

a recent pew survey found that an estimated 45 percent of teenagers in lower - income households say they sometimes have to do homework on a smartphone .

however , most of the stakeholders we interviewed told us that smartphones are not adequate for doing homework for various reasons , including that they are too small for typing papers and that not all educational websites are compatible with smartphones .

according to these stakeholders , other devices such as desktops or laptops are better suited for homework ; however , among all school - age children , those in lower - income households are less likely than those in higher - income households to use these devices ( see fig .

4 ) .

data limitations .

a majority of the stakeholders we interviewed said that wireless plans' data caps — a limitation on the amount of data the subscriber can download and upload per month — could make it difficult for school - age children to do homework , because , for example , once the data cap is reached , the provider may decrease connection speeds or impose additional costs for further data use , which could hinder completion of homework .

a 2016 survey found that an estimated 39 percent of lower - income households with school - age children — in this case those with incomes less than the federal poverty guidelines — had reached a data cap , compared to 25 percent of higher - income households .

varying service quality .

mobile wireless may be less reliable and slower than in - home fixed service , which can make doing homework more challenging .

in 2018 , fcc concluded that mobile wireless services are not full substitutes for in - home fixed service , because mobile wireless quality can be affected by user location , indoor obstructions , outdoor foliage , and weather , among other factors .

in addition , we reported in 2015 that the availability and quality of mobile wireless service connections vary based on location and terrain .

for example , according to officials with albemarle county public schools in virginia , while most students who participated in a recent survey indicate that they have mobile wireless internet access at home , that access may only offer poor quality connections and slow speeds due to mountainous terrain .

as a result , mobile wireless access may have limited usefulness for homework purposes .

a 2018 survey by the pew research center found that about 20 percent of teens from lower - income households say that they sometimes have to use public wi - fi for homework given a lack of access at home .

as shown in figure 5 , stakeholders we interviewed and literature we reviewed identified a number of potential challenges students may encounter in using methods to access the internet outside the home to do their homework .

the six selected school district projects we reviewed have taken various approaches to address the homework gap by providing wireless internet service to students who may lack access at home .

most of these projects provide wireless internet access to students who lack in - home fixed internet and do not necessarily limit it to students in lower - income households .

in addition , all but one of these projects provide filtered access , meaning that students using these services are subject to the same usage restrictions as if they were on - site in school .

approaches included: provide wireless hot - spot devices .

the green bay area public school district in wisconsin loans out mobile wireless hot - spot devices to students throughout the district who do not have access at home , providing them filtered internet access in their homes or elsewhere in the community .

the hot - spot devices are available on loan from school libraries to any student who claims a need for one regardless of household income .

students may use district - issued chromebooks or other internet - enabled devices , which then connect to the district's internet resources via the hot - spot device using service provided by a commercial mobile - wireless provider .

build or use a private network .

some districts have built new or expanded existing networks to provide internet access to students using a variety of approaches .

albemarle county public schools in virginia uses ebs spectrum to provide access to students in community centers in mobile home parks in this mountainous district where , according to school district officials , many students lack service at home .

the district also plans to install wireless receiver devices in selected students' homes through which those students will be able to connect internet - enabled devices via wi - fi .

desert sands unified school district in california also built out an ebs network to provide internet access to students who lack service at home .

according to officials with that district , the benefit of this approach is that it involved only a one - time cost to build the network , rather than recurring annual payments to a commercial mobile - wireless provider for service .

two rural , low - income school districts in virginia — charlotte county public schools and halifax county public schools — partnered with microsoft to provide service through unlicensed white space devices ( which operate on frequencies not being used by television broadcasters or 600 mhz wireless providers ) to students who lack access at home , regardless of income .

according to microsoft , the use of unlicensed white space devices is a good solution to providing wireless access in rural areas where other technologies may be uneconomical and such frequencies tend to be available .

students who use this service receive a device that is installed in their home that wirelessly connects to the district's network and transmits to other devices in the home via wi - fi .

the boulder valley school district in colorado allowed a local wireless provider to build antennas on some school buildings in order to serve its customers in exchange for providing free service to lower - income students , determined based on student eligibility for free or reduced price lunch .

according to a school district official , the provider has installed antennas at three schools , providing access to students living within a 3-mile radius , and plans to install antennas at most remaining schools in the district .

that official told us that this model may not work in many other school districts , as there may not be sufficient population density to make it economically beneficial for a commercial provider to agree to provide such service .

equip school buses with wi - fi .

the coachella valley unified school district , which covers a large geographic area in california where many students lack in - home fixed access , equipped its fleet of about 100 school buses with wi - fi in 2014 , enabling students to do homework during long bus rides .

a commercial mobile - wireless provider connected the wi - fi router on the bus to the district's network .

in order to access wi - fi on the buses , students had to use district - issued devices that they were allowed to bring home after school .

the district also parked wi - fi - equipped school buses and other district vehicles overnight in neighborhoods with a high proportion of students who brought district - issued tablets home in order to provide access to students who likely lacked internet at home .

however , the district stopped this initiative in 2017 due to limited funding and is now seeking out alternative funding sources to reactivate the program .

while none of the projects described above used any funding from education , the department has identified six existing grants that schools and districts could use under certain conditions to support internet investments , although not necessarily wireless investments specifically .

while the purpose of each of these grant programs isn't specific to internet investments , education identified specific types of internet investments that these grant funds can be used for .

we did not make a determination as to whether any of the grant funds could have supported the efforts we reviewed .

representatives of two of the school districts we met with stated that they would like to see additional information on education grants that could be used to support internet investments .

education officials said the department has taken the first step to developing a strategy to share information about these grants by developing a coordinated communications strategy through its office of rural engagement .

they added that the department will then continue to build a broader strategy .

education is also finalizing data collection on a survey that will collect some data regarding the homework gap .

as mentioned earlier , until 2008 education collected survey data over a number of years about information technology and internet access in schools and classrooms .

according to education officials , the department stopped collecting such data due to a lack of funding .

however , the department is now finalizing a survey that is collecting nationally representative data about public school teachers' use of computers and the internet , and their knowledge of students' access to computers and the internet outside the classroom .

the survey is collecting data that pertain to the homework gap , including the extent to which schools provide wireless hot - spot devices to students to take home ; the extent to which teachers think students access the internet outside of school , such as at home , libraries , or businesses ; and the extent to which teachers think smartphones are useful for doing homework .

according to education , the department finished administering the survey in june 2019 and plans to release the results in april 2020 .

the survey data may provide education and others , including fcc and congress , with useful information that can inform policy and other decisions related to the homework gap , such as how best to support schools' efforts to expand wireless access for underconnected students .

fcc had a minor role in some of the school district projects by having previously granted ebs licenses to some districts that use ebs spectrum to provide wireless access .

however , according to fcc documentation , many schools and school districts do not have ebs licenses — such as those in rural areas in the western united states — and some that have obtained a license now lease their capacity out on a long - term basis to commercial providers .

as a result , school districts may be limited in using ebs to provide wireless access to students or have to take additional steps to use ebs .

desert sands unified school district officials said that the district did not have an ebs license and that the local license holder had leased it out to a commercial provider , so the district worked with that provider to build out its ebs network .

albemarle county public schools had leased out its ebs license to a commercial provider years ago , but because that provider was not utilizing that spectrum , the school district was able to reclaim it .

fcc has taken recent steps that may affect the extent to which school districts are able to use ebs to provide wireless access .

in may 2018 , fcc issued a notice of proposed rulemaking seeking comment on proposed changes to how it manages ebs to encourage and facilitate its efficient use .

in july 2019 , fcc adopted a report and order that makes a number of changes to the ebs spectrum and its use .

specifically , once effective , these rules will eliminate eligibility restrictions for ebs licenses and eliminate the educational use requirement of the spectrum .

while fcc's e - rate program supports schools' connectivity by providing discounts for eligible services , program rules may limit the ability of schools and school districts to address the homework gap .

specifically , program rules specify that off - premises use of such services is not eligible for e - rate support and require that any off - premises traffic must be cost allocated out of school districts' e - rate discounts .

for example , any off - premises traffic supported by existing e - rate - supported products or services requires a reduction in the e - rate discount for those existing e - rate supported products and services .

this reduction may increase costs for school districts as they would no longer receive all their potential e - rate discounts .

officials representing all six of the school district projects we reviewed suggested that program rules limiting eligibility for off - premises use and requiring cost - allocation may inhibit the ability of school districts to expand off - premises wireless access , and thus address the homework gap .

for districts that do provide wireless access off - premises , e - rate program restrictions may still pose challenges .

for example , according to an official with desert sands unified school district , the district had to buy a separate line of internet access to avoid having that off - premises traffic travel through the district's existing e - rate - supported network , which would have required cost - allocation and a reduction of the e - rate discount for that existing e - rate supported network .

according to officials with microsoft , charlotte county public schools and halifax county public schools had to separate their off - premises unlicensed white space device traffic from internet traffic that passed through e - rate - discounted access in the schools .

an official with boulder valley school district said that the district had to terminate an earlier effort to extend access to students in a housing development after being told that it could not provide off - premises access with program - discounted equipment without cost - allocation .

in september 2016 , fcc issued a public notice requesting public comment on two petitions filed with the agency seeking to allow the petitioning school districts to use existing e - rate - program - supported services and equipment for off - premises access without having to cost - allocate that traffic out of their existing e - rate discounts .

cost allocating out that traffic would result in reduced e - rate discounts for school districts , and therefore higher costs , for existing services and equipment supported by e - rate .

fcc rules allow parties to petition for waivers of rules if they can demonstrate that special circumstances warrant deviation from the existing rules and doing so serves the public interest .

according to fcc officials , the petitions are pending and the agency has not yet taken further formal action on this public notice .

the petitions are described in more detail below .

in may 2016 , the boulder valley school district filed a petition requesting a waiver of the cost allocation rules in order to use its e - rate - program - supported network to provide internet access to students at public housing facilities after school hours .

in the petition , the district argued that because traffic on its e - rate program - supported network dramatically decreased after school hours , using that network to provide access during that time would not impose any additional costs on the e - rate program .

microsoft and others — including the school districts in charlotte and halifax counties — filed a petition in 2016 to obtain clarification that those school districts could provide wireless access to students' homes for educational purposes by extending the districts' existing e - rate - supported services using the districts' unlicensed white space device network without cost allocating that traffic from the existing e - rate discounts .

the petition stated that the infrastructure to provide service to unlicensed white space devices would not be funded with e - rate program funds , and that these districts were not well served by commercial internet providers .

in comments filed with fcc , microsoft argued that projects covered by both petitions would provide in - home access for students without imposing any additional costs to the e - rate program and that the projects would increase the productivity of e - rate by using existing resources more efficiently .

previously , fcc explored the possibility of making wireless off - premises access an allowable e - rate program expense — which would eliminate the requirement to cost - allocate such traffic — in a 2011 to 2012 pilot program .

when establishing this pilot program , fcc noted commenter concerns regarding the potential administrative , legal , technological , and procedural challenges of expanding e - rate funding to off - campus premises .

the pilot program provided funding from july 2011 to june 2012 and sought to “investigate the merits and challenges of wireless off - premises connectivity services” and to “gain a better understanding of operation and administrative issues associated with off - premises use and connectivity , as well as the financial impact on the e - rate program overall.” furthermore , the pilot program sought to help fcc determine whether off - premises connectivity services “should ultimately be eligible for e - rate support.” fcc provided a total of $9 million in grants to 20 pilot - program participants — 19 schools or school districts and one community library system — to implement projects enabling innovation in learning outside the boundaries of school buildings and the traditional school day , including those that provided off - premises wireless access and wireless devices to students .

recipients were not required to cost allocate the off - premises traffic as part of the pilot .

fcc required all pilot participants to file interim and final reports that included information about project benefits , such as the extent to which students provided with wireless devices used them and the effect of increased internet access on academic outcomes ; project costs ; the effectiveness of measures to prevent project waste , fraud , and abuse , to filter content , and to ensure that students only used the devices for educational purposes ; and lessons learned .

according to fcc , those reports would allow it to assess the impact of selected pilot projects on the schools and to gather lessons learned that would help others implement similar projects in the future .

in addition , fcc said it would evaluate the effectiveness of the pilot program to determine whether off - premises wireless access should be eligible for e - rate program support .

while fcc received interim and final reports from most pilot participants , it did not determine a methodology for evaluating the data provided in those reports .

furthermore , fcc did not publish a report evaluating the effectiveness of the pilot program , including the potential costs , benefits , and challenges of off - premises wireless access to make a determination regarding whether off - premises access should be eligible for e - rate program support .

although the order establishing the pilot did not require fcc to determine an evaluation methodology and publish a formal analysis , according to fcc officials , staff reviewed the interim and final reports prior to the commission adopting a 2013 notice of proposed rulemaking that sought input on ways to modernize the e - rate program , including input on using e - rate - supported wireless hot - spots for community use .

in two subsequent e - rate program modernization orders in 2014 , the commission did not expand the e - rate program's support for off - premises access .

fcc officials explained that given the changes in technology , costs , and student learning in recent years , the data collected from the pilot may have some limitations .

fcc has not announced any plans to conduct another pilot program , and aside from its consideration of the petitions previously mentioned , fcc has not announced an intention to revisit whether off - premises wireless access should be eligible for e - rate support .

federal internal control standards state that agencies should use quality information to make decisions and communicate information to external parties .

specifically , agencies should collect data from reliable sources in a timely manner , process these data into quality information , and use that information to make informed decisions .

agencies should also communicate such information to external parties that can help the agencies achieve their objectives .

furthermore , in previous work we identified as pilot - program design best practices: determining a methodology for gathering and evaluating data , evaluating pilot results to make conclusions on whether to integrate pilot activities into broader efforts , and communicating with stakeholders — such as by publishing results .

as discussed earlier , school districts we met with said that existing e - rate program rules that require cost - allocation of off - premises access to e - rate discounts limit their ability to address the homework gap and providing off - premises access remains a challenge for schools and school districts .

determining and executing a methodology for collecting and analyzing data on the potential costs , benefits , and challenges of making schools' efforts to expand off - premises wireless access eligible for program funding could help inform fcc decisions regarding the two pending petitions and any future petitions .

as petitions may only cover petitioning entities , determining and executing such a methodology could also help inform more widespread changes to e - rate rules regarding off - premises access that would affect all e - rate program recipients .

fcc could collect such data through another pilot program or from school districts now providing off - premises wireless access .

publishing the results of this analysis could help fcc ensure that such information will be accessible to inform future related efforts and provide transparency to external stakeholders , including school districts .

the differences in internet access — and therefore in the ease of doing homework — between school - age children in lower - income households and those in higher - income households that are more likely to be well connected has resulted in a “homework gap” that could inhibit the academic success of underconnected students .

while school districts have made efforts to address the homework gap , such efforts may be inhibited by existing restrictions in fcc's e - rate program .

although fcc explored the possibility of making wireless off - premises access an allowable e - rate program expense in a 2011 to 2012 pilot program , fcc's lack of an analysis of the data it collected at the time or since then means that it may not have sufficient and relevant information to make a decision on pending petitions from local school districts regarding off - premises access .

determining the best way to collect and analyze data on the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises wireless access eligible for e - rate program support ; conducting such analysis ; and publishing the results could provide relevant information and transparency to external stakeholders .

doing so could also enable fcc to make a determination on whether it would be appropriate to ease restrictions on off - premises access , a step that may give school districts more flexibility in addressing the homework gap .

we are making the following recommendation to fcc: the chairman of the federal communications commission should determine and execute a methodology for collecting and analyzing data — such as conducting a new pilot program regarding off - premises wireless access or analyzing other data — to assess the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises wireless access eligible for e - rate program support , and publish the results of this analysis .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to fcc , education , and the department of commerce for review and comment .

fcc provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix ii .

in these written comments , fcc stated that it agreed with our recommendation and noted steps it plans to take to assess the potential benefits , costs , and challenges of making off - premises broadband access eligible for e - rate program support .

fcc also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

education provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iii and also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .

the department of commerce reviewed our report and told us it did not have any comments .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the chairman of the fcc , the secretary of commerce , and the secretary of education .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

our objectives for this report were to examine: ( 1 ) challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access and ( 2 ) what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for their students , and the federal role in such efforts .

to examine challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in - home fixed internet face in doing homework that involves internet access , we analyzed data from the census bureau's november 2017 current population survey: computer and internet use supplement , which is sponsored by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) .

the computer and internet use supplement collected household information from all eligible current population survey households , as well as personal information from household members age 3 and older .

the supplement provided data about households' computer and internet use , and about each household member's use of the internet from any location during the previous six months .

one member of a household was generally interviewed and answered questions on behalf of every other member .

interviews were conducted from november 12 – 18 , 2017 .

the probability sample selected to represent the universe consisted of approximately 56,000 households .

we included variables on ages of household members to determine if the household had one or more school - age children .

we considered a household to have school - age children if it had any children between the ages of 6 and 17 , an age range used in other analyses of internet use by school - age children , such as analyses by ntia and pew research center .

we analyzed data on the use of in - home fixed and mobile - wireless internet , as well as of various computing devices .

in our analysis we also included variables on household income , to allow us to report results based on different income ranges .

when analyzing responses by household income , we grouped household income into similar ranges that ntia publishes on its data explorer website , but we consolidated the top two ranges used by ntia into one range .

to determine the reliability of these data , we reviewed ntia technical documentation on the survey , interviewed ntia officials , and compared our estimates of selected variables with estimates presented by ntia on its website .

we found these data were sufficiently reliable for reporting on data on internet and computing device use by household income levels .

in addition , we conducted a literature search to review challenges lower - income school - age children who lack in – home internet face in doing homework that involves internet access .

we searched multidisciplinary databases using relevant terms such as “low - income,” “wireless,” “internet,” and “school - age children.” we searched for scholarly articles , including working and conference papers , government reports , think tank publications , and trade publications published between 2013 and 2018 .

we reviewed the abstracts of results from the search for publications most relevant to our work and fully reviewed publications that , based on their abstract , were most suited to this engagement .

we used relevant publications to support findings we collected from other sources , including interviews .

we also conducted semi - structured interviews with a range of stakeholders , including education industry associations , researchers , and advocacy organizations we selected based on literature , internet searches , and recommendations from those we interviewed .

specifically , we interviewed eight education or technology industry associations or advocacy organizations , one education researcher , one technology industry researcher , and representatives of one technology company that provides internet services and products to schools .

in addition , we interviewed officials with the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and department of education ( education ) .

we also reviewed a non - generalizable sample of six projects involving seven local school districts taking steps to provide wireless internet access outside of school for students who may lack internet at home .

we identified these projects based on keyword searches and recommendations from other interviewed associations and researchers , as well as officials with fcc , ntia , and education .

from this list , we then selected those projects that were frequently cited in the press or by others we interviewed ; that covered a variety of geographic locations , including those in both urban and rural areas ; and that included a variety of approaches to addressing the homework gap .

during these interviews , we asked interviewees about a range of topics , including the extent to which school - age children have access to in - home and wireless internet and challenges faced by students who may only have mobile wireless access .

in total we interviewed 17 stakeholders , including the industry associations , researchers , and school districts detailed above .

we analyzed the content of the interviews to identify key challenges identified by stakeholders .

these interviews did not provide a complete list of all challenges , and the results of these interviews are not generalizable but do provide insight into a range of issues .

to determine what selected school districts are doing to expand wireless internet access for their students and the federal role in such efforts , we conducted semi - structured interviews with officials at the school districts listed above and officials at microsoft regarding its efforts to expand wireless access for students who may lack internet at home .

during these interviews , we asked the districts about what steps they are taking to expand wireless access , the goals and challenges of the relevant project , and the federal role in the effort .

we analyzed the content of the interviews to identify key themes .

we also interviewed officials with fcc and education to determine and review federal efforts related to school initiatives to expand wireless access for students .

we reviewed documentation from fcc and education regarding relevant federal efforts including rulemaking documents such as fcc's 2018 notice of proposed rulemaking and 2019 report and order regarding educational broadcast service spectrum .

we reviewed other relevant fcc documents related to the schools and libraries universal service support mechanism ( also known as the e - rate program ) , which provides schools with discounts on telecommunications and internet services .

e - rate documents we reviewed included reports related the 2011 e - rate pilot program exploring off - premises wireless access .

we compared fcc efforts to federal internal control standards related to using quality information and communicating externally and pilot program design best practices .

we reviewed information , provided to us by department officials , on existing education grant programs that can be used by schools and school districts to support internet investments .

we also reviewed information on education's relevant survey efforts .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2018 to july 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

andrew von ah at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact above , mark goldstein ( director ) ; derrick collins ( assistant director ) ; matthew rosenberg ( analyst in charge ) ; dwayne curry ; sherri doughty ; rachel frisk ; hayden huang ; gina hoover ; dan luo ; josh ormond ; cheryl peterson ; matt ray ; hai tran ; and laurel voloder made key contributions to this report .

