the president has made numerous trips to the mar - a - lago property in palm beach , florida .

the president has hosted a foreign head of state and head of government and conducted other presidential responsibilities , including addressing matters of national concern , while at mar - a - lago , which may render the property a location of potential interest to foreign actors .

because members of the public are able to mingle with the president when he is at mar - a - lago , members of congress and others have raised questions about the protection of classified information at the property .

questions have also been raised with regard to potential conflicts of interest that could arise as a result of foreign government patronage at the trump organization's properties .

you asked us to review issues pertaining to the establishment of secure areas where classified information can be handled by the president when he travels to mar - a - lago .

you also asked us to identify payments made to the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) that result from foreign government patronage at the trump organization properties .

this report provides information on ( 1 ) processes taken to vet individuals who will be in close proximity to the president when he visits mar - a - lago ; ( 2 ) processes to provide the president with secure areas for handling classified and other sensitive information while at mar - a - lago ; ( 3 ) regulations and processes governing agency expenditures on employee per diem expenses for travel and operational space for personnel who travel with the president ; and ( 4 ) the treasury's processes for receiving payments from the trump organization or the president and payments that the treasury has received through these processes .

this is a public version of a sensitive gao report that we issued in october 2018 .

dod and the secret service deemed some of the information in our october report as sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure .

therefore , this report omits sensitive information on vetting individuals and providing secure areas for handling classified information .

although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report addresses the same objectives as the sensitive report and uses the same methodology .

to address our first objective , we analyzed guidance and documents related to protective operations from the u.s. secret service ( secret service ) and reviewed agreements between federal agencies to identify the measures that agencies are expected to take to vet individuals during the president's domestic trips .

we interviewed officials from the secret service and the federal bureau of investigation to ascertain how they partner to vet individuals during the president's trips .

we reviewed final survey reports that summarize security measures and actions taken by the secret service during the president's four trips to mar - a - lago between february 3 , 2017 and march 5 , 2017 and other documentation .

a gao engagement assessing presidential travel costs selected the first four trips to mar - a - lago after the president's inauguration , because those trips were completed shortly before the date of the congressional request letter .

to stay consistent with concurrent work on presidential travel costs , the same time frame was selected .

we interviewed officials from the secret service who were tasked with protecting the president to determine how agreements , policies , and procedures are used to vet individuals when the president is at mar - a - lago .

to address our second objective , we reviewed security - related guidance from the secret service and the department of defense ( dod ) to determine the roles that these organizations have in establishing secure areas that may be used to handle classified information when the president travels .

we also reviewed office of the director of national intelligence policies and procedures that are to be used when establishing temporary secure areas , such as those used at mar - a - lago , for handling classified information .

we also reviewed the details of specific security practices for the site with agency officials .

we relied on dod and secret service documentation and descriptions of these practices .

we discussed with dod officials after - action reports they prepare to identify vulnerabilities related to information security and steps that have been taken to address these vulnerabilities .

we requested from dod the after - action reports examining areas that may have been used by its personnel , the national security council , and the executive office of the president during the president's trips .

dod officials provided us with a march 2017 after - action report for the president's march 3-5 , 2017 visit to mar - a - lago .

we reviewed the report to understand the types of information included and assessed by dod .

dod officials stated that similar reports were developed after each of the president's february 2017 trips to mar - a - lago .

in addition , we discussed and reviewed with secret service officials specific security practices at mar - a - lago related to protection of the property , the presidential suite , the dining room , and public areas , among others .

we further reviewed the secret service's after - action reports for each of the four trips to mar - a - lago within our scope .

each report included specific information on what had occurred during the trip and identified what security personnel did in securing each segment of the site .

secret service personnel made themselves available to answer our questions regarding the report .

to address our third objective , we reviewed laws , regulations , and policies to identify the rules and processes governing agency expenditures on operational spaces and per diem for employees who accompany the president when he is traveling domestically .

we reviewed documentation about dod's and the secret service's travel processes , such as policies and agency guidance .

in addition , we reviewed the vouchers from the presidential trips to mar - a - lago that were completed between february 3 , 2017 and march 5 , 2017 .

we also interviewed knowledgeable officials from dod and the secret service .

we reviewed relevant policies and spoke with agency officials regarding policies and processes that are in place for when individuals on travel need to exceed the general services administration per diem rate .

we also reviewed secret service documentation regarding waiver requests submitted when individuals traveling with the president exceeded the general service's administration per diem rate .

in addition to this work , we assessed the costs of presidential travel , which we published in a second report in january 2019 .

to address our fourth objective , we reviewed treasury's website and interviewed treasury officials to identify processes for receiving gifts to the federal government and gifts to reduce the public debt .

to identify payments received by treasury from the president or the trump organization that were made through the treasury's donation processes , we reviewed treasury accounts and interviewed officials to determine if any payments had been received from january 2017 through august 2018 .

we also reviewed the trump organization's written policy , which provides its definition of foreign government patronage , explains how it will calculate profits from foreign government patronage , and specifies when the trump organization intends to make payments to the treasury under this policy .

finally , we interviewed attorneys representing the trump organization .

additionally , we contacted the white house counsel's office in may 2017 and january 2018 to solicit the perspective of the executive office of the president , including the national security council , on efforts to establish secure areas and vet individuals at mar - a - lago and manage costs associated with personnel traveling with the president , and on any payments the trump organization has made to the u.s. treasury of profits realized from foreign government patronage of the trump organization's properties .

as of january 2019 , the white house counsel's office had not responded to our requests for information .

we conducted this performance audit from april 2017 to october 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we subsequently worked with dod and the secret service , from september 2018 to january 2019 to prepare this unclassified version of the original sensitive report for public release .

this public version was also prepared in accordance with these standards .

the secret service has processes to vet individuals differently depending on the person's expected proximity to the president , using a combination of physical screening and background checks , as illustrated in figure 1 .

according to secret service officials , physical screening includes the use of equipment such as wands and magnetometers to secure the property .

background checks assess in part whether an individual has a history of criminal activity .

in some cases , enhanced background checks identify other types of threats .

the secret service develops and executes a security plan to ensure that the outer , middle , and inner layers at the travel location are secure .

officials from the secret service confirmed that agency policies aim to provide comprehensive planning guidance for their agents' activities but are not meant to be all inclusive .

outer layer: the secret service uses physical screening measures to establish a layer of security around the mar - a - lago property .

according to secret service officials , state and local law enforcement and the u.s. coast guard may monitor entry onto the property or perform visual checks of individuals entering the property and surrounding waterways .

depending on where the president is , guests may be required to pass through a physical security checkpoint that employs magnetometers , wands , and visual checks to assess physical threats .

middle layer: officials from the secret service said that they use physical screening measures for individuals and any rooms that the president may access during his visit .

officials told us that if they are notified of the president's planned arrival to a specific room , they will secure that room .

inner layer: in advance of the president's arrival , the secret service has a process requiring vetting of individuals who are expected to be within close proximity to the president for a planned purpose or in certain secure areas .

according to secret service officials , individuals who need access to secure areas but who are not expected to interact directly with the president , such as wait staff and other workers , are to undergo a background check in addition to physical screening .

individuals who are expected to meet the president are to undergo a background check and an enhanced background check .

officials from the secret service said that they are responsible for collecting the findings from these checks and making recommendations to the executive office of the president on whether individuals with derogatory findings should be allowed to access a space .

according to officials from the secret service , staff at mar - a - lago routinely undergo background checks .

in order to conduct the background check , the secret service is to use personally identifiable information for each individual , and those individuals' names may be checked against indexes maintained by the secret service and other federal , state , and local law enforcement organizations .

the secret service's guidance notes that submission of the requested information to run a background check is based on individuals voluntarily providing the needed information .

in order to conduct an enhanced background check , the secret service collaborates with the federal bureau of investigation and other federal agency partners .

according to officials from the secret service , the executive office of the president is responsible for identifying individuals who are expected to meet with the president and providing the secret service with the names and the personally identifiable information needed to complete these checks .

according to secret service guidance , white house staff is expected to submit all names to the secret service at least 72 hours in advance of the president's arrival .

advance agents are also responsible for setting deadlines for completing background checks .

officials from the secret service said that , based on the information received from these checks , the secret service will make a recommendation to the executive office of the president on whether an individual should be granted access to the president .

according to these officials , the executive office of the president ultimately determines whether or not an individual will have access .

however , the secret service is responsible for ensuring that the area is safe and that the individual is physically screened .

dod's white house communications agency and the secret service each have specific responsibilities for establishing secure communications and secure areas for handling classified information when the president travels to domestic locations , such as mar - a - lago .

dod's white house communications agency: this organization is an information technology unit within dod that supports the president and his staff during presidential trips .

this organization's mission is to provide information services to the president , vice president , national security staff , secret service , and others when directed .

according to agency guidance and officials , the white house communications agency is responsible for installing secure communications equipment that enables the exchange of classified information in areas that may be used by these entities .

secret service: according to officials from the secret service , they send an advance team that coordinates with the white house communications agency to set up a conference center for the president where classified information may be exchanged , among other things .

these officials stated that they provide security at the entrance of this conference center and perform security sweeps to ensure that it is safe and secure .

dod and the secret service coordinate to establish and secure several areas that are available for handling classified information when the president travels to locations such as mar - a - lago , as shown in figure 2 .

these areas include a conference center , spaces used by staff of the national security council and executive office of the president , and presidential transportation vehicles .

details associated with these areas and facilities are sensitive and have been omitted from this report .

the secret service and dod are subject to regulations governing reimbursements to employees for official travel .

processes exist to review these travel - related expenses when personnel from these agencies travel .

these processes are the same when personnel accompany the president to mar - a - lago .

two regulations implement statutory requirements and executive branch policies for travel , allowing agencies to pay for or reimburse their employees' per diem expenses ( lodging , meals and incidental expenses ) and other travel - related expenses: the federal travel regulation ( ftr ) , issued by the general services administration applies to the secret service's personnel .

the joint travel regulations ( jtr ) , issued by the department of defense apply to dod personnel .

both regulations allow agencies to pay for employees' daily expenses when they are traveling within the continental united states , based on allowances set by the general services administration for the applicable location and date ( per diem rates ) or the actual expense of travel .

under the federal travel regulation , the maximum amount that a civilian employee may be reimbursed is 300 percent of the applicable per diem rate .

the joint travel regulations allow uniformed service members to be reimbursed up to 300 percent of the per diem rate when they are traveling in the continental united states , but they can be reimbursed more than 300 percent of the per diem rate for lodging when traveling outside the continental united states .

officials from the secret service stated that they apply the same cost oversight processes for all presidential travel .

expenses for lodging and operational space are centrally billed to the agency , and employee meals and incidental expenses are reimbursed to the traveler .

in accordance with policy , the secret service tries to acquire lodging at the general services administration's per diem lodging rate and must submit a waiver request for any room that exceeds this designated rate by any amount .

the secret service field office closest to the travel destination is responsible for arranging for these spaces , negotiating rates , and if necessary submitting a waiver request to officials in the secret service's logistics resource center .

the logistics resource center is to review the waiver request , determine whether a more cost effective method exists to meet the need , and approve or reject the request .

in some cases , the secret service may not be able to acquire rooms at the per diem lodging rate , or agents may need rooms for operational purposes that exceed 300 percent of the per diem rate , which is more than is allowed for lodging under the federal travel regulation .

for example , the secret service may use a room for operational purposes or reserve rooms adjacent to the president to better protect him .

in addition , to meet operational demands , the secret service may require a certain number of agents to stay at the hotel in which the president is staying , so that they are within a certain proximity of the president at all times .

furthermore , officials from the secret service said that members of the secret service canine teams must stay at hotels that allow animals , and rooms at these hotels may exceed the general services administration lodging rate .

the authorities the secret service has relied on to pay for hotel rooms needed to meet its operational requirements do not limit how much the agency can pay .

further , congress passed a law in may of 2017 excepting the secret service from regulatory caps on room rentals , regardless of room purpose .

nevertheless , consistent with the secret service waiver process , personnel are still required to submit waiver requests for operational spaces to justify the need to book rooms during the president's trips to mar - a - lago at prices higher than the general service administration lodging rates .

we confirmed that a blanket waiver request was submitted and approved for all rooms at mar - a - lago that exceeded the general services administration per diem lodging rate during the president's trips to mar - a - lago that are covered by this review .

additionally , we reviewed secret service documentation and confirmed that secret service personnel did not exceed the 300 percent threshold for lodging .

for meals and incidental expenses , the secret service's employees who are on official duty are to submit a claim for reimbursement electronically or by paper and receipts , as applicable , at the conclusion of the trip .

approving officials are to approve ( or deny ) expenses , and the secret service's financial management division authorizes reimbursement for approved travel .

dod personnel use the same processes for travel to mar - a - lago as they do for other presidential trips to oversee costs for lodging , meals , and incidental expenses .

according to officials from dod's defense travel management office , their office establishes travel policy that applies to the four organizations that travel in support of the president's trips .

dod personnel use the defense travel system to submit travel documents , including vouchers and receipts , as applicable .

according to officials , lodging may be booked and reimbursed on an individual basis or centrally billed if a block of rooms is needed over the same period .

meals and incidental expenses are reimbursed to the traveler .

like secret service's personnel , dod personnel must obtain approval from an authorizing official prior to the trip to exceed the general services administration per diem lodging rate , consistent with the federal travel regulation and joint travel regulations .

according to officials from the defense travel management office , dod typically would not reimburse expenses above the approved lodging rate if lodging at the approved rate was available within the region .

however , officials from the defense finance and accounting service indicated that presidential trips may require such a deviation .

these approvals are to be tracked in the defense travel system .

the white house military office , which includes the white house communications agency , also sends personnel with the president when he travels .

white house communications agency officials told us that its lodging and operational space for these personnel are typically coordinated by the white house travel office and that dod personnel pay for the associated costs and seek reimbursement from dod after the trip is complete .

according to officials from the white house communications agency , some personnel are required to remain at , or near , the mar - a - lago property .

if they are not required to stay at or near the property , they will try to obtain lodging at hotels in the area at the general services administration's per diem rate for lodging .

dod officials told us that according to the joint travel regulations , dod is not authorized to pay or reimburse daily expenses above the 300 percent ceiling .

in connection with the president's travel to mar - a - lago between february 3 , 2017 and march 5 , 2017 , dod personnel exceeded the general services administration per diem rate but did not exceed the 300 percent threshold .

according to officials from the defense travel management office , operational space used for official business is governed by the federal acquisition regulation .

white house communications agency officials told us that they have generally used space near the mar - a - lago property but leased property , effective september 2017 , near mar - a - lago to reduce the cost of supporting the president's trips to the property .

treasury has regular processes for receiving payments designated as gifts to the united states and gifts to reduce the public debt .

treasury officials stated that any payments received from the trump organization or the president that are designated as gifts would be handled using these processes .

under federal law , treasury may receive general gifts to the u.s. government and may also receive gifts to reduce the public debt .

treasury has developed processes to accept these types of payments , as shown in figure 3 .

treasury officials said there are three accounts available to receive payments as gifts — a general gift account , a general fund receipts account , and an account for gifts to reduce the public debt .

any of these accounts could receive payments designated as gifts by the president or the trump organization .

treasury officials told us they would deposit such payments into the account for gifts to the u.s. government unless the payment source specified that the funds should be used to reduce the public debt .

treasury received one payment from the trump organization , for $151,470 that was submitted through treasury's processes on february 22 , 2018 .

in may 2017 , the trump organization issued a policy addressing profits generated from foreign government patronage at its businesses .

the trump organization's policy states that it will make a single lump - sum payment annually after the end of its fiscal year , which ends on december 31st .

we did not identify any other payments that treasury received from the trump organization or the president between january 21 , 2017 , and august 1 , 2018 .

in september 2018 , an attorney for the trump organization confirmed that the organization had not made any payments since february 22 , 2018 .

we provided copies of this draft report to dod , dhs , the department of justice , the general services administration , the department of treasury , and the executive office of the president for comment .

we also provided a section to the trump organization for comment .

dhs provided written comments , which are reprinted in their entirety in appendix i. dhs , dod , the department of treasury and the department of justice also provided technical comments , which we incorporated into this report as appropriate .

the executive office of the president and the trump organization provided no comments .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release this report earlier , we will not issue the report until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will also provide copies to the secretary of defense , the director of the secret service , the secretary of homeland security , the attorney general , the director of the federal bureau of investigation , the administrator of the general services administration , and the secretary of the treasury .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact joseph ( joe ) kirschbaum at ( 202 ) 512-9971 or at kirschbaumj@gao.gov or diana maurer at ( 202 ) 512-9627 or at maurerd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

in addition to the contacts named above , gina r. hoffman , assistant director ; joseph p. cruz , assistant director ; tracy barnes , nicholas benne , jennifer kamara , joanne landesman , amie lesser , thomas lombardi , carol petersen , michael silver , janet temko - blinder , christopher turner , kayli westling , and alex winograd made key contributions to this report .

