the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is primarily responsible for managing u.s. humanitarian and development assistance efforts worldwide .

over the last few decades , as the u.s. government has increasingly come to rely on the private sector to perform various functions , usaid has shifted from conducting its own activities to managing acquisition and assistance ( a&a ) instruments , which are awarded to and implemented by mainly nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) .

for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 , usaid's total annual a&a instruments increased from about 6,000 to about 11,000 , while obligations for the instruments doubled from about $5 billion to about $10 billion .

usaid staff are responsible for monitoring the activities of a&a recipients to provide reasonable assurance that the funds provided are used in accordance with applicable regulations , policies , and sound business practices .

effective oversight within the agency is key to ensuring that usaid staff are carrying out their responsibilities .

usaid's a&a staff , including contracting officers ( co ) assisted by a&a specialists , have primary responsibility for managing a&a instruments .

in headquarters , these staff are part of usaid's office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) ; abroad , they are part of usaid's missions .

cognizant technical officers ( cto ) , who work in usaid functional or geographic bureaus or overseas missions , also design and manage assistance activities .

they also share some of the responsibility of managing a&a instruments .

several gao and usaid office of inspector general ( oig ) reports have emphasized the importance of strategic workforce planning to ensure that an agency's workforce is adequately supporting the agency's mission .

for example , a strategic workforce plan should include a definition of the critical skills and competencies needed to meet the agency's strategic program goals , and top management should ensure that the agency has sufficient financial and staff resources to accomplish these goals .

within usaid , the office of human resources ( ohr ) is the primary office that defines and manages the agency's workforce planning process , including managing the human resources databases and directing the workforce planning program .

you asked us to assess usaid's management of its a&a function .

specifically , we examined ( 1 ) usaid's capacity to develop and implement a strategic a&a workforce plan and ( 2 ) the extent to which usaid has implemented a mechanism to evaluate its a&a function .

to address these objectives , we focused on usaid's administration of the a&a process .

we analyzed usaid's staffing , planning , workload , strategy , training , and agency evaluation documents related to the a&a function .

we also reviewed assessments of usaid a&a workforce and evaluation efforts , including prior gao and usaid oig reports .

in addition , we reviewed gao's key principles for effective strategic workforce planning , and standards for internal controls in the federal government .

we conducted audit work at usaid headquarters in washington , d.c. , as well as at missions in cambodia , indonesia , kazakhstan , the kyrgyz republic , mali , peru , and thailand .

we selected these countries to obtain geographic diversity and ensure representation of various a&a processes and organizational structures for the a&a function .

we met with usaid officials at all of these locations , and officials from organizations that implement usaid activities under a&a instruments in some of the locations .

furthermore , to obtain the views of usaid staff with key a&a responsibilities , we administered a survey to all usaid cos in headquarters and overseas , as well as a&a specialists in headquarters .

we received a response rate of 95 percent — 150 respondents out of a total of 158 .

given the high response rate and no indications of nonresponse bias , we considered estimates from this survey to be generalizable to the population surveyed .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2007 to september 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology .

usaid is headquartered in washington , d.c. , and has field locations in approximately 90 countries to provide economic , development , and humanitarian assistance worldwide in support of u.s. foreign policy goals .

its activities include technical assistance , research , policy advice , and infrastructure assistance .

in headquarters , usaid is organized into three functional and five geographic bureaus .

the functional bureaus are aligned with the agency's three strategic goals — ( 1 ) economic growth and trade , ( 2 ) democracy and governance , and ( 3 ) global health .

the bureaus design and manage activities that support their specific strategic goal .

however , each activity is typically implemented in multiple countries around the world .

the five geographic bureaus are responsible for oversight of overseas missions that design and manage activities that support usaid's strategic goals .

overseas , usaid designs and manages its foreign assistance activities and a&a instruments at several types of missions .

these include bilateral missions that design and manage assistance activities and a&a instruments in the countries in which they are located , such as the mission in indonesia ; regional missions that design and manage assistance activities and a&a instruments in the countries in which they are located and also for other countries in the region , such as the mission in kazakhstan ; and regional missions that provide administrative support , such as acquisition and assistance , legal and financial , to missions in their region , such as the mission in thailand .

usaid's office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) has overall responsibility for the administration of a&a instruments in headquarters .

its a&a staff provide professional advisory and technical support to usaid's functional and geographic bureaus for developing and managing a&a instruments .

oaa also provides periodic guidance to a&a staff at overseas missions .

oaa is located within usaid's management bureau , and its director reports to the deputy assistant administrator of the management bureau .

usaid a&a staff at overseas missions provide advice and support to mission staff who design and manage assistance activities ; they also have overall responsibility for the administration of a&a instruments at overseas missions .

a&a offices are typically headed by a contracting officer ( co ) who reports to the mission director or deputy mission director .

at most bilateral missions , cos are co - located with a&a specialists and ctos .

however , under usaid's regional mission structure , cos often provide a&a support to more than one mission and are not necessarily co - located with either the ctos or all of the a&a specialists who assist them .

some missions with no on - site co may instead have on - site a&a specialists who provide a&a support to ctos .

appendix ii lists missions with authorized on - site cos as of july 2008 , as reported by oaa .

usaid's total obligations for a&a instruments doubled from about $5 billion to about $10 billion from fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2007 .

while total a&a obligations and number of a&a instruments increased only slightly at headquarters over this time period , a&a obligations overseas increased by nearly 600 percent , from about $1 billion in fiscal year 2002 to about $6 billion in fiscal year 2007 .

in fiscal year 2007 , a&a obligations managed by overseas missions made up the majority — nearly 60 percent — of total a&a obligations .

figure 1 illustrates the a&a obligations managed by oaa headquarters and overseas missions for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 .

usaid's total number of a&a instruments from fiscal years 2002 through 2007 also increased substantially , from about 6,000 to about 11,000 .

in fiscal year 2007 , around 71 percent of the total number of a&a instruments was managed by overseas missions .

usaid lacks the capacity to develop and implement a strategic a&a workforce plan because it lacks two key elements: ( 1 ) sufficiently reliable and up - to - date overseas a&a staff level data and ( 2 ) comprehensive information on the competencies of its overseas a&a specialists , who play a critical role in assisting cos and ctos in overseas missions .

during our fieldwork , we found that the numbers of a&a staff with the necessary competencies did not match a&a workload .

although various usaid has launched some ad hoc attempts to address the agency's a&a workforce issues , these efforts lack critical elements of a strategic a&a workforce plan , particularly comprehensive information on its a&a specialists overseas .

although usaid's office of human resources ( ohr ) systematically collects data on a&a specialists' staff levels , these data are not sufficiently reliable .

ohr officials acknowledged they had concerns about the reliability and accuracy of the overseas a&a staff level data , particularly with regard to the number of overseas a&a specialists .

these officials stated that they receive staffing data from missions but do not know whether mission staff validate the data .

in addition , they told us that mission staff who prepare these data may not receive adequate guidance for classification of different overseas staff positions , and as a result , misclassification and inaccurate reporting of a&a staff levels may occur .

furthermore , ohr officials do not validate or confirm the data they collect from missions , according to these officials .

the office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) does not systematically track the number of overseas a&a specialists , and its data on overseas a&a staff levels are out of date .

according to oaa officials , the office's most recent data on the agency's entire a&a workforce are the result of a fiscal year 2005 survey of all overseas missions to analyze workload and staffing within oaa .

while oaa's data are not current , the office of human resources ( ohr ) officials told us that oaa's data may still be more accurate than the data collected by ohr in fiscal year 2005 .

our analysis of oaa's and ohr's separately collected data on overseas a&a staff levels for the end of fiscal year 2005 ( the most current data made available to us by oaa ) revealed substantial discrepancies .

for example , comparing the two sets of data showed that oaa's reported total overseas a&a staff levels for that year were more than 78 percent higher than those reported by ohr — oaa reported 264 overseas a&a staff , and ohr reported 148 .

in addition , we found that , at certain missions , ohr's data showed no a&a specialists , whereas oaa's data indicated several a&a specialists .

although ready access to the office of human resources' databases would allow other usaid offices to identify and resolve discrepancies in their staffing data , the offices lack such access .

to date , according to ohr officials , oaa has not specifically requested ohr staffing data in order to compare them to its own .

although a&a obligations have increased significantly at overseas missions , usaid has not collected comprehensive information on the competencies , including knowledge , skills , abilities , and experience levels , of its overseas a&a staff .

according to the principles of effective workforce planning , an agency should determine the critical skills and competencies needed to achieve current and future programmatic results .

in may 2008 , the office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) and the office of human resources ( ohr ) jointly conducted competency assessments for a&a staff in headquarters and cos in overseas missions as part of an effort to implement the president's management agenda .

however , these assessments did not include a&a specialists at overseas locations .

for staff included in this effort , oaa and ohr conducted a capability assessment that identified key a&a staff competencies , such as decision making and written communication skills ; assessed competency levels ; identified competency gaps ; and established strategies to reduce staff vacancies and skill gaps through recruitment , retention , and training .

according to ohr officials , usaid expects to implement a similar assessment for a&a specialists overseas but will likely not begin implementation until fiscal year 2011 at the earliest .

without sufficiently reliable data on its entire a&a workforce — including a&a specialists overseas — usaid cannot collect comprehensive competency information , identify gaps in the numbers , skills , and competencies of its a&a workforce , and develop strategies to address them .

at the usaid missions we visited , we found that the numbers and competencies of a&a staff did not match a&a workload .

while at some missions the numbers of a&a staff with the necessary competencies were considerably less than adequate , at other missions they were more than adequate , according to mission officials .

officials at five missions we visited — thailand , cambodia , kazakhstan , the kyrgyz republic , and mali — told us that their a&a staff at times could not provide adequate and timely support , such as providing guidance to ctos and approving a&a documents , primarily because the numbers of a&a staff with the necessary competencies to manage their workloads were insufficient .

we found several such examples , including the following: a co at the regional mission in thailand — where three cos manage a&a activities in 12 countries — stated that she sometimes could not address some missions' needs in a timely manner because of competing workload demands .

staff at one of the missions for which the regional mission provides a&a support — cambodia — told us that while their a&a workload has increased , they have at times not received adequate a&a support .

these staff attributed this lack of support to a decline in a&a specialist staff levels from three in 2007 to one at the time of our visit , as well as the inexperience of the mission's one remaining on - site a&a specialist .

this a&a specialist only works on a&a activities part - time because she has other responsibilities .

the mission director told us that as a result , she has had to perform tasks that are normally considered among a&a staff's responsibilities , such as revising a&a documents .

the mission director and a&a staff in kazakhstan — a regional mission responsible for a&a activities at missions in kazakhstan and four other central asian countries that do not have on - site a&a specialists — told us that they could not adequately support a&a activities at the four missions that do not have on - site a&a specialists .

staff at one such mission , in the kyrgyz republic , noted that when they needed a&a staff on site to provide more guidance to their less experienced ctos , the a&a staff were not available .

officials noted that without such guidance from a&a staff , ctos may be more likely to incorrectly manage a&a instruments .

a&a staff in kazakhstan told us their ability to visit and support a&a activities at such missions was hindered by a heavy workload and competing demands from the other missions in the region .

officials at the mission in mali , which had two on - site a&a specialists and received a&a support from cos at the regional mission in ghana , told us that these remotely located cos were sometimes not available to assist them in meeting their activities' goals .

for example , they said they had delayed time - sensitive seasonal agricultural projects because the co was not available when needed to approve contracts .

in contrast , officials at the other two missions we visited — peru and indonesia — told us they had more than adequate numbers of a&a staff with the necessary competencies to manage their workload .

some staff even indicated that these missions may not need all of their assigned cos to adequately manage their a&a work .

for example , one co who will soon be leaving the mission in indonesia may not need to be replaced , according to some a&a mission staff .

a co at the mission in peru told us that because the mission had so many experienced or competent a&a staff , the a&a workload was more easily managed , and staff even had sufficient time to volunteer the mission as a location for usaid to pilot a new system through which usaid a&a instruments will be awarded .

our survey of a&a staff overseas generally supported these findings from our fieldwork .

for example , about 70 percent of a&a respondents overseas reported that it was somewhat or very difficult to alter staffing patterns to meet the demands of changing workloads .

most notably , one respondent reported a disparity between the workload , numbers and competencies of a&a staff levels at the missions to which she was previously and currently assigned .

while the respondent found the workload to be less manageable at her prior mission with inexperienced a&a staff , she found the workload at her current mission more easily manageable because it had more experienced a&a staff .

in recent years , usaid has launched some ad hoc attempts to address the agency's a&a workforce issues .

however , as the following indicates , these efforts lack critical elements of a strategic a&a workforce plan , particularly comprehensive information on its a&a specialists overseas: proposal to increase oaa staff levels .

in may 2008 , oaa officials proposed to the management bureau an increase in staff from 133 to 218 in oaa headquarters .

according to management bureau officials , oaa has been approved for 154 positions for fiscal year 2008 .

this proposal only addresses a&a staff levels in headquarters , however , and does not consider a&a staff levels overseas .

development leadership initiative .

this agencywide , multiyear effort is intended to recruit u.s. staff to be placed overseas .

under this initiative , usaid plans to hire 120 staff , including 15 cos , in fiscal year 2008 .

however , this initiative only seeks to increase the levels of overseas cos , not the levels of a&a specialists .

a&a workforce capability assessment .

as mentioned earlier , this was a may 2008 effort to identify and assess the competencies of all cos , as well as a&a specialists in headquarters .

competency assessments of a&a specialists overseas are not expected to begin until fiscal year 2011 at the earliest .

workforce planning model .

this agencywide management tool projects the number , type , and location of staff needed to accomplish the agency's mission , based on expectations for future program funds as well as the size and location of overseas missions .

the model does not , however , incorporate data on either the current a&a staffing levels or the competencies of existing a&a staff .

taken together , these efforts do not constitute a strategic a&a workforce plan that takes into account the entire a&a workforce .

usaid has yet to take an integrated approach to developing and implementing such a workforce plan .

usaid has not implemented an evaluation mechanism to provide oversight of its a&a function .

oaa's evaluation division is responsible for providing this oversight to ensure that a&a operations follow usaid policies , primarily by assessing the agency's a&a operations worldwide .

in 2006 , usaid's oig found that the division had not met its previously set target of conducting on - site evaluations of a&a operations at all missions within a 3-year period , due to resource constraints within the division .

the division has since developed a new evaluation mechanism , the scorecard evaluation , that relies on cos' annual self - assessments of a&a operations and is followed by on - site reviews at selected missions , conducted by division staff .

however , the division has yet to implement this evaluation mechanism .

among other responsibilities , oaa's evaluation division is to conduct evaluations of worldwide a&a operations to ensure usaid's compliance with an executive order and certify the effectiveness of usaid's a&a function .

gao's internal control standards state that evaluations — whether in the form of self - assessments or other means — are necessary to ensure an agency's operational effectiveness and compliance with applicable policies .

furthermore , the president's fiscal year 1995 executive order on federal procurement reform included a requirement that every u.s. agency evaluates its a&a function against the agency's approved criteria .

to comply with the order , oaa developed an evaluation program to assess usaid's a&a function .

this evaluation program was also designed to enable usaid's management bureau to annually certify the adequacy and effectiveness of management controls for the a&a function , as required by usaid directives .

prior to fiscal year 2007 , the evaluation program required evaluation division staff to make on - site visits to assess a&a operations at oaa offices in headquarters and missions .

evaluations were designed to be performed at each mission by teams of two evaluation division staff over a period of about 2 or 3 weeks .

after each team had completed its fieldwork , the oaa director reported to the mission director on deficiencies that the team had identified in the mission's a&a operations and provided recommendations to address those deficiencies .

in fiscal year 2006 , the oig found that oaa's evaluation division had not met its target of conducting evaluations of all a&a operations to ensure that the agency had responded to the executive order on federal procurement reform .

although the division had set a goal of conducting evaluations at all of the approximately 85 missions every 3 years , the oig found that for fiscal years 2003 through 2005 , the division had evaluated a&a operations at only 9 missions — about 11 percent of the number of missions at the time .

the oig report noted that a staffing shortage , as well as a significant increase in usaid's a&a operations in iraq and afghanistan , had adversely impacted the division's ability to meet its target during that time frame .

oaa's evaluation division was unable to certify to the management bureau the overall adequacy and effectiveness of management controls at the missions on the basis of such a small number of completed evaluations .

the division also could not provide reasonable assurance that usaid was effectively implementing the executive order .

as a result , the oig recommended in 2006 that the director of oaa develop a plan for verifying and ensuring that the agency was effectively implementing the executive order .

in fiscal year 2007 , in view of the resource constraints that had hampered its ability to meet its prior evaluation targets , oaa's evaluation division developed a web - based self - reporting mechanism for evaluating the a&a function , referred to as the scorecard evaluation .

according to evaluation division officials , the division previously lacked a mechanism to review all locations every year for systemic problems in a&a operations .

with the scorecard evaluation , all usaid cos who manage a&a offices are to assess their own operations and thereby assist oaa in identifying areas of vulnerability in headquarters and missions each year .

the scorecard methodology follows gao's standards of internal control to achieve effectiveness and efficiency of acquisition operations ; ensure fiscal integrity of the agency's acquisition system ; and ensure that applicable acquisition laws , regulations , guidance , and principles are being followed .

areas identified in the scorecard are to include cos' reporting of staffing patterns , assessment of the a&a operations' management systems , and the extent to which a&a award solicitations , negotiations , and administration comply with usaid guidelines .

the evaluation division is expected to follow up on the scorecard evaluations with on - site reviews of a risk - based selection of offices and missions , followed by evaluation reports that make recommendations for mitigating risks associated with a&a operations at these locations .

after reviewing the cos' submitted scorecards — certified by the appropriate mission director or other management official — the evaluation division is to determine the risk levels associated with all a&a activities in the cos' self - reported scorecard evaluation responses .

next , the division expects to select certain missions for on - site visits , using a risk - based approach based on the scorecard evaluation results and informal , internally generated criteria , such as cos' reliance upon less - experienced cos , number of years lapsed since the last evaluation at the location , high funding levels , and country - specific issues that might raise concerns in the division about a&a operations .

during the on - site visits , which are expected to last approximately 1 week , the evaluation division staff will conduct a hands - on review of mission documents — including the co's work products and all supporting documents in the a&a file — hold discussions with mission staff to verify the submitted scorecard responses , and follow up on any issues mentioned in the scorecards .

finally , on the basis of its findings from the scorecards and the on - site reviews , oaa is expected to develop an evaluation report with recommendations on the missions' a&a operations that missions are required to address prior to the following year .

as of august 2008 , the evaluation division had completed pilot scorecard evaluations — including on - site visits — at four locations with usaid a&a operations: the east africa regional mission and missions in kenya , peru , and sudan .

in its evaluation reports for these pilot locations , the evaluation team assigned risk levels based on the cos' self - assessments of a&a areas .

for example , at various locations , the evaluation team identified the following high - risk issues or weaknesses in a&a operations: a mission lacked resources to monitor contractor performance , and the co could not ensure that contractor performance reports were prepared , as required by usaid policy ; a regional structure was providing insufficient mentoring and oversight of junior contract officers ; and a regional mission had experienced a sixfold workload increase in the past 3 years , despite resource constraints .

although the evaluation division has developed the new scorecard evaluation , it has yet to implement it .

approximately 40 percent of the a&a staff who responded to our survey reported that there is insufficient oversight to ensure the quality of the a&a process .

according to evaluation division staff , in fiscal year 2007 the division set a goal of ensuring a scorecard review of all a&a operations in headquarters offices and all of the approximately 80 missions within a 2-year period , and at least one on - site visit of a mission in each of the five regions of the world .

however , agency officials informed us that the evaluation division currently lacks the staff level and systems needed to implement the scorecard evaluation to meet its goal .

according to evaluation division officials , the number of procurement analysts in the division has declined from 12 in fiscal year 1992 to 4 in fiscal year 2008 .

however , according to these officials , the division needs at least 8 procurement analysts to make the appropriate number of on - site evaluation visits to missions per year .

as of august 2008 , the evaluation division was authorized to hire 3 additional procurement analysts .

however , the division has not yet finalized plans for full implementation of the scorecard evaluations based on this increase in staff .

in addition , according to evaluation division staff , usaid headquarters and missions lack an electronic a&a data system that would facilitate the evaluation process .

currently , the evaluation division reviews the available a&a documents provided by cos worldwide ; while some a&a units utilize an electronic filing system , a&a operations in many missions continue to maintain hard - copy a&a documents .

evaluation division staff told us they would ideally be able to access a digital repository of a&a documents remotely while reviewing cos' completed scorecard evaluations .

such access would allow the evaluation division staff to review a&a documents in headquarters and reduce their need to conduct on - site visits , thereby saving resources and time .

as of july 2008 , usaid was analyzing information technology options for the oaa evaluation division to achieve its needs , including the implementation of the global acquisition and assistance system ( glaas ) , a new globally accessible system intended to standardize and automate usaid's management of a&a instruments .

however , glaas has not yet been implemented at all missions , and the evaluation division continues to lack the technology to access all a&a files electronically in order to conduct scorecard reviews remotely .

as usaid increasingly relies on nongovernmental organizations to implement its activities , the agency's responsibility to effectively manage the implemented activities gains in importance .

critical to its success in this area is its management of the a&a function .

as the amount of its a&a obligations and the number of a&a instruments continue to increase , especially at overseas missions , usaid should work to ensure that the appropriate number of staff with the requisite competencies and skills are available to manage a&a operations .

despite a past usaid oig recommendation calling for usaid to develop an a&a workforce plan , the agency has yet to analyze the relation of staffing patterns to existing workload with the goal of better matching its staff to its workload .

specifically , the agency currently lacks sufficiently reliable and up - to - date data on its overseas a&a staff levels and comprehensive information on the competencies of the a&a staff .

with these data , which are key elements of federal workforce planning models , usaid could better identify its critical staffing needs and adjust its staffing patterns to meet those needs .

a critical component of usaid's oversight of its a&a operations is the successful implementation of its new evaluation mechanism .

the mechanism is designed to ensure that a&a operations follow usaid policies , primarily by assessing a&a operations that manage about $10 billion worldwide .

although the agency is in the process of hiring additional staff for the division , much time has elapsed since usaid's oig noted in 2006 that the division's resource constraints hampered its ability to conduct evaluations .

until usaid has the capacity to implement the evaluation mechanism , the agency lacks the ability to ensure that potential weaknesses in the a&a process are quickly identified and corrected .

to improve the agency's management and oversight of its a&a function , we are recommending that the administrator of usaid develop and implement a strategic a&a workforce plan that matches resources to priority needs , such as the evaluation of the a&a function .

specifically , we recommend that the strategic a&a workforce plan includes a process to collect , analyze , and maintain ( 1 ) sufficiently reliable and up - to - date data on the agency's a&a staff levels and ( 2 ) comprehensive information on the competencies of the a&a staff .

we requested and received comments on a draft of this report from usaid .

these comments are reprinted in appendix iii , along with our responses to specific points .

usaid did not specifically comment on our recommendations but acknowledged that it needs to rebuild core a&a management capacity in key areas such as workforce planning and evaluation in order to sustain effective management of a&a functions .

usaid noted several agencywide initiatives such as the development of a new human capital strategic plan and workforce plan to address the agency's staffing requirements from 2009 to 2013 , as well as a competency management system and a learning management system to improve staff competency information .

in addition , usaid stated that enhancements must be made to the evaluation function that could strengthen the oversight of its a&a function .

we acknowledge usaid's agencywide efforts to enhance workforce planning , but maintain that the agency currently lacks sufficiently reliable staff - level data and comprehensive competency information on its overseas a&a specialists , which are key elements of a strategic workforce plan .

usaid also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development .

we will also make copies available to others on request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

to examine the united states agency for international development's ( usaid ) capacity to develop and implement a strategic acquisition and assistance ( a&a ) workforce plan , we used gao's guidance on human capital management and gao's framework for assessing the acquisition function at federal agencies .

we also reviewed prior assessments of usaid's workforce planning efforts by gao and usaid's office of inspector general ( oig ) .

to determine a&a staff levels , we analyzed and compared staffing data that usaid's office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) and the office of human resources ( ohr ) made available to us .

we also interviewed ohr officials to determine the reliability of their data .

we obtained and analyzed data on the number of a&a instruments and the obligated amounts of a&a instruments for fiscal years 2002 through 2007 .

we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing information about the data and the system that produced them and by interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data .

we found usaid's data sufficiently reliable for representing the a&a obligations and instruments .

to report on usaid's efforts in a&a workforce planning , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed agency officials , as well as evaluated these efforts according to key principles for strategic workforce planning identified in our prior work .

to examine the extent to which usaid has implemented a mechanism to evaluate its a&a function , we analyzed usaid documents and interviewed relevant usaid agency officials .

documents we examined include the president's 1995 executive order on federal procurement reform , applicable agency policies and directives , a past oig report that audited usaid's a&a evaluation program , and documents related to the global acquisition and assistance system ( glaas ) .

we also analyzed past a&a evaluation reports , documents pertaining to the scorecard evaluation methodology , as well as the scorecard evaluations and on - site evaluation reports conducted for the piloted locations .

in addition , we met with usaid officials in washington , d.c. , to discuss the a&a evaluation mechanism .

to assess the a&a function overseas , we conducted fieldwork in the following seven countries: cambodia , indonesia , kazakhstan , the kyrgyz republic , mali , peru , and thailand .

we selected these countries to obtain geographic diversity and ensure representation of various a&a processes and organizational structures for the a&a function .

in all of these countries , we met with usaid officials .

in some of these countries , we also met with representatives of nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) that implement a&a activities for usaid under a&a instruments .

although the findings from our fieldwork in each country are not generalizable to the population of usaid a&a activities , we determined that the selection of the countries and activities reviewed was appropriate for our design and objectives .

to obtain views from usaid staff with key a&a responsibilities , we also conducted a survey of usaid's a&a staff between october 2007 and june 2008 .

the survey was sent to all usaid contracting officers ( co ) in headquarters and missions , as well as all a&a specialists in headquarters .

the survey contained questions related to work experience , staffing , workload , and the administration of acquisition and assistance instruments .

we pretested the survey with three cos. our survey of a&a staff received a 95 percent response rate — 150 responded out of 158 surveyed .

we compared the responding a&a staff with the nonresponding a&a staff and found no significant differences between the two groups on several variables .

based on this analysis and the 95 percent response rate , we assumed that the nonrespondents were missing at random and generated statistical estimates of the population of a&a staff from the 95 percent of respondents .

given the high response rate and no indications of nonresponse bias , we considered estimates from this survey to be generalizable to the population surveyed .

because we treated our respondents as a random sample of a&a staff , our results are estimates of the population and thus are subject to sampling errors that are associated with samples of this size and type .

our confidence in the precision of the results from this sample is expressed in 95 percent confidence intervals , which are expected to include the actual results in 95 percent of the samples of this type .

all percentage estimates in this report have a margin of error of no more than plus or minus 3 percent .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2007 through september 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

according to usaid's office of acquisition and assistance ( oaa ) , the following bilateral and regional missions were authorized to have at least one on - site contracting officer ( co ) present as of july 2008 .

these missions do not include locations with on - site acquisition and assistance specialists who work with a remotely located co. countries are grouped by regions , as determined by oaa .

the following are gao's comments on the u.s. agency for international development's letter dated september 16 , 2008 .

1 .

usaid noted that our final reporting objectives differed from the original objectives we provided to the agency when we commenced our review in early 2007 .

in its comments , the agency misinterpreted our reporting only on certain aspects of the a&a function as an indication that other aspects of the a&a function are largely in sound condition .

during the course of gao engagements , the final reporting objectives and the scope of the review are sometimes refined based upon information obtained during the planning and design phase .

for example , we did not report on the proper organizational alignment of usaid's a&a function because usaid officials were unable to adequately demonstrate significant impediments as a result of its placement within usaid's management bureau .

2 .

usaid stated that the agency does not possess the authority to simply transfer locally engaged staff to other missions to meet the demands of missions with greater workloads .

it also noted that overseas programs and funding fluctuate and mission management can be hesitant to make abrupt hiring or staff reduction decisions in the short term .

we recognize that mission management determines how to allocate resources within missions and some of the staffing decisions pertaining to overseas a&a specialists are made outside of oaa .

our report emphasized that key elements of an agency's strategic workforce plan include determining the critical skills and competencies of its staff , addressing gaps in staff numbers and deployment , and aligning human capital approaches regardless of location .

a past oig report also recommended the development of an a&a workforce plan that includes a mechanism for collecting and analyzing a&a data to allow managers to compare current staffing patterns to developing trends , match staff to workloads , and adjust quickly when unbalanced workloads develop .

we maintain that without accurately identifying the number of overseas a&a staff , the agency can neither determine the appropriate levels of staff with requisite competencies to manage missions' a&a workloads , nor explore ways of making necessary adjustments to gaps in mission a&a staff levels and competencies as well as imbalances in workloads .

3 .

usaid commented that when requested by missions , oaa provides routine assistance such as temporary duty staff for end - of - fiscal - year surges .

in our report , we cite several instances of usaid not addressing staffing imbalances at its overseas missions .

we maintain that oaa's approach of providing temporary assistance is not a substitute for strategic workforce planning that includes key elements such as reliable and up - to - date data on the number and competencies of its overseas a&a workforce .

without this information , usaid cannot systematically address its critical staffing needs and adjust its staffing patterns to meet those needs .

4 .

usaid commented that it had already begun to enhance the evaluation function by establishing the contract review board , which reviews all procurements of $10 million or more at the solicitation , competitive range , and award stages .

although we agree that this mechanism is an important oversight mechanism during the early phases of the a&a process , our review focused on the oversight of the a&a function at the administration stage , which commences after the awarding of the a&a instrument and entails usaid's monitoring of contractor performance for the a&a instruments .

in addition to the contact named above , zina merritt ( assistant director ) , james ashley , debbie chung , mark dowling , joel grossman , tracy guerrero , clarette kim , john krump , victoria lin , james strus , and william woods made key contributions to this report .

