in the span of 14 days in september 2017 , two category 5 hurricanes — irma and maria — struck the territory of the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) , causing billions of dollars in damage to its infrastructure , housing , and economy .

these disasters exacerbated an already difficult financial situation in the usvi , which was operating under severe fiscal constraints prior to the storms .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) — a component of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) — is the lead federal agency responsible for disaster preparedness , response , and recovery , which includes assisting the usvi as it recovers from these natural disasters .

among other responsibilities , fema administers the public assistance program in the usvi through a partnership with the territorial government and provides grant funding for a wide range of eligible response and recovery activities .

these activities include debris removal efforts , life - saving emergency protective measures , and the repair , replacement , or restoration of disaster - damaged publicly - owned facilities , electrical utilities , roads and bridges , and more .

further , in july 2018 , fema approved the usvi government's request to use the public assistance alternative procedures program in the territory that offers financial incentives for the timely and cost - effective completion of permanent work .

you asked us to review the federal government's response and recovery efforts related to the 2017 hurricanes .

as part of that effort , we have several reviews ongoing of fema's and the usvi government's disaster recovery planning , oversight , and execution efforts in the usvi .

in this report , we discuss: 1. the status of fema public assistance program funding provided to the usvi in response to the 2017 hurricanes as of october 1 , 2018 — more than 1 year after hurricanes irma and maria impacted the territory ; and 2. the usvi's transition to implementing fema's public assistance alternative procedures program in the territory .

another review will examine disaster recovery efforts in the usvi and we plan to issue that report later this year .

in addition , we are conducting a broader body of work covering various disaster response and recovery issues , including disaster recovery in impacted states in the contiguous united states and puerto rico , and will be reporting on these issues over the next year .

for this report , we reviewed relevant documentation on fema's public assistance program — including the april 2018 public assistance program and policy guide and the september 2018 public assistance alternative procedures permanent work guide for the usvi .

we also obtained and analyzed data from fema's emergency management mission integrated environment and integrated financial management information system on public assistance program obligations and the usvi's expenditures as of october 1 , 2018 .

an obligation is a definite commitment that creates a legal liability of the government for the payment of goods and services ordered or received .

for the purposes of this report , obligations represent the amount of grant funding fema provided through the public assistance program for specific projects in the usvi .

an expenditure is an amount paid by federal agencies , by cash or cash equivalent , during the fiscal year to liquidate government obligations .

for the purposes of this report , an expenditure represents the actual spending by the usvi government of money obligated by the federal government .

we interviewed fema officials , including those stationed in the usvi , as well as officials from the usvi's governor's office , the usvi's territorial emergency management agency , the usvi's department of finance , and contractor personnel regarding the implementation of the public assistance program in the territory .

further , in may and october of 2018 , we conducted site visits to the usvi islands of st. croix , st. thomas , and st. john to observe hurricane - damaged areas and eligible public assistance projects , as well as disaster assistance funding from other federal departments .

we assessed the reliability of the emergency management mission integrated environment and the integrated financial management information system data by reviewing existing information about these systems , interviewing data users and managers responsible for these data , and cross - checking data across sources to ensure consistency .

based on these steps we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

we conducted this performance audit from october 2018 through february 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in september 2017 , two category 5 hurricanes struck the usvi , causing catastrophic damage across the entire territory and neighboring caribbean islands .

on september 6 , 2017 , hurricane irma struck st. thomas and st. john and on september 19 , 2017 , hurricane maria struck st. croix ( see fig .

1 ) .

the storms severely damaged the territory's critical infrastructure , devastating more than 90 percent of aboveground power lines and shutting down electricity and telecommunications for months .

further , 52 percent of the territory's housing units were damaged , ports and airports were closed for weeks , and hundreds of thousands of tons of debris were generated , often blocking roads and making transportation hazardous .

in addition , according to a september 2018 report from the usvi hurricane recovery and resilience task force , the territory's economic activity — especially tourism — was severely reduced in the months following the storms , leading to job losses and a total estimated economic impact of $1.54 billion .

in response to the request of the governor of the usvi , the president declared a major disaster the day after each hurricane struck the territory .

major disaster declarations can trigger a variety of federal response and recovery programs for government and nongovernmental entities and households and individuals , including assistance through the public assistance program .

under the national response framework and national disaster recovery framework , dhs is the federal department with primary responsibility for coordinating disaster response and recovery , and within dhs , fema has lead responsibility .

the administrator of fema serves as the principal adviser to the president and the secretary of homeland security regarding emergency management .

fema's public assistance program provides funding to state , territorial , local , and tribal governments as well as certain types of private nonprofit organizations to assist with responding to and recovering from major disasters or emergencies .

as shown in figure 2 , public assistance program funds are categorized broadly as “emergency work” or “permanent work.” within these broad categories are separate subcategories .

in addition to the emergency work and permanent work categories , the program includes category z , which represents indirect costs , administrative expenses , and other expenses a recipient or subrecipient incurs in administering and managing the public assistance program that are not directly chargeable to a specific project .

fema's public assistance program also provides funding for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures to reduce or eliminate the long - term risk to people and property from future natural and man - made disasters and their effects .

specifically , fema provides funding for hazard mitigation measures in conjunction with the repair of disaster - damaged facilities to enhance their resilience during future disasters .

for example , a community that had a fire station damaged by a disaster could use public assistance funding to repair the facility and incorporate additional measures such as installing hurricane shutters over the windows to mitigate the potential for future damage .

once the president has declared a disaster , fema , the state or territorial government ( the recipient ) , and local or territorial entities ( the subrecipient ) work together to develop damage assessments and formulate project worksheets for eligible projects .

project worksheets detail the scope of work and estimated cost for repairing or replacing disaster - damaged infrastructure as well as any hazard mitigation measures that may help to increase the resilience of this infrastructure during future disasters .

after a project has completed fema's review process and is approved , fema obligates funding for the project by placing money into an account where the recipient has the authority to draw down — or withdraw — funding to pay the subrecipient for eligible work upon completion ( see fig .

3 ) .

in addition , a state or territorial governor may designate a governor's authorized representative ( gar ) to oversee all aspects of disaster assistance , including public assistance funding .

specifically , the gar is responsible for ensuring compliance with program requirements by providing oversight into how goods and services are procured for projects , such as construction materials or modular school units .

the gar also confirms that subrecipients submit complete documentation demonstrating that all work completed is in accordance with a project's approved scope of work and public assistance program requirements .

the gar then approves the paperwork and the recipient can draw down funding from the account holding the obligations to reimburse subrecipients for completed work .

when a project has been completed , fema conducts a close - out process to certify that all work has been completed and reconciles the actual cost incurred .

if the actual cost of the completed work is greater than the amount of money fema obligated for the project , fema will reimburse the subrecipient for these additional costs .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 authorized the use of alternative procedures in administering the public assistance program , thereby providing new flexibilities to fema , states , territories , and local governments for debris removal , infrastructure repair , and rebuilding projects using funds from this program .

unlike in the standard public assistance program where fema will fund the actual cost of a project , the public assistance alternative procedures allow awards for permanent work projects to be made on the basis of fixed - cost estimates to provide financial incentives for the timely and cost - effective completion of work .

under these procedures , if the actual cost of the project exceeds the fixed - cost estimate agreed upon by fema and the recipient , the recipient or subrecipient is responsible for the additional costs at the time of the close - out process .

however , if the actual cost of completing eligible work for a project is below the estimate , the recipient may use the remaining funds for additional cost - effective hazard mitigation measures to increase the resilience of public infrastructure .

in addition , these funds may also be used for activities that improve the recipient's or subrecipient's future public assistance operations or planning .

as of october 1 , 2018 , fema had obligated more than $1.4 billion through the standard public assistance program for 475 projects across the usvi .

as shown in figure 4 , fema obligated funding for both emergency work and permanent work projects .

as of october 1 , 2018 , of the more than $1.4 billion fema obligated , the usvi had expended approximately $586.9 million — about 41 percent of total public assistance program obligations to the usvi — to reimburse subrecipients for completed work .

of this $586.9 million , the usvi had expended about $532.8 million ( 91 percent ) for emergency work projects in categories a and b and $49.1 million ( 8 percent ) for permanent work projects in categories c through g. the majority of fema's obligations and the funding the usvi expended as of october 1 , 2018 , are for emergency work because these projects began soon after the disasters struck and focused on debris removal and providing assistance to address immediate threats to life and property .

in contrast , permanent work projects take time to identify , develop , and ultimately complete as they represent the longer - term repair and restoration of public infrastructure .

emergency work .

of the more than $1.4 billion fema had obligated as of october 1 , 2018 , about $873.8 million ( 60 percent ) was obligated for 322 emergency work projects in public assistance categories a and b .

category a: debris removal .

fema obligated about $94.0 million for 71 projects focused on debris removal activities across the territory .

for example , fema obligated $45.0 million to the usvi department of public works for territorywide debris removal efforts and $39.1 million to the usvi water and power authority for these activities in st. croix ( see fig .

5 ) .

of the $94.0 million fema obligated for debris removal , the usvi had expended about $54.6 million ( 58 percent ) as of october 1 , 2018 .

category b: emergency protective measures .

fema obligated about $780 million for 251 projects focused on emergency measures .

for example , fema obligated about $187 million for the sheltering and temporary essential power program , which is intended to provide essential repairs or restore power to private residences to allow affected individuals to return or remain in their homes , thereby reducing the demand for other shelter options .

in addition , fema obligated approximately $101 million for the purchase and installation of modular units to be used as temporary classrooms and other facilities while permanent school buildings are repaired or replaced ( see fig .

6 ) .

of the $780 million fema obligated for emergency protective measures , the usvi had expended about $478 million ( 61 percent ) as of october 1 , 2018 .

permanent work .

of the more than $1.4 billion in public assistance funding fema had obligated as of october 1 , 2018 , about $516.3 million ( 36 percent ) was obligated for 153 permanent work projects across categories c through g. these permanent work projects include about $349.4 million for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures aimed at reducing the future risk of disaster - damaged facilities in conjunction with their repair .

further , of the $516.3 million fema obligated for permanent work in the usvi , approximately $500.4 million — or 97 percent of all permanent work obligations — was obligated to the usvi water and power authority for the permanent repair of electrical distribution systems and other utilities across the territory .

category c: roads and bridges .

fema obligated about $5.2 million for 35 projects focused on repairing roads and bridges in the territory , 18 of which included hazard mitigation measures totaling about $1.5 million .

for example , fema obligated about $410,000 for one project to repair a road on st. thomas damaged by floodwaters .

this project included approximately $227,000 for hazard mitigation measures , such as replacing the damaged road surface with reinforced concrete and building a retaining wall .

as of october 1 , 2018 , the usvi had not expended funding in this category .

category d: water control facilities .

as of october 1 , 2018 , fema did not have any projects in this category .

according to fema officials , the usvi does not have water control infrastructure that would fall under category d , such as dams , levees , or berms .

category e: buildings and equipment .

fema obligated $6.0 million for 77 projects focused on repairing and rebuilding damaged buildings and equipment , 16 of which included hazard mitigation measures totaling about $1.8 million .

for example , fema obligated about $1.5 million to repair damage to the airport terminal building in st. thomas — a project where hazard mitigation measures comprised 87 percent of the project's total cost ( see fig .

7 ) .

these measures include replacing the terminal's roof with materials designed to withstand higher wind speeds to increase the building's resilience during future storms .

of the $6.0 million fema obligated for category e , the usvi had expended about $148,000 ( 2.5 percent ) as of october 1 , 2018 .

category f: utilities .

of the $516.3 million fema obligated for permanent work projects , $502.2 million ( 97 percent ) was obligated for 15 projects focused on repairing utilities , 7 of which included hazard mitigation measures totaling about $346.0 million .

for example , fema obligated $286.1 million and $50.2 million for permanent electrical distribution system repairs in st. croix and st. john , respectively .

this includes replacing damaged wooden utility poles with more resilient composite fiberglass poles that can withstand 200 mile per hour winds as well as power transmission lines and transformers ( see fig .

8 ) .

of the $502.2 million fema obligated for category f , the usvi had expended about $49.0 million ( 10 percent ) as of october 1 , 2018 .

category g: parks , recreational , and other facilities .

fema obligated about $2.9 million for 26 projects focused on repairing parks , playgrounds , and other recreational facilities , 1 of which included hazard mitigation measures .

specifically , fema obligated about $453,000 to repair the lindbergh park and water playground in st. thomas — a project that included about $18,000 for hazard mitigation measures .

as of october 1 , 2018 , the usvi had not expended funding in this category .

future projects .

in addition to the more than $1.4 billion in public assistance funding fema had obligated as of october 1 , 2018 , fema expected to review an additional 900 future projects for eligibility representing an estimated $779.4 million in potential funding .

of this estimated total amount , fema anticipates $128.5 million ( 16 percent ) in costs for future emergency work projects and $650.9 million ( 84 percent ) in costs for future permanent work projects .

in july 2018 , fema approved a june 2018 request from the governor of the usvi to transition to using the public assistance alternative procedures program for permanent work in the territory .

the alternative procedures provide new flexibilities to fema and the usvi that are not available through the standard public assistance program .

in september 2018 , fema issued the public assistance alternative procedures permanent work guide for the usvi to provide guidance on the implementation of the program in the territory .

fema and usvi officials stated that a section of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 and the flexibilities provided by the program itself influenced the usvi's decision to transition to using the alternative procedures .

first , section 20601 of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 authorized fema , when using the public assistance alternative procedures , to provide assistance to fund the replacement or restoration of disaster - damaged infrastructure that provide critical services to industry standards without regard to pre - disaster condition .

fema and usvi officials told us that the territory therefore has a valuable opportunity to use the alternative procedures to repair and rebuild its critical services infrastructure — including the usvi's education system , electrical grid , and emergency medical care system , among others — so it is in a better condition than it was prior to the 2017 hurricanes .

second , usvi officials stated that under the standard public assistance program currently being used in the usvi , the territorial government is responsible for providing the initial funding to reimburse subrecipients for completed work prior to drawing down funds from the account holding the fema - obligated amounts of money for each project .

they explained that because of the financial liquidity challenges facing the territory , this process was problematic and required usvi officials to prioritize projects based on the availability of the territory's funding .

usvi officials stated that the public assistance alternative procedures will help to address this challenge by providing the territory with more flexibility regarding when and how to fund projects .

for example , in certain cases , the usvi is able to consolidate permanent work projects approved under the alternative procedures and share obligated funding across these projects .

in addition , the usvi is able to use any excess funds for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures or for activities that improve the recipient's or subrecipient's future public assistance operations or planning .

as of november 2018 , fema and usvi officials stated they were working to identify and develop permanent work projects using the public assistance alternative procedures and discussing the process for developing the fixed - cost estimate for each project .

specifically , unlike in the standard public assistance program where fema will fund the actual cost of a project , the public assistance alternative procedures use a fixed - cost estimate which is agreed to prior to obligation and the usvi will be financially responsible for any actual costs that exceed this amount .

given the usvi's difficult fiscal situation , fema and usvi officials stated that ensuring these fixed - cost estimates are as accurate as possible will be critical .

however , fema officials also noted that if fema and the territory cannot come to an agreement on a fixed - cost estimate for any given project , the usvi does have the option to move forward through the standard public assistance program .

according to fema's public assistance alternative procedures permanent work guide for the usvi , all cost estimates for projects using these procedures must be finalized by march 2020 .

we will continue to monitor the usvi's plans for using the alternative procedures as part of our broader work assessing disaster recovery efforts in the usvi and will issue a follow - on report later this year .

we provided a draft of this report to dhs and the usvi government .

we requested comments from dhs and the usvi government , but none were provided .

dhs did provide technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of homeland security , the administrator of fema , the usvi government , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you and your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 8777 or curriec@gao.gov .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

chris currie , 202-512-8777 or curriec@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , joel aldape ( assistant director ) , bryan bourgault , leanna diggs , aaron gluck , eric hauswirth , brian lipman , amanda miller , heidi nielson , and kevin reeves made key contributions to this report .

