thank you for inviting me to discuss our work on opportunities for the federal government to reduce the fiscal exposure and financial risks posed by extreme weather events .

according to the united states global change research program ( usgcrp ) , the impacts and costliness of weather disasters — resulting from floods , drought , and other events such as tropical cyclones — are expected to increase in significance as previously “rare” events become more common and intense due to anticipated changes in the global climate system .

typically , climate change is described as average annual changes in temperature or precipitation , and is associated with shifts in the frequency and severity of extreme weather that can impose substantial costs on society .

the 151 weather disasters since 1980 with overall damages exceeding $1 billion each illustrate these vulnerabilities .

while it is not possible to link any individual weather event to climate change , these events provide insight into the potential climate - related vulnerabilities the united states faces .

federal , state , and local policymakers increasingly view adaptation — adjustments to natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climate change — as a risk - management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities that could be affected by extreme weather events and changes in the climate .

for example , adaptation measures may include raising river or coastal dikes to protect infrastructure from sea level rise , building higher bridges , and increasing the capacity of storm water systems .

as stated in a 2010 national research council ( nrc ) report , even though uncertainties exist regarding the exact nature and magnitude of impacts , mobilizing now to increase the nation's resilience can be an insurance policy against climate change risks .

my testimony today is based on reports we issued from march 2007 to november 2013 .

we conducted work for these reports in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

our issued reports have detailed information about our scope and methodology .

among other impacts , climate change could threaten coastal areas with rising sea levels , alter agricultural productivity , and increase the intensity and frequency of severe weather events such as floods , drought , and hurricanes that have cost the nation tens of billions of dollars in damages over the past decade .

for example , congress provided around $60 billion in budget authority for disaster assistance after superstorm sandy.these impacts pose significant financial risks , but the federal government is not well positioned to address this fiscal exposure , partly because of the complex nature of the issue .

given these challenges and the nation's fiscal condition , in february 2013 , we added limiting the federal government's fiscal exposure by better managing climate change risks to our list of high - risk areas .

climate - related impacts will result in increased fiscal exposures for the federal government from many areas , including , but not limited to its role as ( 1 ) the insurer of property and crops vulnerable to climate impacts , ( 2 ) the provider of aid in response to disasters , ( 3 ) the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure such as defense facilities and federal property vulnerable to climate impacts , and ( 4 ) the provider of data and technical assistance to state and local governments responsible for managing the impacts of climate change on their activities .

the financial risks from two important federal insurance programs — the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the federal crop insurance corporation ( fcic ) administered by the united states department of agriculture ( usda ) — create a significant fiscal exposure .

in 2012 , the nfip had property coverage of over $1.2 trillion and the fcic had crop coverage of almost $120 billion .

nfip has been on our high risk list since march 2006 because of concerns about its long - term financial solvency and related operational issues .

while congress and fema intended to finance nfip with premiums collected from policyholders and not with tax dollars , the program was , by design , not intended to pay for itself .

as of december 2013 , fema's debt from flood insurance payments totaled about $24 billion — up from $17.8 billion before superstorm sandy — and fema had not repaid any principal on the loan since 2010 .

further , the federal government's crop insurance costs have increased in recent years for a variety of reasons , more than doubling from $3.4 billion in fiscal year 2001 to $7.6 billion in fiscal year 2012 .

in march 2007 , we reported that both of these programs' exposure to weather - related losses had grown substantially , and that fema and usda had done little to develop the information necessary to understand their long - term exposure resulting from climate change .

recommended that the secretaries of agriculture and homeland security analyze the potential long - term fiscal implications of climate change on federal insurance programs and report their findings to congress .

the agencies agreed with the recommendation and contracted with experts to study their programs' long - term exposure from climate change .

both agencies have incorporated the findings of the reports into their climate change adaptation plans — as directed by instructions and guidance implementing executive order 13514 on federal leadership in environmental , energy , and economic performance .

we are currently examining how these programs account for climate change in their activities .

gao , climate change: financial risks to federal and private insurers in coming decades are potentially significant , gao - 07-285 ( washington , d.c.: mar .

16 , 2007 ) .

topography , coastal erosion areas , changing lake levels , future changes in sea levels , and intensity of hurricanes in updating its flood maps .

the biggert - waters act also reauthorized nfip through 2017 and made other significant changes to the program , including removing subsidized premium rates for certain properties , eliminating the grandfathering of prior premium rates when a property is remapped , and requiring fema to create a reserve fund .

while these changes may help put nfip on a path to financial solvency , their ultimate effect is not yet known .

in addition , the program faces challenges in making the changes .

for example , implementation of certain changes was delayed by provisions in the consolidated appropriations act of 2014 , and s. 1926 , which passed the senate on january 30 , 2014 , would delay the implementation of certain rate increases contained in the biggert - waters act .

as we have previously reported , such delays to rate increases may help address affordability concerns , but they would likely continue to increase nfip's long - term burden on taxpayers .

in the event of a major disaster , federal funding for response and recovery comes from the disaster relief fund managed by fema , and disaster aid programs of other participating federal agencies .

the federal government does not fully budget for these costs , thus creating a large fiscal exposure .

we reported , in september 2012 , that disaster declarations have increased over recent decades to a record of 98 in fiscal year 2011 compared with 65 in 2004 .

over that period , fema obligated over $80 billion in federal assistance for disasters .

we also found that fema has had difficulty implementing long - standing plans to assess national preparedness capabilities and that fema's indicator for determining whether to recommend that a jurisdiction receive disaster assistance does not accurately reflect the ability of state and local governments to respond to disasters .

had fema adjusted its indicator to reflect changes in personal income and inflation , 44 percent and 25 percent fewer disaster declarations , respectively , would have met the threshold for public assistance during fiscal years 2004 through 2011 .

in september 2012 , we recommended , among other things , that fema develop a methodology to more accurately assess a jurisdiction's capability to respond to and recover from a disaster without federal assistance .

fema concurred with this recommendation .

the federal government owns and operates hundreds of thousands of buildings and facilities that a changing climate could affect .

for example , in its 2010 quadrennial defense review , the department of defense ( dod ) recognized the risk to its facilities posed by climate change , noting that the department must assess potential impacts and adapt as required .

we plan to report later this year on dod's management of climate change risks at over 500,000 defense facilities .

in addition , the federal government manages about 650 million acres – – nearly 30 percent of the land in the united states – – for a variety of purposes , such as recreation , grazing , timber , and fish and wildlife .

in 2007 , we recommended that that the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , and the interior develop guidance for their resource managers that explains how they expect to address the effects of climate change , and the three departments generally agreed with this recommendation .

however , as we showed in our may 2013 report , resource managers still struggled to incorporate climate - related information into their day - to - day activities , despite the creation of strategic policy documents and high - level agency guidance .

the federal government invests billions of dollars annually in infrastructure projects that state and local governments prioritize and supervise .

in total , the united states has about 4 million miles of roads and 30,000 wastewater treatment and collection facilities .

according to a 2010 congressional budget office report , total public spending on transportation and water infrastructure exceeds $300 billion annually , with roughly 25 percent of this amount coming from the federal government and the rest coming from state and local governments .

these projects have large up - front capital investments and long lead times that require decisions about addressing climate change before its potential effects are discernable .

the federal government plays a limited role in project - level planning for transportation and wastewater infrastructure , and state and local efforts to consider climate change in infrastructure planning have occurred primarily on a limited , ad hoc basis .

infrastructure is typically designed to withstand and operate within historical climate patterns .

however , according to nrc , as the climate changes and historical patterns — in particular , those related to extreme weather events — no longer provide reliable predictions of the future , infrastructure designs may underestimate the climate - related impacts to infrastructure over its design life , which can range as long as 50 to 100 years .

these impacts can increase the operating and maintenance costs of infrastructure or decrease its life span , or both , leading to social , economic , and environmental impacts .

for example , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration estimates that , within 15 years , segments of louisiana state highway 1 — the only road access to port fourchon , which services virtually all deep - sea oil operations in the gulf of mexico , or about 18 percent of the nation's oil supply — will be inundated by tides an average of 30 times annually due to relative sea level rise .

flooding of this road effectively closes this port .

because of port fourchon's significance to the oil industry at the national , state , and local levels , the u.s. department of homeland security , in july 2011 , estimated that a closure of 90 days could reduce the national gross domestic product by $7.8 billion .

figure 1 shows louisiana state highway 1 leading to port fourchon .

despite the risks posed by climate change , we found , in april 2013 , that infrastructure decision makers have not systematically incorporated potential climate change impacts in planning for roads , bridges , and wastewater management systems because , among other factors , they face challenges identifying and obtaining available climate change information best suited for their projects .

even where good scientific information is available , it may not be in the actionable , practical form needed for decision makers to use in planning and designing infrastructure .

such decision makers work with traditional engineering processes , which often require very specific and discrete information .

moreover , local decision makers — who , in this case , specialize in infrastructure planning , not climate science — need assistance from experts who can help them translate available climate change information into something that is locally relevant .

in our site visits to a limited number of locations where decision makers overcame these challenges — including louisiana state highway 1 — state and local officials emphasized the role that the federal government could play in helping to increase their resilience .

any effective adaptation strategy must recognize that state and local governments are on the front lines in both responding to immediate weather - related disasters and in preparing for the potential longer - term impacts associated with climate change .

we reported , in october 2009 , that insufficient site - specific data — such as local temperature and precipitation projections — complicate state and local decisions to justify the current costs of adaptation efforts for potentially less certain future benefits .

executive office of the president develop a strategic plan for adaptation that , among other things , identifies mechanisms to increase the capacity of federal , state , and local agencies to incorporate information about current and potential climate change impacts into government decision making .

usgcrp's april 2012 strategic plan for climate change science recognizes this need by identifying enhanced information management and sharing as a key objective .

gao , climate change adaptation: strategic federal planning could help government officials make more informed decisions , gao - 10-113 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 7 , 2009 ) .

designated by the executive office of the president work with relevant agencies to identify for decision makers the “best available” climate - related information for infrastructure planning and update this information over time , and to clarify sources of local assistance for incorporating climate - related information and analysis into infrastructure planning , and communicate how such assistance will be provided over time .

they have not directly responded to these recommendations , but the president's june 2013 climate action plan and november 2013 executive order 13653 on preparing the united states for the impacts of climate change drew attention to these issues .

for example , the executive order directs numerous federal agencies , supported by usgcrp , to work together to develop and provide authoritative , easily accessible , usable , and timely data , information , and decision - support tools on climate preparedness and resilience .

we also have work under way exploring , among other things , the risk extreme weather events and climate change pose to defense facilities , public health , agriculture , public transit systems , and federal insurance programs .

this work — within the framework of the february 2013 high - risk designation — may identify other steps the federal government could take to limit its fiscal exposure and make our communities more resilient to extreme weather events .

chairman carper , ranking member coburn , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions you have at this time .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

alfredo gomez , director ; michael hix , assistant director ; and heather chartier , diantha garms , cindy gilbert , richard johnson , joseph dean “pep” thompson , and lisa van arsdale made key contributions to this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

