we are pleased to have the opportunity to comment on the h - 1b program .

congress created the current h - 1b program in 1990 to enable u.s. employers to hire temporary , foreign workers in specialty occupations .

the law capped the number of h - 1b visas issued per fiscal year at 65,000 , although the cap has fluctuated over time with legislative changes .

the h - 1b cap and the program itself have been a subject of continued controversy .

proponents of the program argue that it allows companies to fill important and growing gaps in the supply of u.s. workers , especially in the science and technology fields .

opponents of the program argue that there is no skill shortage and that the h - 1b program displaces u.s. workers and undercuts their pay .

others argue that the eligibility criteria for the h - 1b visa should be revised to better target foreign nationals whose skills are undersupplied in the domestic workforce .

our comments in this statement for the record are based on the results of our recent examination of the h - 1b program , highlighting the key challenges it presents for h - 1b employers , h - 1b and u.s. workers , and federal agencies .

specifically , this statement presents information on ( 1 ) employer demand for h - 1b workers ; ( 2 ) how the h - 1b cap impacts employers' costs and whether they move operations overseas ; ( 3 ) the government's ability to track the cap and h - 1b workers over time ; and ( 4 ) how well the provisions of the h - 1b program protect u.s. workers .

a detailed explanation of our methodology can be found in our report .

our work was conducted from may 2009 through january 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the h - 1b program enables companies in the united states to hire foreign workers for work in specialty occupations on a temporary basis .

a specialty occupation is defined as one requiring theoretical and practical application of a body of highly specialized knowledge and the attainment of a bachelor's degree or higher ( or its equivalent ) in the field of specialty .

the law originally capped the number of h - 1b visas at 65,000 per year ; the cap was raised twice pursuant to legislation , but in fiscal year 2004 , the cap reverted to its original level of 65,000 .

statutory changes also allowed for certain categories of individuals and companies to be exempt from or to receive special treatment under the cap .

the american competitiveness in the twenty - first century act of 2000 exempted from the cap all individuals being hired by institutions of higher education and also nonprofit and government - research organizations .

more recently , the h - 1b visa reform act of 2004 allowed for an additional 20,000 visas each year for foreign workers holding a master's degree or higher from an american institution of higher education to be exempted from the numerical cap limitation .

in 2004 , consistent with free trade agreements , up to 6,800 of the 65,000 h - 1b visas may be set aside for workers from chile and singapore .

while the h - 1b visa is not considered a permanent visa , h - 1b workers can apply for extensions and pursue permanent residence in the united states .

initial petitions are those filed for a foreign national's first - time employment as an h - 1b worker and are valid for a period of up to 3 years .

generally , initial petitions are counted against the annual cap .

extensions — technically referred to as continuing employment petitions — may be filed to extend the initial petitions for up to an additional 3 years .

extensions do not count against the cap .

while working under an h - 1b visa , a worker may apply for legal permanent residence in the united states .

after filing an application for permanent residence , h - 1b workers are generally eligible to obtain additional 1-year visa extensions until their u.s .

permanent resident cards , commonly referred to as “green cards,” are issued .

the departments of labor ( labor ) , homeland security ( homeland security ) , and state ( state ) each play a role in administering the application process for an h - 1b visa .

labor's employment and training administration ( employment and training ) receives and approves an initial application , known as the labor condition application ( lca ) , from employers .

the lca , which labor reviews as part of the application process , requires employers to make various attestations designed to protect the jobs of domestic workers and the rights and working conditions of temporary workers .

homeland security's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) reviews an additional employer application , known as the i - 129 petition , and ultimately approves h - 1b visa petitions .

for prospective h - 1b workers residing outside the united states , state interviews approved applicants and compares information obtained during the interview against each individual's visa application and supporting documents , and ultimately issues the visa .

for prospective h - 1b workers already residing in the united states , uscis updates the workers' visa status without involvement from state .

uscis has primary responsibility for administering the h - 1b cap .

generally , it accepts h - 1b petitions in the order in which they are received .

however , for those years in which uscis anticipates that the number of i - 129 petitions filed will exceed the cap , uscis holds a “lottery” to determine which of the petitions will be accepted for review .

for the lottery , uscis uses a computer - generated random selection process to select the number of petitions necessary to reach the cap .

with regard to enforcement , labor , the department of justice ( justice ) , and homeland security each have specific responsibilities .

labor's wage and hour division ( wage and hour ) is responsible for enforcing program rules by investigating complaints made against employers by h - 1b workers or their representatives and assessing penalties when employers are not in compliance with the requirements of the program .

justice is responsible for investigating complaints made by u.s. workers who allege that they have been displaced or otherwise harmed by the h - 1b visa program .

finally , uscis's directorate of fraud detection and national security ( fdns ) collaborates with its immigration and customs enforcement office to investigate fraud and abuse in the program .

over the past decade , demand for h - 1b workers tended to exceed the cap , as measured by the number of initial petitions submitted by employers , one of several proxies used to measure demand since a precise measure does not exist .

as shown in figure 1 , from 2000 to 2009 , initial petitions for new h - 1b workers submitted by employers who are subject to the cap exceeded the cap in all but 3 fiscal years .

however , the number of initial petitions subject to the cap is likely to be an underestimate of demand since , once the cap has been reached , employers subject to the cap may stop submitting petitions and homeland security stops accepting petitions .

if initial petitions submitted by employers exempt from the cap are also included in this measure ( also shown in figure 1 ) , the demand for new h - 1b workers is even higher , since over 14 percent of all initial petitions across the decade were submitted by employers who are not subject to the cap .

in addition to initial requests for h - 1b workers , employers requested an average of 148,000 visa extensions per year , for an average of over 280,000 annual requests for h - 1b workers .

over the decade , the majority ( over 68 percent ) of employers were approved to hire only one h - 1b worker , while fewer than 1 percent of employers were approved to hire almost 30 percent of all h - 1b workers .

among these latter employers are those that function as “staffing companies” that contract out h - 1b workers to other companies .

the prevalence of such companies participating in the h - 1b visa program is difficult to determine .

there are no disclosure requirements and homeland security does not track such information .

however , using publicly available data , we learned that at least 10 of the top 85 h - 1b - hiring employers in fiscal year 2009 participated in staffing arrangements , of which at least 6 have headquarters or operations located in india .

together , in fiscal year 2009 , these 10 employers garnered nearly 11,456 approvals , or about 6 percent of all h - 1b approvals .

further , 3 of these employers were among the top 5 h - 1b - hiring companies , receiving 8,431 approvals among them .

to better understand the impact of the h - 1b program and cap on h - 1b employers , gao spoke with 34 companies across a range of industries about how the h - 1b program affects their research and development ( r&d ) activities , their decisions about whether to locate work overseas , and their costs of doing business .

although several firms reported that their h - 1b workers were essential to conducting r&d within the u.s. , most companies we interviewed said that the h - 1b cap had little effect on their r&d or decisions to locate work offshore .

instead , they cited other reasons to expand overseas including access to pools of skilled labor abroad , the pursuit of new markets , the cost of labor , access to a workforce in a variety of time zones , language and culture , and tax law .

the exception to this came from executives at some information technology services companies , two of which rely heavily on the h - 1b program .

some of these executives reported that they had either opened an offshore location to access labor from overseas or were considering doing so as result of the h - 1b cap or changes in the administration of the h - 1b program .

many employers we interviewed cited costs and burdens associated with the h - 1b cap and program .

the majority of the firms we spoke with had h - 1b petitions denied due to the cap in years when the cap was reached early in the filing season .

in these years , the firms did not know which , if any , of their h - 1b candidates would obtain a visa , and several firms said that this created uncertainty that interfered with both project planning and candidate recruitment .

in these instances , most large firms we interviewed reported finding other ( sometimes more costly ) ways to hire their preferred job candidates .

for example , several large firms we spoke with were able to hire their preferred candidates in an overseas office temporarily , later bringing the candidate into the united states , sometimes on a different type of visa .

on the other hand , small firms were sometimes unable to afford these options , and were more likely to fill their positions with different candidates , which they said resulted in delays and sometimes economic losses , particularly for firms in rapidly changing technology fields .

interviewed employers also cited costs with the adjudication and lottery process and suggested a variety of reforms: the majority of the 34 firms we spoke with maintained that the review and adjudication process had become increasingly burdensome in recent years , citing large amounts of paperwork required as part of the adjudication process .

some experts we interviewed suggested that to minimize paperwork and costs , uscis should create a risk - based adjudication process that would permit employers with a strong track - record of regulatory compliance in the h - 1b program to access a streamlined process for petition approval .

in addition , several industry representatives told us that because the lottery process does not allow employers to rank their top choices , firms do not necessarily receive approval for the most desired h - 1b candidates .

some experts suggested revising the system to permit employers to rank their applications so that they are able to hire the best qualified worker for the job in highest need .

finally , entrepreneurs and venture capital firms we interviewed said that program rules can inhibit many emerging technology companies and other small firms from using the h - 1b program to bring in the talent they need , constraining the ability of these companies to grow and innovate in the united states .

some suggested that , to promote the ability of entrepreneurs to start businesses in the united states , congress should consider creating a visa category for entrepreneurs , available to persons with u.s. venture backing .

in our report , we recommended that uscis should , to the extent permitted by its existing statutory authority , explore options for increasing the flexibility of the application process for h - 1b employers .

in commenting on our report , homeland security and labor officials expressed reservations about the feasibility of our suggested options , but homeland security officials also noted efforts under way to streamline the application process for prospective h - 1b employers .

for example , homeland security is currently testing a system to obtain and update some company data directly from a private data vendor , which could reduce the filing burden on h - 1b petitioners in the future .

in addition , homeland security recently proposed a rule that would provide for employers to register and learn whether they will be eligible to file petitions with uscis prior to filing an lca , which could reduce workloads for labor and reduce some filing burden for companies .

the total number of h - 1b workers in the united states at any one point in time — and information about the length of their stay — is unknown due to data and system limitations .

first , data systems among the various agencies that process h - 1b applications are not easily linked , which makes it impossible to track individuals as they move through the application and entry process .

second , h - 1b workers are not assigned a unique identifier that would allow agencies to track them over time or across agency databases — particularly if and when their visa status changes .

consequently , uscis is not able to track the h - 1b population with regard to: ( 1 ) how many approved h - 1b workers living abroad have actually received an h - 1b visa and / or ultimately entered the country ; ( 2 ) whether and when h - 1b workers have applied for or were granted legal permanent residency , leave the country , or remain in the country on an expired visa ; and ( 3 ) the number of h - 1b workers currently in the country or who have converted to legal permanent residency .

limitations in uscis's ability to track h - 1b applications also hinder it from knowing precisely when and whether the annual cap has been reached each year — although the immigration and nationality act requires the department to do so .

according to uscis officials , its current processes do not allow them to determine precisely when the cap on initial petitions is reached .

to deal with this problem , uscis estimates when the number of approvals has reached the statutory limit and stops accepting new petitions .

although uscis is taking steps to improve its tracking of approved petitions and of the h - 1b workforce , progress has been slow to date .

through its “transformation program,” uscis is developing an electronic i - 129 application system and is working with other agencies to create a cross - reference table of agency identifiers for individuals applying for visas that would serve as a unique person - centric identifier .

when this occurs , it will be possible to identify who is in the united states at any one point in time under any and all visa programs .

however , the agency faces challenges with finalizing and implementing the transformation program .

we recommended that homeland security , through its transformation program , take steps to ( 1 ) ensure that linkages to state's tracking system will provide homeland security with timely access to data on visa issuances , and ( 2 ) that mechanisms for tracking petitions and visas against the cap be incorporated into business rules to be developed for uscis's new electronic petition system .

while a complete picture of the h - 1b workforce is lacking , data on approved h - 1b workers provides some information about the h - 1b workforce .

between fiscal year 2000 and fiscal year 2009 , the top four countries of birth for approved h - 1b workers ( i.e. , approved initial and extension petitions from employers both subject to the cap and cap - exempt ) were india , china , canada , and the philippines .

over 40 percent of all such workers were for positions in system analysis and programming .

as compared to fiscal year 2000 , in fiscal year 2009 , approved h - 1b workers were more likely to be living in the united states than abroad at the time of their initial application , to have an advanced degree , and to have obtained their graduate degrees in the united states .

finally , data on a cohort of approved h - 1b workers whose petitions were submitted between january 2004 and september 2007 , indicate that at least 18 percent of these workers subsequently applied for permanent residence in the united states — for which about half were approved , 45 percent were pending , and 3 percent were denied by 2010 .

the provisions of the h - 1b program designed to protect u.s. workers — such as the requirement to pay prevailing wages , the visa's temporary status , and the cap on the number of visas issued — are weakened by several factors .

first , h - 1b program oversight is shared by four federal agencies and their roles and abilities to coordinate are restricted by law .

as a result , there is only nominal sharing of the kind of information that would allow for better employer screening or more active and targeted pursuit of program abuses .

for example , the review of employer applications for h - 1b workers is divided between labor and uscis , and the thoroughness of both these reviews is constrained by law .

in reviewing the employer's lca , labor is restricted to looking for missing information and obvious inaccuracies , such as an employer's failure to checkmark all required boxes on a form denoting compliance .

uscis's review of the visa petition , the i - 129 , is not informed by any information that labor's employment and training administration may possess on suspicious or problematic employers .

with regard to enforcement of the h - 1b worker protections , wage and hour investigations are constrained , first , by the fact that its investigators do not receive from uscis any information regarding suspicious or problematic employers .

they also do not have access to the employment and training's database of employer lcas .

second , in contrast to its authority with respect to other labor protection programs , wage and hour lacks subpoena authority to obtain employer records for h - 1b cases .

according to investigators , it can take months , therefore , to pursue time - sensitive investigations when an employer is not cooperative .

to improve labor's oversight over the h - 1b program , we recommended that its employment and training administration grant wage and hour searchable access to the lca database .

further , we asked congress to consider granting labor subpoena power to obtain employer records during investigations under the h - 1b program .

to reduce duplication and fragmentation in the administration and oversight of the application process , consistent with past gao matters for congressional consideration , we asked congress to consider streamlining the h - 1b approval process by eliminating the separate requirement that employers first submit an lca to labor for review and certification , since another agency ( uscis ) subsequently conducts a similar review of the lca .

another factor that weakens protection for u.s. workers is the fact that the h - 1b program lacks a legal provision to hold employers accountable to program requirements when they obtain h - 1b workers through staffing companies .

as previously noted , staffing companies contract h - 1b workers out to other employers .

at times , those employers may contract the h - 1b worker out again , creating multiple middlemen , according to wage and hour officials ( see fig .

2 ) .

they explained that the contractual relationship , however , does not transfer the obligations of the contractor for worker protection to subsequent employers .

wage and hour investigators reported that a large number of the complaints they receive about h - 1b employers were related to the activities of staffing companies .

investigators from the northeast region — the region that receives the highest number of h - 1b complaints — said that nearly all of the complaints they receive involve staffing companies and that the number of complaints are growing .

h - 1b worker complaints about these companies frequently pertained to unpaid “benching” — when a staffing company does not have a job placement for the h - 1b worker and does not pay them .

in january 2010 , homeland security issued a memo — commonly referred to as the “neufeld memo” — on determining when there is a valid employer - employee relationship between a staffing company and an h - 1b worker for whom it has obtained a visa ; however officials indicated that it is too early to know if the memo has improved program compliance .

to help ensure the full protection of h - 1b workers employed through staffing companies , in our report we asked that congress consider holding the employer where an h - 1b visa holder performs work accountable for meeting program requirements to the same extent as the employer that submitted the lca form .

finally , changes to program legislation have diluted program provisions for protecting u.s. workers by allowing visa holders to seek permanent residency , broadening the job and skill categories for h - 1b eligibility , and establishing exemptions to the cap .

the immigration act of 1990 removed the requirement that h - 1b visa applicants have a residence in a foreign country that they have no intention of abandoning .

consequently , h - 1b workers are able to pursue permanent residency in the united states and remain in the country for an unlimited period of time while their residency application is pending .

the same law also broadened the job and skill categories for which employers could seek h - 1b visas .

labor's lca data show that between june 2009 and july 2010 , over 50 percent of the wage levels reported on approved lcas were categorized as entry - level ( i.e .

paid the lowest prevailing wage levels ) .

however , such data do not , by themselves , indicate whether these h - 1b workers were generally less skilled than their u.s. counterparts , or whether they were younger or more likely to accept lower wages .

finally , exemptions to the h - 1b cap have increased the number of h - 1b workers beyond the cap .

for example , 87,519 workers in 2009 were approved for visas ( including both initial and extensions ) to work for 6,034 cap - exempt companies .

taken together , the multifaceted challenges identified in our work show that the h - 1b program , as currently structured , may not be used to its full potential and may be detrimental in some cases .

although we have recommended steps that executive agencies overseeing the program may take to improve tracking , administration , and enforcement , the data we present raise difficult policy questions about key program provisions that are beyond the jurisdiction of these agencies .

the h - 1b program presents a difficult challenge in balancing the need for high - skilled foreign labor with sufficient protections for u.s. workers .

as congress considers immigration reform in consultation with diverse stakeholders and experts — and while homeland security moves forward with its modernization efforts — this is an opportune time to re - examine the merits and shortcomings of key program provisions and make appropriate changes as needed .

such a review may include , but would not necessarily be limited to the qualifications required for workers eligible under the h - 1b program , exemptions from the cap , the appropriateness of h - 1b hiring by staffing companies , the level of the cap , and the role the program should play in the u.s. immigration system in relationship to permanent residency .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this statement , please contact andrew sherrill at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or sherrilla@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

in addition to andrew sherrill ( director ) , michele grgich ( assistant director ) and erin godtland ( economist - in - charge ) led this engagement with writing and technical assistance from nisha hazra , melissa jaynes , jennifer mcdonald , susan bernstein ( education , workforce and income security ) ; and rhiannon patterson ( applied research and methods ) .

stakeholders included: barbara bovbjerg ( education , workforce , and income security ) ; tom mccool ( applied research and methods ) ; ronald fecso ( chief statistician ) ; sheila mccoy and craig winslow ( general counsel ) ; hiwotte amare and shana wallace ( applied research and methods ) ; richard stana and mike dino ( homeland security and justice ) ; jess ford ( international affairs and trade ) .

barbara steel - lowney referenced the report .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

