thank you for the opportunity to discuss key aspects of a secure maritime border .

maritime borders are gateways to our nation's maritime transportation system of ports , waterways , and vessels , which handle billions of dollars of cargo annually .

accordingly , maritime borders are critical to our national security .

for instance , an attack on this system could have a widespread affect on global shipping , international trade , and the global economy , and an attack on a domestic port could have dire consequences because of the size of ports and their general proximity to metropolitan areas .

further , criminals could use small vessels to smuggle narcotics , aliens , and other contraband across u.s. maritime borders .

balancing maritime security concerns with the need to facilitate the free flow of people and commerce remains an ongoing challenge for the public and private sectors alike .

within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the u.s. coast guard has much of the responsibility for ensuring the safety and security of u.s. maritime interests and leading homeland security efforts in the maritime domain .

in this capacity , the coast guard conducts port facility and commercial vessel inspections , coordinates maritime information - sharing efforts , and promotes maritime domain awareness , among other things .

also within dhs , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for screening incoming vessels' crews and cargoes for the presence of contraband , such as weapons of mass destruction , illicit drugs , or explosives , while facilitating the flow of legitimate trade and passengers .

several other dhs components , such as the transportation security administration , the domestic nuclear detection office , and the federal emergency management agency , also have roles in securing our maritime borders .

my statement today identifies key factors that are important to secure the maritime borders and discusses progress and challenges in related dhs programs .

specifically , i will address the following factors: ( 1 ) maritime domain awareness ; ( 2 ) risks from foreign ports ; ( 3 ) international partnerships in global supply chain security ; ( 4 ) maritime surveillance , interdiction , and security operations ; ( 5 ) partnerships and coordination along the coasts and in ports ; and ( 6 ) measuring performance .

my statement is based on reports and testimonies we issued from july 2003 through october 2013 related to maritime , port , vessel , and cargo security and other related aspects of maritime border security .

to perform the work for our previous reports and testimonies , we visited domestic and overseas ports ; reviewed agency program documents , port security plans , and other documents ; and interviewed officials from the federal , state , local , private , and international sectors , among other things .

the officials we met with represented a wide variety of stakeholders including the coast guard , cbp , port authorities , terminal operators , vessel operators , foreign governments , and international trade organizations .

further details on the scope and methodology for the previously issued reports and testimonies are available within each of the published products .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

our prior work has identified several key factors important to securing the maritime borders , which include ( 1 ) maintaining robust maritime domain awareness , ( 2 ) assessing risks coming from foreign ports , ( 3 ) leveraging international partnerships , ( 4 ) conducting maritime surveillance , interdiction , and security operations , ( 5 ) coordinating with partners along the coast and in ports , and ( 6 ) measuring performance .

our prior work has also shown that dhs and its components have made progress , and in some cases experienced challenges , with their programs to address these factors .

to ensure the security of our maritime borders , it is critical that federal agencies maintain robust maritime domain awareness .

according to the national plan to achieve maritime domain awareness , the maritime domain provides an expansive pathway around the world that terrorist organizations could exploit for moving equipment and personnel , as well as a means for launching attacks .

timely awareness of the maritime domain and knowledge of threats helps the coast guard to detect , deter , interdict , and defeat adversaries .

for example , according to the coast guard , maritime domain awareness played a key role in allowing it to interdict narcotics , intercept thousands of alien migrants , detain hundreds of suspected smugglers , board foreign vessels to suppress illegal fishing , and rescue thousands of people .

to enhance maritime domain awareness , the coast guard works with its maritime partners to facilitate the sharing and dissemination of a wide array of information and intelligence to better secure the nation's maritime transportation system against potential threats .

the coast guard has made progress in developing its maritime domain awareness systems — including its common operational picture — by increasing user access and adding data sources .

the coast guard also has related systems that can be used to provide enhanced maritime domain information to coast guard units and port partners .

however , as we previously reported , the coast guard experienced challenges in developing and implementing these systems .

for example , in july 2011 , we reported that the coast guard had not met its goal of building a single , fully interoperable command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance program system intended to enable the sharing of information among its new offshore vessels and aircraft .

in addition , in february 2012 , we reported that the intended information - sharing capabilities of the coast guard's watchkeeper software — which was designed to gather data to help port partner agencies collaborate in the conduct of operations and share information , among other things — met few port partner agency needs .

this is , in part , because the coast guard did not determine these needs when developing the system .

further , in april 2013 , we reported that , among other things , the coast guard had not followed its own information technology development guidance when developing one of its new maritime domain awareness systems , known as coast guard one view .

we recommended , and the coast guard concurred , that it take actions to address these challenges .

dhs stated that it planned to take actions to address these recommendations , such as developing necessary acquisition documentation .

in addition to its own systems , the coast guard also relies on systems operated by other entities to help it track vessels and enhance maritime domain awareness .

for example , to track vessels at sea , the coast guard uses a long - range identification and tracking system and an automatic identification system that broadcasts information on the vessels and their locations .

to track vessels in u.s. coastal areas , inland waterways , and ports , the coast guard operates a land - based automatic identification system and also obtains information from radar and cameras in some ports .

in march 2009 , we reported on the challenges of tracking small vessels using available technologies .

for example , we reported that although the coast guard and other agencies may have technology systems that can track small vessels within some ports , these did not always work in bad weather or at night .

in september 2012 , we reported that the expansion of vessel tracking technology to all small vessels may be of limited utility because of , among other things , the large number of small vessels , the difficulty in identifying threatening actions , and the challenges associated with getting resources on scene in time to prevent an attack once it has been identified .

dhs and its components — such as the coast guard and cbp — have started or completed initiatives to improve maritime domain awareness in order to address small vessel security risks , including an initiative to help cbp better track small vessels arriving from foreign locations and another initiative to assist the coast guard in assessing and monitoring small vessel launch sites .

the security of maritime borders also depends , in part , upon security at foreign ports where cargo and vessels bound for the united states may originate .

cbp and the coast guard have developed models to assess the risks of cargo carried by these vessels , foreign ports , and foreign vessels entering u.s. ports .

in particular , cbp developed the container security initiative ( csi ) program that places officials at select foreign ports to use intelligence and risk assessment information to determine whether u.s. - bound cargo container shipments from those ports are at risk of containing weapons of mass destruction or other terrorist contraband .

cbp's selection of the initial 23 csi ports in 2002 was primarily based on the volume of u.s. - bound containers , but beginning in 2003 , cbp considered more threat information when it expanded the number of csi ports .

in our september 2013 report , we reported that cbp had not assessed the risk posed by foreign ports that ship cargo to the united states since 2005 .

in 2009 , cbp developed a model that ranked 356 potential expansion ports for a related program on the basis of risk , but it was not implemented because of budget cuts .

we found in september 2013 that by applying cbp's risk model to fiscal year 2012 cargo shipment data , csi did not have a presence at about half of the ports cbp considered high risk , and about one fifth of the existing csi ports were at lower risk locations .

as a result , we recommended that cbp periodically assess the supply chain security risks from foreign ports that ship cargo to the united states and use the results to inform any future expansion of csi and determine whether changes need to be made to existing csi ports .

dhs concurred with our recommendation and reported that by december 2014 it plans to develop a process for conducting periodic assessments of the supply chain security risks from all ports that ship cargo to the united states and use information from the assessments to determine if future expansion or adjustments to csi locations are appropriate .

while cbp is focused on the security of the cargo shipped to the united states from foreign ports , the coast guard is focused on the security of ports and the vessels arriving in the united states .

under the international port security program , coast guard officials visit foreign ports to evaluate their antiterrorism security measures against established international standards .

we reported in october 2007 that the coast guard had found that most of the over 100 countries it visited had substantially implemented international standards .

more recently , the coast guard reported in november 2013 that it had visited over 150 countries .

in september 2012 , we reported that the coast guard had made progress with implementing its international port security program despite a number of challenges .

for example , we reported that the coast guard was able to alleviate sovereignty concerns of some countries by including a reciprocal visit feature in which the coast guard hosts foreign delegations to visit u.s. ports .

further , as we reported in september 2013 , the coast guard developed a risk - informed model — that it updates annually — as part of its international port security program to regularly assess the potential threat foreign ports pose to the maritime supply chain and make operational decisions .

according to the coast guard international port security program: annual report 2012 , the coast guard uses the model to make informed decisions on how to engage each country with the international port security program , including ( 1 ) how often to visit ports , ( 2 ) how many staff to assign to a particular visit , and ( 3 ) whether the country requires assistance .

in addition to assessing the security of foreign ports , the coast guard also uses the results of the international port security program to help determine which arriving foreign vessels to board and inspect through its port state control program .

in particular , according to the coast guard's international port security program: annual report 2012 , the coast guard is to use risk - based criteria to identify which foreign vessels entering u.s. ports and waterways it considers to be at risk of noncompliance with international or domestic regulations , and perform compliance examinations of these vessels .

the risk - based criteria used to make these decisions include the vessel's management , the flag state under which the vessel is registered , and the vessel's security compliance history resulting from previous examinations .

international partnerships based on international standards are another key aspect of secure maritime borders .

for example , the international ship and port facility security ( isps ) code was developed after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks to establish measures to enhance the security of ships and port facilities with a standardized and consistent security framework .

the isps code requires facilities to conduct an assessment to identify threats and vulnerabilities and then develop security plans based on the assessment .

the requirements of this code are performance based ; therefore , compliance can be achieved through a variety of security measures .

additionally , in collaboration with 11 other members of the world customs organization , cbp developed the framework of standards to secure and facilitate global trade ( safe framework ) , which is based , in part , on the core concepts of cbp programs and provides standards for collaboration among customs administrations and entities participating in the supply chain .

the safe framework was adopted by the 173 world customs organization member customs administrations in june 2005 ; and as of our last report on this topic in july 2008 , 154 had signed letters of intent to implement the standards .

cbp and the coast guard also leverage relationships with private industry stakeholders and foreign partners to promote the security of maritime borders , given that protecting domestic ports begins outside the united states where inbound shipments enter the supply chain .

for example , the customs - trade partnership against terrorism ( c - tpat ) program is a voluntary program that enables cbp officials to work in partnership with private companies to review and approve the security of their international supply chains .

companies that join the c - tpat program commit to improving the security of their supply chains and agree to provide cbp with information on their specific security measures .

in addition , the companies agree to allow cbp to verify , among other things , that their security measures meet or exceed cbp's minimum security requirements .

this allows cbp to ensure that the security measures outlined in a member's security profile are in place and effective .

in april 2008 , we reported that the c - tpat program holds promise as part of cbp's multifaceted maritime security strategy .

we also reported that the program allows cbp to develop partnerships with the trade community , which is a challenge given the international nature of the industry and resulting limits on cbp's jurisdiction and activities , and provides cbp with a level of information sharing that would otherwise not be available .

however , our reports raised concerns about the overall management of the program and challenges in verifying that c - tpat members meet security criteria .

we recommended that cbp strengthen program management by developing planning documents and performance measures , and by improving the process for validating security practices of c - tpat members .

cbp agreed with these recommendations and has addressed them .

additionally , through mutual recognition arrangements with foreign partners , the security - related practices and programs established by the customs or maritime security administration of one partner are recognized and accepted by the administration of another .

both cbp and the coast guard have entered into such arrangements .

for example , cbp can expand the reach of its supply chain security programs ( such as c - tpat ) through mutual recognition arrangements .

according to the world customs organization , mutual recognition arrangements allow customs administrations to target high - risk shipments more effectively and expedite low - risk shipments by , for example , reducing redundant examinations .

as we reported in september 2013 , mutual recognition arrangements may allow the coast guard to allocate resources more efficiently and reduce risks .

for example , we further reported that the coast guard signed a memorandum of understanding with the european union that establishes a process for mutually recognizing security inspections of each other's ports .

according to dhs documents and coast guard officials in europe , by signing this memorandum of understanding , the coast guard plans to reassign some international port security officials from europe to africa , where certain countries are having more difficulties than others in implementing effective antiterrorism measures in their ports .

further , we reported that one trade - off of signing the memorandum of understanding is that coast guard's international port security officials will not have the same opportunities to have face - to - face interactions and share port security information and practices directly with their european union counterparts as in the past .

despite this trade - off , coast guard officials stated that entering into such arrangements increases efficiencies and noted that they intend to negotiate additional memorandums of understanding with other foreign governments that have strong port inspection programs .

along the coast and in ports , maritime surveillance , interdiction , and security operations are conducted to ensure the security of maritime borders .

for example , cbp's office of air and marine provides maritime surveillance and interdiction capabilities .

its strategic assumptions include the ability to provide a 24-hour , 7-day a week response to border penetrations anywhere along the u.s. border , with a 1-hour response time for areas designated as high priority .

we reported in march 2012 that as of may 2011 , the office of air and marine had placed about half of its air assets on the southwest border region and the remainder in the northern and southeast regions , while marine resources were distributed fairly evenly across the northern , southwest , and southeast regions .

further , our analysis of the office of air and marine's fiscal year 2010 performance results indicate that they did not meet its national performance goal to fulfill greater than 95 percent of border patrol air support requests and did not provide higher rates of support in locations designated as high priority based on threats .

we made recommendations to help ensure that the office of air and marine's assets and personnel are best positioned to effectively meet mission needs and address threats , and to help dhs better leverage existing resources , eliminate unnecessary duplication , and enhance efficiencies .

dhs concurred with these recommendations , and described actions it was taking , or planned to take to address them , including making strategic and technological changes in its assessment of the mix and placement of its resources by the end of march 2014 .

in addition to cbp's office of air and marine interdiction and response activities , the coast guard conducts a number of activities to deter potential threats to the united states' maritime borders .

for example , the coast guard escorts a certain percentage of high - capacity passenger vessels — cruise ships , ferries , and excursion vessels — and energy commodity tankers to protect against an external threat , such as a waterborne improvised explosive device .

the coast guard also provides additional security response capabilities through its maritime safety and security teams and maritime security response teams .

created by the maritime transportation security act of 2002 , the maritime safety and security teams constitute a maritime security antiterrorism force .

the teams are managed as assets that may be deployed nationwide , and are responsible for safeguarding the public and protecting vessels , harbors , ports , facilities , and cargo in u.s. territorial waters .

the teams are to maintain readiness to deploy to events such as terrorist threats or incidents and storm recovery operations , and routinely deploy to national special security events such as super bowls and presidential inaugurations .

they are also to enforce security zones around high - interest vessels in transit and at other times when additional levels of security are needed within the nation's ports and waterways .

the coast guard's maritime security response team complements the maritime security and safety team , and is charged with maintaining a high readiness posture 365 days a year .

the maritime security response team is the coast guard's advanced interdiction force for counterterrorism and law enforcement operations of a high - risk nature .

the team provides a variety of advanced capabilities or skills , including addressing threats posed by weapons of mass destruction and vertically deploying from helicopters to engage potentially hostile personnel .

along the coast and in ports , partnerships and coordination among various stakeholders contribute to the security of the maritime borders .

to target the threat of transnational terrorist and criminal acts along the coastal borders , the maritime operations coordination plan , established in 2011 , directs cbp , the coast guard , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement's homeland security investigations to utilize the fusion of their intelligence , planning , and operations capabilities through the formation of regional coordinating mechanisms .

the coast guard serves as the lead agency responsible for planning and coordinating among components .

we reported in september 2013 that , according to the coast guard , there were 32 regional coordinating mechanisms as of june 2013 that aligned with coast guard sectors' geographic areas of responsibility .

in addition to the lead agencies , other stakeholders include the federal bureau of investigation ; the drug enforcement administration ; the u.s. attorney's office ; state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies ; and foreign law enforcement agencies .

in ports , area maritime security committees consist of key stakeholders who ( 1 ) may be affected by security policies and ( 2 ) share information and develop port security plans .

these committees , which are required by coast guard regulations that implement the maritime transportation security act of 2002 , also identify critical port infrastructure and risks to the port , develop mitigation strategies for these risks , and communicate appropriate security information to port stakeholders .

recommended committee members include a diverse array of port stakeholders , including federal , state , and local agencies , as well as private sector entities such as terminal operators , yacht clubs , shipyards , marine exchanges , commercial fishermen , trucking and railroad companies , organized labor , and trade associations .

area maritime security committees also are to serve as forums for developing area maritime security plans .

the maritime transportation security act of 2002 required the coast guard to develop area maritime security plans — to be updated every 5 years — for ports throughout the nation .

the coast guard develops these plans for each of the 43 geographically defined port areas with input from applicable governmental and private entities , and the plans are to serve as the primary means to identify and coordinate coast guard procedures related to prevention , protection , and security .

in march 2007 , we reported that there was a wide variance in ports' natural disaster planning efforts and that area maritime security plans — limited to security incidents — could benefit from unified planning to include an all - hazards approach .

we recommended that dhs encourage port stakeholders to use existing forums for discussing all - hazards planning .

dhs concurred with our recommendation and implemented it through the fiscal year 2007 port security grant program supplemental program , which was designed , in part , to facilitate the development of a port - wide risk management / mitigation and business continuity / resumption of trade plan .

another important aspect of a secure border is measuring maritime security .

in the dhs component agencies' implementation of the various maritime security related programs i have described today , and as we have previously reported , one of the challenges that dhs and its component agencies have faced has been the lack of adequate performance measures .

the following are some of the performance measurement challenges we have reported on: lack of reliable and accurate data: dhs and its component agencies have experienced challenges collecting complete , accurate , and reliable data .

for example , in january 2011 , we reported that both cbp and the coast guard tracked the frequency of illegal seafarer incidents at u.s. seaports , but the records of these incidents varied considerably between the two component agencies and between the agencies' field and headquarters units .

as a result , the data dhs used to inform its strategic and tactical plans were of undetermined reliability .

we recommended that cbp and the coast guard determine why their data varied and jointly establish a process for sharing and reconciling records of illegal seafarer entries at u.s. seaports .

dhs concurred and has made progress in addressing the recommendation .

not using data to manage programs: dhs and its component agencies have not always had or used performance information to manage their missions .

for example , we reported in february 2008 that coast guard officials used their maritime information for safety & law enforcement database — the coast guard's primary data system for documenting facility inspections and other activities — to review the results of inspectors' data entries for individual maritime facilities , but the officials did not use the data to evaluate the facility inspection program overall .

we found that a more thorough evaluation of the facility compliance program could provide information on , for example , the variations we identified between coast guard units in oversight approaches , the advantages and disadvantages of each approach , and whether some approaches work better than others .

we recommended that the coast guard assess its maritime information for safety & law enforcement compliance data , including the completeness and consistency of the data and data field problems , and make any changes needed to more effectively utilize the data .

the coast guard agreed and has reported taking actions to address the recommendation .

these actions include hiring a full - time management and program analyst to consistently review the data for trends and gaps , and developing training resources , help desks , and conferences , among other things , to help field personnel track changes to maritime information for safety & law enforcement and to improve data entry time and consistency .

lack of outcome - based performance measures: dhs and its component agencies have also experienced difficulties developing and using performance measures that focus on outcomes .

outcome - based performance measures describe the intended result of carrying out a program or activity .

for example , although cbp had performance measures in place for its c - tpat program , these measures focused on program participation and facilitating trade and travel and not on improving supply chain security , which is the program's purpose .

we made separate but related recommendations in july 2003 , march 2005 , and april 2008 that cbp develop outcome - based performance measures for this program .

cbp concurred , and , in response to our recommendations , identified measures to quantify actions required and to gauge c - tpat's impact on supply chain security .

the coast guard has faced similar issues with developing and using outcome - based performance measures .

for example , we reported in november 2011 that the coast guard developed a measure to report its performance in reducing maritime risk , but faced challenges using this measure to inform decisions .

the coast guard reported it has improved the measure to make it more valid and reliable and stated it believes it is a useful proxy measure of performance , but notes that developing outcome - based performance measures is challenging because of limited historical data on maritime terrorist attacks .

chairman miller , ranking member jackson lee , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

for questions about this statement , please contact stephen l. caldwell at ( 202 ) 512-9610 or caldwells@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include christopher conrad ( assistant director ) , christine hanson ( analyst - in - charge ) , tracey cross , and jeff jensen .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

