i am pleased to be here to discuss our prior work on the lessons the united states can learn from other countries' experiences with a value - added tax , or vat.vats have grown in popularity over the past five decades with recent estimates showing more than 130 countries worldwide using a vat .

the united states is the only member of the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) without a vat .

dissatisfaction with our current federal tax system has fueled a debate about fundamental tax reform due to concerns about the current federal tax system's economic inefficiency , unfairness , and complexity .

part of this debate has involved switching to a consumption tax or combining a consumption tax with an income tax .

one type of consumption tax that some have proposed is a vat .

a vat is applied to the difference between a business's sales of goods and services and its purchases of goods and services ( excluding wages ) .

thus , businesses pay tax only on the value they add to the goods or services they sell .

unlike retail sales taxes , vats are collected at all stages of production and distribution process .

all types of businesses , not just retail businesses , are subject to the tax , and sales to both consumers and other businesses are taxable .

my testimony today will discuss five countries' experiences with their vats .

these study countries are australia , canada , france , new zealand , and the united kingdom .

they represent a range of vat design options from relatively simple to more complex and include some with federal systems and some that recently implemented a vat .

specifically , i will cover ( 1 ) the effect that vat design choices , such as the number of tax rates and tax exemptions , have on compliance , administrative costs , and compliance burden ; ( 2 ) canada's experiences with administering a national vat in conjunction with several different subnational consumption tax arrangements ; ( 3 ) the experiences that countries had transitioning to a vat ; and ( 4 ) our concluding observations on the lessons the united states can learn from these countries' experiences .

this testimony is based on our report issued in 2008 .

although some time has passed since our report was released , the challenges that our study countries encountered in implementing and administering vat systems remain insightful to the united states should it consider a national consumption tax .

for that report we selected our study countries based on several criteria , including the complexity of vat design , the age of the vat system , and whether the country had a federal system .

for each country , we performed in - depth literature reviews and conducted extensive interviews of government officials and vat experts .

we also collected and analyzed documents and data on the countries and their vat systems .

additional information on our scope and methodology is available in our published report .

we conducted the performance audit work that supports this statement in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we did not make any recommendations .

under a vat , businesses pay tax on the value they add to the goods and services they purchase from other businesses .

vat liability is typically calculated in industrialized countries using what is known as the credit - invoice method .

under this method , businesses apply the vat rate to their sales but claim a credit for vat paid on purchases of inputs from other businesses ( shown on purchase invoices ) .

the difference between the vat collected on sales and the credit for vat paid on input purchases is remitted to the government .

figure 1 illustrates a vat with a 10 percent rate .

a lumber company cuts and mills trees and has sales of $50 to a furniture maker .

assuming no input purchases from other businesses , to keep the illustration simple , the company adds the tax to the price of the goods sold and remits $5 in tax to the government .

the purchase invoice received by the furniture maker would list $50 in purchases plus $5 in vat paid .

if the furniture maker has sales of $120 to a retail store , $12 of vat would be added to the sales price but the furniture maker could subtract a credit for the $5 vat paid on purchases and remit $7 to the government .

the retailer would receive an invoice showing purchases of $120 and $12 of vat .

similarly , if the retailer then has sales of $150 , $15 of vat would be added but the retailer could subtract a credit for the $12 paid on purchases and remit $3 to the government .

in total , the government would receive vat equal to 10 percent of the final sales price to consumers .

thus , a 10 percent vat is equivalent to a 10 percent retail sales tax in terms of revenue .

under both taxes , the final consumer ultimately bears the economic burden of the tax ( $15 ) , except in a vat , the tax is collected in stages , not just in the final sale .

our study countries' experiences with noncompliance suggest that even a conceptually simple vat — one that applies a single tax rate to all goods and services — would have compliance risks and would generate significant administrative costs and compliance burden .

further , like other types of taxes , adding complexity through preferences increases these risks , costs , and burden .

while our study countries had vats of varied designs and complexity at the time of our original review in 2008 , they all devoted significant enforcement resources to addressing compliance issues that would be found in even a simple vat .

as shown in table 1 , compliance risks for a vat can stem from either underpayment of taxes owed on sales , or overstating taxes paid on purchases .

these risks include refund fraud and missing - trader fraud .

vats are vulnerable to refund fraud because businesses with taxable sales less than taxable purchases are entitled to refunds .

all of our study countries were concerned about illegitimate businesses or fraudsters submitting fraudulent refund claims that result in the theft of funds from the government .

in the case of a missing trader , a business is set up for the sole purpose of collecting vat on sales and then disappearing with the proceeds .

because of compliance risks , even simple vats require enforcement activities , such as audits and record keeping by businesses , that create administrative costs for the government and compliance burden for businesses .

of course , compliance risks and the associated administrative costs and compliance burdens are not peculiar to vats .

while the specifics may vary , other types of taxes also carry compliance risks .

a vat , like any tax system , will require government resources to administer .

the drivers of administrative costs in many tax systems include the number of taxpayers ( businesses , individuals , or both ) subject to the tax , how often they file returns , and the percentage of taxpayers audited .

in the case of a vat , administration requires the government to process tax returns and provide certain services to businesses .

even a simple vat warrants education and assistance services , in part to address compliance risks .

tax administrators also need to spend significant resources on audit and enforcement activities .

some available data from our study countries indicate a vat may be less expensive and easier to administer than an income tax .

in 2006 , the tax administration agency in the united kingdom measured administrative costs for the vat to be approximately half a percent of revenue collected compared to over one and a quarter percent for the income tax .

officials at the new zealand inland revenue department also told us that administering their vat was easier than administering some of their other taxes .

for example , only 3 percent of vat returns submitted to new zealand's revenue agency are found to have errors , compared to approximately 25 percent for income tax returns .

as with other taxes , compliance burden with a vat is mostly driven by record - keeping requirements , filing - frequency requirements , and time and resources to deal with audits .

the “fixed cost” nature of many compliance costs associated with a vat means that smaller businesses often face a proportionally higher burden than larger businesses in complying with the vat .

the three most comparable studies we identified estimated that the compliance burden as a percentage of annual sales in canada , new zealand , and the united kingdom ranged from approximately 2 percent for businesses with less than $50,000 in sales to as low as 0.04 percent for businesses with over $1,000,000 in sales .

private accounting and tax experts we spoke with also agreed that as the size of the business grows , the vat compliance burden decreases per dollar of sales .

all of the countries we studied have added complexity to their vat designs , mainly through the use of tax preferences .

tax preferences — also called tax expenditures — result in foregone tax revenue due to preferential provisions that generally shrink the tax base .

tax preferences can also exist in other tax systems , such as income taxes or retail sales taxes .

in our study countries , some economic sectors , such as certain consumer essentials like food and health care and public - sector organizations are often provided vat preferences because of social or political considerations .

other sectors , such as financial services , insurance , and real estate , are provided exemptions or exclusions because they are inherently hard to tax under a vat system .

countries' use of vat preferences — such as exemptions and reduced rates — generally results in reduced revenue and greater compliance risks , administrative costs , and compliance burden .

however , some preferences , such as thresholds for businesses , may not increase administrative costs and compliance burden because they reduce the number of entities subject to vat requirements .

additionally , in most study countries , certain financial - services and real - estate transactions are exempt for administrative purposes , which could result in reduced compliance burden .

vat preferences used in our study countries included exemptions , exclusions , and thresholds .

an exempt good or service is not taxed when sold , and businesses that sell exempt goods or services cannot claim input tax credits for inputs used in producing the exempt output .

while no vat is collected with the final sale , the government still collects tax revenue throughout the stages of production .

tax is paid and collected on inputs .

in contrast , excluding a good or service , more commonly referred to as zero rating , removes it entirely from the tax base resulting in an effective tax rate of zero .

for goods and services that are zero - rated , vat that was paid in the production of the good or service can be fully recovered through input tax credits .

as a consequence , no net vat revenue is actually collected by the government from the sale of zero - rated goods and services .

a threshold is a type of exemption that excludes businesses below a certain size from collecting and remitting vat and from being able to claim input tax credits .

businesses with sales below the threshold are not required to charge vat on their sales and cannot claim input tax credits for vat paid on purchases .

businesses with annual sales above the threshold level are required to register with the tax agency , and collect and remit the vat .

one issue the united states would face if it adopted a national vat is its interaction with retail sale taxes levied by states and localities .

although there are several countries with a federal system of government , canada is the only country that we identified that has a national vat administered alongside a variety of subnational consumption taxes .

canada administers its federal vat and provincial consumption tax systems differently in different provinces .

the four types of national / subnational consumption tax structures in canada are:  a separate federal and provincial vat , both of which are administered  a joint federal and provincial vat administered by the federal government ;  a separate federal vat and provincial retail sales tax administered  a federal vat only .

canada's experience administering a national vat along with a variety of provincial vats and sales taxes demonstrates that multiple arrangements in a federal system are feasible , but results in increased administrative costs and compliance challenges for both government and business .

businesses in provinces where the provincial and federal vats tax the same goods and services and are administered by the federal government have a relatively lower compliance burden since they only have to comply with one set of requirements .

in contrast , businesses , particularly retailers , in provinces with a sales tax face greater compliance burdens than those in other provinces because they are subject to dual reporting , filing , and remittance requirements .

australia , canada , and new zealand , the study countries that most recently implemented a vat , all built on preexisting administrative structures .

all had national consumption taxes that were paid by businesses prior to transitioning to a vat .

despite the preexisting structure , implementation of the new tax in these countries involved multiple agencies , the development of new policies and processes , and the hiring of additional staff .

interagency committees were also established in all three countries to facilitate and coordinate implementation efforts .

these three study countries took 15 to 24 months to implement the vat and devoted a great deal of time and effort to education activities .

before entities subject to vat requirements can be expected to comply , they must know what those requirements are and what they mean to specific economic and industry sectors .

according to international monetary fund guidance on vat implementation , development and testing of tax forms early in the implementation process is important because they are a key part of the education effort .

for australia , canada , and new zealand , this also included extensive outreach efforts through a variety of direct and indirect assistance .

for example , australian officials said a key part of their education and outreach strategy was to target key players in various industry sectors , such as local chambers of commerce .

both canada and australia also provided direct monetary assistance to qualifying small businesses to defray the costs of acquiring the necessary supplies needed to meet new bookkeeping and reporting requirements .

despite significant efforts to encourage businesses to submit materials early for vat registration , both australia and canada still had difficulty getting businesses to register prior to the vat implementation date .

in both countries , this resulted in significant spikes in registration and education - related workload just prior to implementation .

in canada , for example , only 500,000 or 31 percent of the 1.6 million total registrants had voluntarily registered 3 months prior to vat implementation .

the experiences of our five study countries show that all vat designs have compliance risks that generate considerable administrative costs and compliance burden and that , similar to the u.s. tax system , adding complexity to the tax's design increases these risks , costs , and burden .

while our study countries had vats of varied designs and complexity , they all devoted significant enforcement resources to addressing compliance that would be found in even a simple vat .

enforcement activities , such as audits , and record keeping by businesses create administrative costs for the government and compliance burden for businesses .

of course , compliance risks and the associated administrative costs and compliance burden are not peculiar to vats .

while the specifics may vary , other types of taxes also carry compliance risks .

one overriding lesson about vat design is that , like our income tax system , adding tax preferences to the system may satisfy economic , distributional , or other policy goals but at a cost .

tax preferences — in the form of exemptions , zero rates , or reduced rates — often reduce revenue , add complexity , and increase compliance risks .

to mitigate the increased risk , countries have imposed additional record - keeping and reporting requirements on businesses , delayed refunds , and done more auditing of businesses .

the end result is an increase in compliance burden for businesses and administrative costs for the government .

the choice of tax type is typically heavily influenced by criteria other than administrability .

revenue needs , effect on economic performance , and distributional consequences are prominent considerations and have been at the forefront of the debate in the united states about tax reform .

administrability and the details of how a new tax would be implemented often get less attention .

however , administrability and design details do matter .

the benefits of a new or reformed tax system , in terms of revenue , economic performance , or equity , would be at least partially offset by poor design that unnecessarily increased compliance risks , administrative costs , and compliance burden .

chairman camp , ranking member levin , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact james r. white at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or whitej@gao.gov .

in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

in addition to the individual named above , jay mctigue , assistant director ; brian james ; and danielle novak made key contributions to this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

