i am pleased to be here today as you discuss the danger posed by counterfeit drugs .

one source of counterfeit drugs is internet pharmacies .

while some internet pharmacies are legitimate businesses that offer consumers a safe , convenient , and cost - effective way to obtain their medications , the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the national association of boards of pharmacy ( nabp ) have reported that thousands are fraudulent enterprises .

in addition to counterfeit drugs , these “rogue” internet pharmacies often sell prescription drugs that have not been approved for sale in the united states , are substandard and have no therapeutic value , or are harmful to consumers .

drugs sold by rogue internet pharmacies have been found to contain too much , too little , or no active pharmaceutical ingredient , or the wrong active ingredient .

they have also been found to contain dangerous contaminants , such as toxic yellow highway paint , heavy metals , and rat poison .

consumers who have taken prescription drugs purchased from rogue internet pharmacies have experienced health problems , required emergency treatments , and died .

despite the risks , buying prescription drugs on the internet is not uncommon .

according to a recent survey conducted by fda , nearly one in four adult u.s. internet consumers surveyed reported purchasing prescription drugs online .

at the same time , nearly 30 percent said that they lacked confidence about how to safely purchase medicine online .

the proliferation and widespread patronage of rogue internet pharmacies has prompted public officials to identify them as a continuing public health threat .

like brick - and - mortar pharmacies , internet pharmacies are subject to federal and state statutes and regulations that are designed to ensure the safety , efficacy , and proper administration of medications .

no one federal agency is designated as the lead in combating rogue internet pharmacy activity .

instead , a number of federal and state agencies share responsibility for regulating prescription drugs that are marketed and sold to u.s. consumers , including by internet pharmacies .

the federal agencies have separate and distinct roles and often work together .

for example , fda is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs , and fda approval is required prior to marketing prescription drugs in the united states .

u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for enforcing laws prohibiting the illegal importation of goods , including prescription drugs that have not been approved for marketing in the united states by fda .

u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) is responsible for , among other things , investigating violations of customs and trade laws , including those related to trafficking in counterfeit goods .

ice also operates the national intellectual property rights coordination center , the mission of which is to share information across 17 federal government agencies and four foreign regulatory agencies , coordinate enforcement actions , and conduct investigations related to intellectual property theft — including those that occur through rogue internet pharmacies .

the department of justice ( doj ) may investigate and prosecute an operator of an internet pharmacy that is suspected of violating federal laws .

state agencies regulate the practice of pharmacy through state boards of pharmacy and , similarly , the practice of medicine though state medical boards .

my statement will highlight some of the key findings from our july 2013 report on internet pharmacies , and includes selected updates to the report .

among other things , our report identified ( 1 ) how rogue internet pharmacies are selling prescription drugs in violation of federal laws , ( 2 ) challenges associated with federal investigations and prosecutions of rogue internet pharmacies , ( 3 ) efforts to combat rogue internet pharmacies , and ( 4 ) efforts to educate consumers about the risks of rogue internet pharmacies and how to recognize legitimate online pharmacies .

to identify how rogue internet pharmacies are selling prescription drugs in violation of federal laws , we interviewed officials from federal agencies such as fda , cbp , ice , and doj , reviewed federal laws and regulations , and examined agency documents .

to obtain additional information , we interviewed a variety of knowledgeable stakeholders , including nabp and legitscript , an online pharmacy verification service , both of which routinely review internet pharmacy websites to determine compliance with federal and state laws .

to identify challenges involved in investigating and prosecuting rogue internet pharmacies , as well as efforts to combat rogue internet pharmacies , we interviewed officials from federal agencies , including fda , cbp , ice , and doj .

we obtained data from several federal agencies that summarize their efforts to combat internet pharmacies .

we discussed these data with agency officials , reviewed them for reasonableness and consistency , and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we also interviewed officials from stakeholders involved in combating rogue internet pharmacies , drug manufacturers , and private companies that provide services to internet - based companies .

finally , we reviewed published reports on rogue internet pharmacy operations .

to identify efforts to educate consumers about the risks of rogue internet pharmacies and how to recognize legitimate online pharmacies , we interviewed officials from federal agencies and stakeholders to discuss their consumer education efforts .

we also reviewed available educational campaign materials .

we conducted the work for the report on which this statement is based from october 2012 to june 2013 , and made selected updates in february 2014 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

although the exact number of rogue internet pharmacies is unknown , most operate from abroad .

according to legitscript , an online pharmacy verification service that applies nabp standards to assess the legitimacy of internet pharmacies , there were over 36,000 active rogue internet pharmacies as of february 2014 .

federal officials and other stakeholders we interviewed consistently told us that most rogue internet pharmacies operate from abroad , and many have shipped drugs into the united states that are not approved by fda , including counterfeit drugs .

in doing so , they violate federal food , drug and cosmetic act ( fdca ) provisions that require fda approval prior to marketing prescription drugs to u.s. consumers , as well as customs laws that prohibit the unlawful importation of goods , including unapproved drugs .

many rogue internet pharmacies sell counterfeit , misbranded , and adulterated drugs , in violation of fdca provisions .

counterfeiting and trafficking or selling counterfeit drugs also violate laws that protect intellectual property rights .

many also illegally sell certain medications without a prescription that meets federal and state requirements .

indeed , nearly 10 years ago , we made sample purchases from a variety of rogue sites without a prescription and we subsequently received several drugs that were counterfeit or otherwise not comparable to the product we ordered .

to sell drugs to their u.s. customers , foreign rogue internet pharmacies use sophisticated methods to evade scrutiny by customs officials and smuggle their drugs into the country .

for example , rogue internet pharmacies have misdeclared the contents of packages , in violation of customs laws .

rogue internet pharmacies have disguised or hidden their drugs in various types of packaging ; for example , cbp has found drugs in bottles of lotion and in tubes of toothpaste .

some of the drugs we obtained when conducting work for our 2004 report were shipped in unconventional packaging , including in a plastic compact disc case and in a sealed aluminum can that was mislabeled as dye and stain remover in addition , rogue internet pharmacies also often violate other wax.federal laws , including those related to fraud and money laundering .

rogue internet pharmacies are often complex , global operations , and federal agencies face substantial challenges investigating and prosecuting those involved .

according to federal agency officials , piecing together rogue internet pharmacy operations can be difficult because they may be composed of thousands of related websites , and operators take steps to disguise their identities .

the ease with which operators can set up and take down websites also makes it difficult for agencies to identify , track , and monitor rogue websites and their activities , as websites can be created , modified , and deleted in a matter of minutes .

officials also face challenges investigating and prosecuting operators because they are often located abroad , with components of the operations scattered in several countries .

for example , as displayed in figure 1 , one rogue internet pharmacy registered its domain name in russia , used website servers located in china and brazil , processed payments through a bank in azerbaijan , and shipped its prescription drugs from india .

even when federal agencies are able to identify rogue internet pharmacy operators , agency officials told us that they face jurisdictional challenges investigating and prosecuting them .

agencies may need assistance from foreign regulators or law enforcement in order to obtain information and gather evidence .

however , rogue internet pharmacies often deliberately and strategically locate components of their operations in countries that are unable or unwilling to aid u.s. agencies .

in addition , foreign law enforcement authorities that are willing to aid investigations can be slow in responding to requests for help , according to officials from several federal agencies .

as a result of competing priorities and the complexity of rogue internet pharmacies , federal prosecutors may not always prosecute these cases .

such cases are often resource intensive and often involve the application of specialized investigative techniques , such as internet forensics and undercover work .

components of doj routinely prioritize cases for prosecution by applying minimum thresholds associated with illicit activities in order to focus their limited resources on the most serious crimes .

accordingly , agencies may not pursue cases if it appears that such cases do not meet relevant thresholds .

in addition , basing a prosecution on violations of the fdca can be challenging , which may contribute to prosecutors declining to pursue rogue internet pharmacy cases .

though rogue internet pharmacy activity clearly violates the fdca , proving violations of the act's misbranding and counterfeiting provisions can be difficult , according to a doj official .

in addition , violations of these provisions of the fdca are subject to relatively light criminal penalties , which may limit prosecutors' interest .

when federal prosecutors pursue charges against rogue internet pharmacy operators , they often charge them for violating other laws , such as smuggling , mail fraud , wire fraud , or money laundering , since such violations can be less onerous to prove and carry stronger penalties .

despite these challenges , federal agencies and others have taken actions to combat rogue internet pharmacies .

federal agencies have conducted investigations that have led to convictions , fines , and asset seizures from rogue internet pharmacies as well as from companies that provide services to them .

agencies have investigated rogue internet pharmacies independently and conducted collaborative investigations with other federal agencies through ice's national intellectual property rights coordination center .

since our report was published in july 2013 , doj has continued to pursue those that import and traffic in counterfeit drugs , as well as those that purchase from them .

in addition , fda formed a cyber crimes investigation unit in 2013 , and in 2014 , the agency announced its plans to expand its law enforcement presence overseas by placing its first permanent agent at europol — the european union's law enforcement agency .

agencies have also collaborated with law enforcement agencies around the world to disrupt rogue internet pharmacy operations .

for example , fda and other federal agencies have participated in operation pangea , an annual worldwide , week - long initiative in which regulatory and law enforcement agencies from around the world work together to combat rogue internet pharmacies .

in 2013 , fda took action against 1,677 rogue internet pharmacy websites during operation pangea .

fda officials told us that the effect of such shutdowns is primarily disruptive since rogue internet pharmacies often reopen after their websites get shut down ; officials from federal agencies and stakeholders we spoke with likened shutting down websites to taking a “whack - a - mole” approach .

one stakeholder noted that rogue internet pharmacies own and keep websites in reserve so that they can redirect traffic and maintain operations if any of their websites get shut down .

federal agencies responsible for preventing illegal prescription drug imports have also interdicted rogue internet pharmacy shipments .

for example , from fiscal years 2010 through 2012 , cbp reported seizing more than 14,000 illicit shipments of prescription drugs .

however , fda officials noted that the sheer volume of inbound international mail shipments makes it difficult to interdict all illicit prescription drug imports .

fda and others have taken steps to educate consumers about the dangers of buying prescription drugs from rogue internet pharmacies .

in september 2012 , fda launched a national campaign to raise public awareness about the risks of purchasing drugs online .

the campaign provides information about the dangers of purchasing drugs from rogue internet pharmacies , how to identify the signs of rogue internet pharmacies , as well as how to find safe internet pharmacies .

other federal agencies have also taken steps to educate consumers about the dangers of purchasing drugs online ; for example , by posting information on their websites .

nabp also posts information about its quarterly review of internet pharmacies , which most recently showed that 97 percent of the over 10,000 internet pharmacies that it reviewed were out of compliance with federal or state laws or industry standards .

nabp also directs consumers to purchase medicines from legitimate internet pharmacies that it has accredited .

to assist consumers in more readily identifying legitimate online pharmacies , nabp is working to launch a new top - level domain name called .pharmacy .

the association intends to grant this domain name to appropriately licensed , legitimate internet pharmacies operating in compliance with regulatory standards — including pharmacy licensure , drug authenticity , and prescription requirements — in every jurisdiction that the pharmacy does business .

legitscript also helps consumers to differentiate between legitimate and rogue internet pharmacies .

it regularly scans the internet and , using nabp's standards , classifies internet pharmacies into one of four categories: ( 1 ) legitimate , ( 2 ) not recommended , ( 3 ) rogue , or ( 4 ) pending review .

when visiting its publicly available website , consumers can enter the website address of any internet pharmacy and immediately find legitscript's classification .

as of february 3 , 2014 , legitscript had classified 213 internet pharmacies as legitimate and therefore safe for u.s. consumers , on the basis of nabp standards .

despite these actions of agencies and stakeholders , consumer education efforts face many challenges .

in particular , many rogue internet pharmacies use sophisticated marketing methods to appear professional and legitimate , making it challenging for even well - informed consumers and health care professionals to differentiate between legitimate and rogue sites .

for example , some internet pharmacies may fraudulently display an nabp accreditation logo on their website , despite not having earned the accreditation , or may fraudulently display visa , mastercard , paypal , or other logos on their website despite not holding active accounts with these companies or being able to process such payments .

figure 2 displays a screenshot of a rogue internet pharmacy website that may appear to be legitimate to consumers , but whose operators pled guilty to multiple federal offenses , including smuggling counterfeit and misbranded drugs into the united states .

some rogue internet pharmacies seek to assure consumers of the safety of their drugs by purporting to be “canadian.” canadian pharmacies have come to be perceived as a safe and economical alternative to pharmacies in the united states .

over the last 10 years , several local governments and consumer organizations have organized bus trips to canada so that u.s. residents can purchase prescription drugs at canadian brick - and - mortar pharmacies at prices lower than those in the united states .

more recently , some state and local governments implemented programs that provided residents or employees and retirees with access to prescription drugs from canadian internet pharmacies .

despite fda warnings to consumers that the agency could not ensure the safety of drugs not approved for sale in the united states that are purchased from other countries , the prevalence of such programs may have contributed to a perception among u.s. consumers that they can readily save money and obtain safe prescription drugs by purchasing them from canada .

many rogue internet pharmacies seek to take advantage of this perception by purporting to be located in canada , or sell drugs manufactured or approved for sale in canada , when they are actually located elsewhere or selling drugs sourced from other countries .

chairman murphy , ranking member degette , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or crossem@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this statement include geri redican - bigott , assistant director ; michael erhardt ; patricia roy ; and lillian shields .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

