i am pleased to discuss our recent work on the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) vocational rehabilitation and employment program's ( vr&e ) independent living ( il ) “track.” the il track is one of five tracks administered by vr&e and provides non - employment related benefits — such as counseling and assistive devices — to help veterans with service - connected disabilities live more independently when employment is not a feasible goal .

in fiscal year 2011 , almost 3,000 veterans nationwide were served through vr&e's il track .

under 38 u.s.c .

§ 3120 ( d ) , a veteran's il program “shall consist of such services…as the secretary determines necessary to enable such veteran to achieve maximum independence in daily living.” areas .

in general , timeframes for il plans may not exceed 24 months , except under certain circumstances .

under va regulations , vr&e may declare a veteran successfully “rehabilitated” when all goals in their il plan have been achieved , or if they meet other conditions .

therefore , “rehabilitation” does not necessarily mean that the veteran's disabilities have improved , but rather that the goals developed in their il plan to facilitate independence have been met .

when veterans are not successfully rehabilitated , their case may be closed as “discontinued.” vr&e can also temporarily “interrupt” a veteran's case when circumstances arise that affect the provision of the goods and services .

because there is no statutory limit on the number of il plans a veteran can have , officials told us that veterans can reapply to the vr&e program at any time and start another il plan .

however , unlike vr&e's four employment - related tracks , the number of veterans who can be admitted into the il track annually is limited by the law .

while this number has increased over the years , the cap was set at 2,600 veterans in fiscal year 2011 , and 2,700 in fiscal year 2012 .

my remarks today are based on our report , which was released on june 7 , 2013 , and describes ( 1 ) the characteristics of veterans in the il track , and the types and costs of benefits they were provided ; ( 2 ) the extent to which their il plans were completed , and the time it took to complete them ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the il track has been administered appropriately and consistently across regional offices .

to obtain this information , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations ; standards for internal controls and managerial cost accounting ; as well as vr&e policies , procedures , and other relevant studies and documentation .

we also interviewed va officials and veteran service organizations , and visited va regional offices in san diego , california ; atlanta , georgia ; detroit , michigan ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and the district of columbia .

in addition , we analyzed va administrative data and used statistical models to determine any differences in rehabilitation times .

moreover , we reviewed the case files of a random , generalizable sample of 182 veterans who were assigned to the il track at some point during fiscal year 2008 .

we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

a more detailed explanation of our methodology is available in our report .

from fiscal years 2008 through 2011 , the typical participant in the il track was a male vietnam - era veteran .

of the 9,215 veterans who entered the il track in these years , most ( 67 percent ) were male and 50 years old or older .

most women in the il track were in their 40s or 50s .

most of the 9,215 il track veterans served in the vietnam war ; relatively few served in the global war on terrorism as part of operation enduring freedom or operation iraqi freedom.veterans served in the u.s. army , and less than 1 percent served in the national guard or reserves .

more than three - quarters of il track veterans had a combined service - connected disability rating of at least 60 in addition , most ( 60 percent ) il track percent , and 34 percent had a disability rating of 100 percent .

regardless of disability rating level , the most prevalent disabilities among this group were post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) , tinnitus ( “ringing in the ears” ) , and hearing loss .

furthermore , our review of the case files of 182 randomly selected il track veterans in fiscal year 2008 shows that they were provided a wide range of goods and services , from individual counseling and the installation of ramps to a boat , camping gear , and computers .

the most common type of goods or services were related to counseling , education and training , and computer and camera equipment .

for all veterans who entered the il track in fiscal year 2008 , we estimated that vr&e purchased a total of almost $14 million in goods and services .

the average spent per il track case that year was nearly $6,000 .

we found that most ( about 89 percent ) of il track veterans who began only one plan during fiscal year 2008 were classified by vr&e as “rehabilitated” — i.e. , successfully reaching and maintaining the goals identified in their il plan — by the end of fiscal year 2011 .

at the same time , about 11 percent of cases were either “discontinued” — i.e. , closed by vr&e because the rehabilitation goals in the veteran's il plan were not completed — or were still active cases .

of the il cases that had been discontinued , the reasons included the veteran declining benefits , not responding to va's attempts to contact them , worsening medical conditions , and death .

we also found that some il plans were easier to close as rehabilitated than others , due to the varied nature and complexity of il plans , which are based on veterans' individual disabilities and needs .

for example , one il plan we reviewed for a veteran with rheumatoid arthritis only called for the purchase and installation of eight door levers and a grab rail for the bathtub to facilitate his independence .

however , another il plan we reviewed called for providing a veteran who used a wheel - chair with medical , dental , and vision care as needed , and about $24,000 in modifications to the veteran's home , including modifying the veteran's bathroom , widening doors and modifying thresholds , and installing an emergency exit ramp in a bedroom .

while the overall il rehabilitation rate nationwide was 89 percent for veterans who started an il plan in fiscal year 2008 , the rate varied by regional office , from 49 to 100 percent .

about two - thirds of regional offices rehabilitated 80 percent or more of their 2008 il track veterans by the end of fiscal year 2011 .

in addition , vr&e's il rehabilitation rate was higher in regional offices with larger il caseloads .

among veterans who entered the il track in fiscal year 2008 , an average of 90 percent were rehabilitated at offices with more than 25 il entrants , compared to an average of 79 percent at offices with 25 or fewer il entrants .

furthermore , in fiscal year 2008 il veterans nationwide completed their il plans in an average of 384 days ( about 13 months ) ; however , we found that the length of time to rehabilitate these veterans varied by regional office from a low of 150 days at the st. paul regional office to a high of at most regional offices ( 49 895 days at the roanoke regional office .

of 53 ) , however , the average number of days to complete veterans' il plans ranged from 226 to 621 days ( 8 to 21 months ) .

to control for various factors that could influence rehabilitation time frames , we used a statistical model to estimate the amount of time it would take certain groups of il track veterans to complete their il plans.model show differences across regional offices in the amount of time it takes for veterans to become rehabilitated based on caseload .

more specifically , the chance of rehabilitation within 2 years was less than 50 percent at 4 offices , between 50 and 90 percent at 18 offices , and 90 the results of our percent or higher at 16 offices .

veterans served by regional offices with large il caseloads generally had a higher probability of completing an il plan more quickly than a veteran served by an office with a small il caseload ( see fig 1 ) .

we identified four key areas where vr&e's oversight of the il track was limited: ( 1 ) ensuring compliance with case management requirements , ( 2 ) monitoring regional variation in il track caseload and benefits provided , ( 3 ) adequacy of policies and procedures for approving expenditures on goods and services for il track veterans , and ( 4 ) availability of critical program management information .

certain vr&e case management requirements were not being met by some regional offices .

for example , based on our review of vr&e's site visit monitoring reports , we found that some vocational rehabilitation counselors ( vrcs ) were not fulfilling vr&e's requirement to meet in - person each month with il track veterans to monitor progress in completing their il plans .

vrcs told us that this requirement is a challenge due to the size of their caseloads and the distances that they may have to travel to meet with veterans .

furthermore , while vr&e and the veterans health administration ( vha ) both have policies that require them to coordinate on the provision of goods and services for il track veterans , we found that some vrcs experience challenges in doing so .

several vrcs in the regions we interviewed indicated that when they refer il track cases to vha physicians , the physicians do not respond or they respond too late .

as a result , services for il track veterans are delayed or purchased by vr&e instead of vha .

in our review of 182 il track case records , we found some instances where vr&e purchased goods and services that appear to be medically related , such as ramps and grab bars , which could have been provided by vha .

in response , we recommended va explore options for enhancing coordination to ensure il track veterans' needs are met by vha , when appropriate , in a timely manner .

va concurred and stated that it was piloting an automated referral system that would allow vr&e staff to make referrals to vha providers and check on their status electronically .

vr&e does not systematically monitor variation in il track caseload size and benefits across its regional offices .

we found that the total il track caseload for fiscal years 2008 through 2011 ranged from over 900 cases in the montgomery , alabama regional office to 4 cases in the wilmington , delaware regional office .

in addition , we found that some regions developed il plans that addressed a broad range of needs while others elected to develop more focused plans that provided fewer benefits to achieve vr&e's rehabilitation goal .

vr&e has relied on the information provided through its general quality assurance ( qa ) activities and a series of periodic ad hoc studies to oversee the administration of the il track .

because these activities are limited in scope , frequency , and how the information is used , we noted that they may not ensure consistent administration of the il track across regions .

in response , vr&e officials commented that qa results are analyzed to determine trends , and make decisions about training content and frequency .

vr&e's current policy for approving il track expenditures may not be adequate , considering the broad discretion vr&e provides to regions in determining and purchasing goods and services .

while officials told us that vrcs are required to include all cost estimates when they submit veterans' il plans to be reviewed and approved by the region's vr&e officer , vr&e's written policy and guidance do not explicitly require this for all il expenditures .

thus , regional offices have the ability to purchase a broad range of items without any central office approval , resulting in some offices purchasing goods and services that may be questionable or costly .

 ( see table 1 for the level of approval required for il expenditures. ) .

in one case we reviewed , vr&e central office approval was not required for the purchase of a boat , motor , trailer , and the boat's shipping cost , among other items , totaling about $17,500 .

in another case we reviewed , vr&e central office was not required to approve total expenditures of $18,829 for a riding lawn mower — which vr&e's current policy prohibits — and other il goods and services including a bed , bed frame , desktop computer , and woodworking equipment .

without appropriate approval levels , vr&e's il track may be vulnerable to potential fraud , in our report , we recommended that va reassess waste , and abuse.and consider enhancing its current policy concerning the required level of approval for il track expenditures .

va concurred with our recommendation and said it will use the results of an internal study to determine if changes are needed to its existing cost - review policies or procedures .

va stated that any necessary changes should be implemented by march 2014 .

vr&e's case management system — commonly referred to as — does not collect or report critical program management “cwinrs”information that would help the agency in its oversight responsibilities .

more specifically , this system does not collect and maintain information on: costs of il goods and service purchased: the system does not collect information on the total amount of funds vr&e expends on il benefits .

vr&e aggregates costs across all its tracks , despite va's managerial cost accounting policies that require the costs of products and services to be captured for management purposes .

federal financial accounting standards also recommend that costs of programs be measured and reported .

according to va officials , cost information is not collected on the il track alone because they view the five tracks within vr&e as a single program with the same overarching goal — to help veterans achieve their employment goals .

we previously reported on this issue in 2009 .

at that time , we found that vr&e's five tracks do not share the same overarching goal .

therefore , we concluded that vr&e should not combine track information .

types of il benefits provided: the system does not collect information on the types of il benefits provided to veterans in a standardized manner that can be easily aggregated and analyzed for oversight purposes .

in several of the il track cases we reviewed , the goods and services purchased were grouped together under a general description , such as “il equipment” or “il supplies,” without any further details .

in addition , we found that controls for data entry were not adequate to ensure that all important data were recorded .

for example , we estimated that the service provider field was either missing or unclear for one or more services in about 15 percent of all il cases that began in fiscal year 2008 .

number of il veterans served: the system does not provide vr&e with the information it needs to monitor its statutory entrant cap and program operations .

the law allows vr&e to initiate “programs” of independent living services and assistance for no more than a specified number of veterans each year , which , as of 2012 , was set at 2,700 .

in analyzing vr&e's administrative data , we found that vr&e counts the number of il plans developed annually rather than the number of individual veterans admitted to the track .

because multiple il plans can be developed for an individual veteran during the same fiscal year , veterans with multiple plans may be counted more than once toward the statutory cap .

as a result , vr&e lacks complete information on the number of veterans it is serving through the il track at any given time — information it could use to better manage staff , workloads , and program resources , and ensure that it can effectively manage its cap .

similar to our report's findings , vr&e's 2012 evaluation of cwinrs has shown that the system limits vr&e's oversight abilities and does not capture all important data elements to support the agency's “evolving business needs.”that the new system modifications will enable them to individually track veterans served through the il track .

however , we found that the cwinrs redesign will not enable vr&e to obtain data on il track expenditures or the types of goods and services provided .

at the time of our review , no specific time frames were provided for the cwinrs redesign , but officials noted it could take up to 3 years to obtain funding for this effort .

in our report , we recommended that va implement an oversight approach that enables vr&e to better ensure consistent administration of the il track across regions .

this approach would include ensuring that cwinrs ( 1 ) tracks the types of goods and services provided and their costs , ( 2 ) accounts for the number of il track veterans being served , and ( 3 ) contains stronger data entry controls .

va concurred with our recommendation and stated that discussions of system enhancements and the development of ad hoc reports are ongoing .

the agency also will be considering a new oversight approach as part of an internal study .

officials told us that they plan to modify cwinrs , and in conclusion , strengthening oversight of vr&e's il track is imperative given the wide range of goods and services that can be provided under the law to help veterans with service - connected disabilities improve their ability to live independently when employment is not feasible .

more attention at the national level can help ensure that il track case management requirements are met , the track is administered consistently across regions , expenditures for goods and services are appropriate , and critical information is collected and used to ensure veterans' il needs are sufficiently addressed .

chairman flores , ranking member takano , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact daniel bertoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 , or at bertonid@gao.gov .

contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include clarita mrena ( assistant director ) , james bennett , david chrisinger , david forgosh , mitch karpman , sheila mccoy , james rebbe , martin scire , ryan siegel , almeta spencer , jeff tessin , jack warner , and ashanta williams .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

