i am pleased to be here today to discuss the export - import bank of the united states' ( ex - im ) small business program .

i appreciate the opportunity to provide some insights from gao's work on this issue .

as you know , since the early 1980s when congress first directed ex - im to make available a specified percentage of its export financing for small businesses , there has been considerable interest in ex - im's support for small business .

initially , congress directed ex - im to make 10 percent of its financing authority available to small businesses , but increased the requirement to 20 percent in the 2002 reauthorization of the bank's charter .

while congress did not change the percent required in the 2006 reauthorization of ex - im , it did direct the bank to make organizational changes related to its small business financing , and to better evaluate its small business efforts .

as requested , today , i will discuss ( 1 ) trends in ex - im's small business financing since fiscal year 2000 and ( 2 ) the weaknesses gao found in the tracking and reporting of ex - im's small business financing and steps ex - im has taken to address them .

my remarks are based primarily on a report that gao published in 2006 , done at the request of this committee , and analysis we conducted to update selected information and follow up on our recommendations .

for the 2006 report , we analyzed data on ex - im transactions , examined ex - im documentation regarding its small business calculations , and interviewed knowledgeable staff .

the work for this statement was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

i would also note that gao has work underway that should be of particular interest to this committee .

ex - im's 2006 reauthorization legislation requires ex - im to develop — and gao to assess — performance standards related to its small business program , including financing for businesses owned by disadvantaged individuals and women .

gao is specifically addressing the following questions: ( 1 ) what performance standards has ex - im developed ? .

 ( 2 ) how well do they meet established criteria such as tracking progress and providing managers needed information to make decisions regarding assistance under the mandate ? .

and ( 3 ) what steps has ex - im taken to implement these standards ? .

we look forward to working with the officials at ex - im to complete this work , and to reporting our findings to congress later this year .

established in 1934 , ex - im operates as an independent agency of the u.s. government and is the official export credit agency of the united states .

in 1983 , congress required ex - im to make available for fiscal year 1986 and thereafter not less than 10 percent of its aggregate loan , guarantee , and insurance authority for financing exports by small businesses .

in 2002 , congress established several new requirements for ex - im relating to small business , including increasing from 10 to 20 percent the proportion of ex - im's aggregate loan , guarantee , and insurance authority that must be made available for the direct benefit of small businesses .

when reauthorizing the bank's charter in 2006 , congress again established new requirements for ex - im , including a small business division with an office of financing for socially and economically disadvantaged small business concerns and small business concerns owned by women , designating small business specialists in all divisions , creating a small business committee to advise the bank president , and defining standards to measure the bank's success in financing small business .

ex - im has taken steps to meet these requirements .

ex - im uses the small business administration methodology to determine whether a company qualifies as a small business .

to apply this methodology , ex - im obtains company information through its application process .

ex - im also subscribes to dun and bradstreet , a commercial information vendor , which provides information about companies , including standard industrial classification ( sic ) codes .

ex - im uses the sic codes provided by dun and bradstreet to determine a company's small business standing by obtaining the corresponding north american industry classification system ( naics ) code through the small business administration website .

ex - im offers a variety of financing instruments , including loan guarantees , export credit insurance , and working capital guarantees .

ex - im provides its insurance either directly to exporters ( non - bank - held insurance ) or to banks which in turn finance u.s. exporters ( bank - held insurance ) .

for the bank - held insurance policies , ex - im authorizes the policy for the bank , which does not know at the time it applies for the financing which exporters will eventually use the export credit insurance .

between fiscal years 2002 and 2007 , ex - im increased the percentage of its financing for small businesses and continued to finance most small business transactions through insurance or working capital guarantees .

ex - im met the congressional requirement to make available not less than 20 percent of its financing authority for small businesses in 2006 and 2007 .

in fiscal year 2006 , ex - im's small business financing was 26.2 percent of its total financing and in fiscal year 2007 it increased to 26.7 percent .

in fiscal years 2002 through 2005 , ex - im did not reach the goal , with its small business financing share ranging from 16.9 percent to 19.7 percent .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

the percent of ex - im financing directly benefiting small business depends on the value of small business financing compared to the value of non - small business financing .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

while the small business financing value slowly increased between fiscal years 2001 and 2007 , the value for non - small business financing was noticeably lower in 2006 and 2007 , compared to 2005 .

ex - im has primarily used three types of tools to finance small business transactions: non - bank - held insurance , working capital guarantees , and bank - held insurance ( see fig .

3 ) .

in 2007 , each tool was used to finance about 30 percent of the $3.4 billion ex - im made available for small business transactions .

the remaining 8 percent of small business financing was through medium - and long - term loans and guarantees .

this pattern contrasts with non - small business financing , where the largest share is through medium - and long - term loans and guarantees .

ex - im's use of bank - held insurance has posed some challenges for accurately calculating the small business financing share , in part because ex - im does not know who the exporter will be prior to authorizing the bank - held insurance transaction and therefore cannot make a small - business designation at that time .

for bank - held insurance and credit guarantee facilities , ex - im estimates the share of the financing benefiting small business based on data regarding previous shipments under those types of transactions .

these estimates of the small business share of authorized transactions can differ significantly from the small business amounts actually shipped under the authorizations .

for example , in 2005 ex - im authorized a $10 million short - term insurance policy under which no shipments had been reported prior to our march 2006 report .

in contrast , in 2005 ex - im also authorized a $50 million short - term insurance policy where shipments under the policy exceeded $87 million for a 6- month period ( or $174 million on an annualized basis ) .

in our 2006 report , we found weaknesses in ex - im's data and data systems for tracking small business financing and made recommendations for improvement , and ex - im has taken steps to address those weaknesses .

we reported that , while ex - im generally classified companies' small business status correctly , weaknesses in its data and data systems limited its ability to accurately determine its small business financing amounts and share .

in implementing “ex - im online” and certain internal control measures , ex - im has improved its ability to accurately measure small business financing .

based on our review of independent data and ex - im's paper transaction files , gao reported in 2006 that ex - im's classification of companies' small business status was generally correct .

from our review of ex - im's electronic databases and dun and bradstreet data on companies' sales and employment , we estimated that , 83 percent of the time , ex - im's small business designation matched the designation based on dun and bradstreet data .

based on a review of ex - im's official paper transaction files in instances where ex - im and dun and bradstreet's designations differed , we determined that ex - im's designation was justified in most instances .

in our 2006 report , we identified weaknesses in ex - im's process for calculating its small business financing and made some corresponding recommendations for improvement .

the weaknesses ranged from internal control weaknesses that may affect only a few transactions a year to more significant weaknesses in ex - im's system for estimating about one - third of its small business support .

we reported two internal control weaknesses in ex - im data systems used to calculate and report on ex - im's small business financing ; by implementing its interactive database , ex - im online , the bank has largely addressed those weaknesses .

first , we found that ex - im's electronic data systems used to calculate its small business support did not contain complete or up - to - date information on companies' small business status .

as a result , to obtain the most current information for these companies , ex - im officials needed to identify and locate paper transaction files .

while ex - im's paper files generally supported its small business designation , we found a significant number of discrepancies between ex - im's paper and electronic files .

second , we found that ex - im's data systems sometimes contained conflicting information for the same company .

ex - im maintained information about insurance transactions and participants in one data system and information about loans and guarantee transactions and participants in another data system .

according to ex - im , updating information in a company's record ( including its small business designation ) in one database did not update the company's record in the other database .

as a result , the two databases could , and in some cases did , have conflicting information about the same company .

gao recommended that ex - im improve the completeness , accuracy , and consistency of its transaction data .

since the issuance of the gao report , ex - im bank has implemented a number of controls to enhance and reinforce the bank's methodology for capturing relevant information for reporting small business statistics .

most notably , ex - im replaced its previous data systems with ex - im online , an interactive , web - based process that allows exporters , brokers , and financial institutions to transact with ex - im electronically .

according to ex - im , more than seventy - five percent of all applications are now submitted online , omitting the need to transfer information from paper copies to the bank's electronic files .

ex - im officials stated that ex - im online also includes a direct feed from dun and bradstreet , which provides current demographic information about a company so that ex - im can make an accurate assessment of the company's small business status .

in addition to initiating ex - im online , ex - im changed its internal procedures to require documented dual signoff on the small business determination for each transaction .

we reported two weaknesses in ex - im's system for estimating small business financing when the exporter is not known at the time ex - im authorizes the transaction , which applied to about one - third of ex - im's total small business financing for fiscal year 2004 .

first , we found that ex - im's estimates might not accurately reflect the amount of small business financing under bank - held insurance policies because of large differences between the amount of financing authorized and the amount of financing used to actually ship goods .

for both fiscal years 2004 and 2005 , the value of shipments under bank - held insurance policies was a fraction of the total authorized value of the bank - held insurance policies .

for example , according to ex - im records , it authorized $3.4 billion of bank - held insurance transactions for fiscal year 2004 , but there were only $280 million in shipments under bank - held insurance policies in the first 6 months of the fiscal year .

ex - im applied its estimate of the small business share of transactions , based on these shipments , to the $3.4 billion of bank - held insurance policies it authorized during the year , and determined that about $720 million of the authorized value of bank - held insurance policies during the year directly benefited small business .

thus , the method resulted in estimates of small business shares for the authorized value of these types of transactions based on a very small share ( about 8 percent ) of the total authorized value .

also , we found that ex - im classified the small business status of a significant portion of the companies making shipments as “unknown” and excluded them from its calculation of the estimate of its small business support .

of the $280 million of shipments under bank - held insurance for 2004 , for example , an ex - im official classified about $128 million ( or nearly half ) as shipments by companies whose small business status was “unknown” and excluded these shipments from its calculation of total shipments .

gao recommended that ex - im improve its system for estimating the value and proportion of direct small business support for those transactions where the exporter is not known at the time ex - im authorizes the transaction .

according to ex - im , its implementation of ex - im online improves these estimates because borrowers can now enter their shipment reports directly into ex - im online .

according to ex - im , two - thirds are being entered in this manner .

ex - im officials stated that such automated submission of shipment information has significantly reduced the amount of shipments by exporters whose small business status is unknown .

they stated that only 3 percent of the fiscal year 2007 shipments under bank - held insurance were by exporters whose small business status was unknown .

they also stated that , for credit guarantee facilities , no shipments were recorded by exporters whose small business status was unknown .

gao also recommended that ex - im engage an external auditor to audit its annual , legislatively mandated report on its direct support for small business .

ex - im engaged mayer hoffman mccann p.c. , its internal auditor , to perform the audit .

with respect to credit guarantee facilities , bank - held policies , and non - bank - held insurance ( i.e. , single buyer / multi - buyer ) policies , the auditors found that ex - im's process to obtain and calculate eligible small business counts operates in accordance with its policy and approved methodology .

however , the auditors found exceptions to stated policy during their review of the working capital guarantee and non - credit guarantee facilities programs .

for example , in the working capital guarantee program , the auditors noted a number of exceptions related to the completion of data fields that would have “flagged” these accounts as small business .

the auditors stated that they believed that ex - im management was taking action to strengthen supervisory edit controls over these processes .

ex - im is statutorily required to report on the number of its authorized transactions that directly benefit small business ; in our 2006 report we found that ex - im's method of determining this number included some transactions that did not directly benefit small business .

ex - im has frequently reported that about 85 percent of its authorized transactions directly benefit small business .

for instance , in fiscal year 2004 , it reported that 2,572 ( or 83 percent ) of its authorized transactions directly supported small businesses .

this count was based on crediting all 698 bank - held insurance policies as directly benefiting small business .

we reported that while many of these transactions directly benefit small business , they may not all directly benefit small business , as evidenced by the fact that ex - im's own estimate showed that about 20 percent of the value of bank - held insurance policies directly benefited small business during 2004 .

gao recommended that ex - im more accurately determine and clearly report the number of transactions that directly benefit small business ; however ex - im officials disagreed with this recommendation and have not changed their methodology .

ex - im officials stated that they reviewed their process and believe that it is appropriate .

a senior official also noted that since the methodology has been used for a number of years , the bank can confidently report trends .

the bank also believes that their methodology provides a conservative estimate .

since gao's last report on small business financing in march 2006 , ex - im has made a number of changes .

it also surpassed the target of allocating 20 percent of its financing to small business for both 2006 and 2007 .

while this is partly due to a drop in the overall level of financing provided to other customers by the bank , ex - im has shown increases in the level of business with small firms over several years .

in addition , ex - im has made changes in its data systems which allow congress to have a greater level of confidence in its reporting on small business and other matters , and it has instituted new internal controls to further increase accuracy in categorizing firms' small business status .

managing its resources going forward to respond to ongoing congressional interest in the composition of ex - im's financing will , undoubtedly , entail new challenges for the bank .

we look forward to working with ex - im further on issues related to evaluation of its small business financing efforts , including those directed at businesses owned by disadvantaged individuals and minorities , as mandated by the congress with the strong support of this committee .

madam chairwoman , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time .

should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact loren yager at ( 202 ) 512-4347 or yagerl@gao.gov .

celia thomas , miriam a. carroll and jason bair also made major contributions to this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

