in 2010 , approximately 118 million handguns were available for sale to , or were possessed by , civilians in the united states .

states regulate if , where , and how their residents can carry handguns — openly or concealed .

according to state reporting , there were approximately 8 million active concealed carry permits in the united states as of december 31 , 2011 .

through the years , gun rights and gun control advocates have debated the efficacy of carrying a concealed handgun and constitutionality of the right to carry a concealed handgun .

the debates have included such issues as who may legally carry a concealed handgun and where the concealed handgun may be legally carried ( i.e. , state parks , government buildings , public arenas , etc .

 ) , among other issues .

state and local authorities control the issuance of concealed carry applicants who wish to obtain such permits are required to meet permits.certain state eligibility requirements .

for example , in many states , a person must be at least 21 years old and not have any felony convictions to receive a permit .

currently , state law determines whether and to what degree to honor other states' permits .

typically , states enter into reciprocity agreements that establish which out - of - state permit holders can carry concealed firearms within each state .

congress has considered the issue of concealed carry permitting and the concept of national reciprocity .

most recently , members of the 112th congress have proposed legislation that would address certain aspects of concealed carry permitting as well as national reciprocity .

proposed legislation currently pending in congress would provide national reciprocity or allow individuals that have a concealed carry permit issued from one state to be eligible to carry a concealed weapon in any other state that issues concealed carry permits .

other proposed legislation would require states to have minimum standards for the process of issuing concealed carry permits as well as minimum eligibility requirements to attain a permit .

both gun rights and gun control advocates have raised concerns with a variety of proposed legislation related to concealed carry permitting and national reciprocity .

in this context , you requested that we provide information on the status of concealed carry permitting .

accordingly , this report describes the extent to which states allow concealed carry permits , and how select states' eligibility requirements and laws regarding recognition of other states' permits differ ; the processes select states use to help ensure they revoke permits when holders no longer meet eligibility requirements ; and how law enforcement officials in select states determine whether permits they encounter are current and valid .

to answer these objectives , we contacted 48 states to obtain information on the number of valid concealed carry permits , denials , and revocations in each state .

further , we gathered information for 50 states and the district of columbia on their permit issuing laws ( as they were as of march 2012 ) , issuing authorities , and reciprocity agreements , among other things .

moreover , we conducted a case study on 9 of the 50 states — arizona , california , florida , georgia , louisiana , maryland , tennessee , texas , and virginia — which we selected to reflect differing state eligibility requirements , state reciprocity of permits , and permit - issuing processes .

from these states , we obtained and analyzed state data and information for 2011 on their eligibility requirements for issuing permits , procedures for monitoring permit holders' continued eligibility , and the number of permits issued and revoked .

in the 9 states included in our case study that issue permits , we also interviewed state and local officials responsible for issuing permits to obtain information on applicable laws and procedures for issuing , monitoring , and revoking permits , and entering into reciprocity agreements .

in addition , we interviewed state and local law enforcement officials in these states to obtain information on processes they use to determine whether permits are valid when needed .

the results from our case studies cannot be generalized across all states .

however , the information obtained from these case studies provides a broad understanding of the different requirements and processes states utilize in issuing permits .

to assess the reliability of the data and information , we asked the states about the systems they use to track the data , any steps taken to verify accuracy , and any limitations to the data .

our analysis was largely dependent on the availability of state data on the number of concealed carry permits .

in some cases , statewide data were not available , and in other cases only data from certain time periods were available .

as a result of these limitations , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable solely to illustrate a minimum number of total active permits and approximate number of state - specific permits .

in addition , we obtained information from and interviewed federal officials with firearms - related experience and law enforcement responsibilities — the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

we obtained information from and interviewed fbi criminal justice information services ( cjis ) division officials on their federal databases that states query when screening concealed carry permit applicants' criminal history backgrounds .

we obtained information and interviewed atf headquarters officials and field special agents on their experience with and perspectives on state concealed carry permits .

we also interviewed non - governmental groups representing a cross section of different views on concealed carry permit issues to gain an understanding of the historical context on these issues.appendix ii contains a more detailed discussion of our objectives , scope , and methodology .

we conducted our work from august 2011 through july 2012 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings in this product .

states' concealed carry laws can allow handgun owners , under certain conditions , to carry a loaded handgun either concealed on a person , in a vehicle , or in public .

“concealed carry” means a person may carry a handgun in a manner so that others cannot see the handgun .

generally , these laws apply to handguns — i.e .

pistols and revolvers ; therefore , for the purposes of this report , we use this category to define firearms .

states can allow civilians to carry a concealed handgun with or without a permit .

generally , states regulate whether individuals can carry handguns in public places such as schools , government buildings , and state and national parks , among other restricted places .

states can be classified into one of the following four categories based on their concealed carry laws: no - issue: the state does not permit residents or nonresidents to carry concealed handguns .

may - issue: the state applies discretion in granting permits to carry concealed handguns .

shall - issue: issuing authorities are required to issue a permit to an applicant that fulfills the objective statutory criteria if no statutory reason for denial exists .

permit not required: states do not require a permit to carry a concealed handgun .

state laws also define which entities issue permits in their state .

for example , some states have delegated the authority to issue permits to a single issuing authority ( sometimes referred to as a centralized system ) , such as departments of public safety , while other states have multiple issuing authorities ( referred to as a decentralized system ) , such as local law enforcement and local courts .

there are also states with a mixture of both centralized and decentralized systems .

of the 48 states that issue concealed carry permits ( 2 states do not issue permits — illinois and vermont ) , 20 states have centralized issuing authorities that process all applications and issue all permits for their state .

another 23 states have decentralized issuing authorities that process applications and issue permits at the jurisdictional level .

the remaining 5 states use a combination of centralized and decentralized issuing authorities .

these states generally utilize decentralized authorities for residents and a centralized authority for nonresidents ( see app .

iii for a list of states' issuing authorities ) .

there is no federal law specifically addressing the issuance of concealed carry permits at the state level .

while the fbi does not have a direct role in the issuance of concealed carry permits , the fbi serves as a source for criminal history background information .

states may contact the fbi to obtain national criminal history records , if any , on applicants who apply for a concealed carry permit , but checking with the fbi prior to issuing a state permit is not required by federal law .

generally , states request name - based background checks from the fbi cjis division's national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) to help them make a determination about who is prohibited from receiving or possessing a handgun and thus prohibited from obtaining a concealed carry permit .

during the course of a nics background check , the applicant's descriptive information is checked against three computerized systems to determine if the person is eligible to obtain the handgun .

those systems include the national crime information center ( ncic ) , the interstate identification index ( iii ) , and the nics index .

if the applicant indicates that he or she is not a u.s. citizen , a query is generated against the immigration and naturalization databases maintained by the department of homeland security , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement .

atf is the primary agency that enforces federal firearms laws regulating the commerce of firearms in the united states .

although the federal government does not have a direct role in the issuance of concealed carry , there is federal law making it unlawful for individuals to receive or possess a handgun if they ( 1 ) have been convicted in any court of , a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year ; ( 2 ) are fugitives from justice ; ( 3 ) are unlawful drug users or are addicted to any controlled substance ; ( 4 ) have been adjudicated as mental defective or have been committed to a mental institution ; ( 5 ) are aliens illegally or unlawfully in the united states , or certain other aliens admitted under a nonimmigrant visa ; ( 6 ) have been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions ; ( 7 ) have renounced their u.s. citizenship ; ( 8 ) are the subject of certain types of a qualifying restraining order of a court ; or ( 9 ) have been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence .

in practice , state determinations about eligibility to obtain concealed carry permits depend largely upon a person's criminal history .

when determining who should receive a concealed carry permit , generally states use eligibility prohibitors that are similar to the federal eligibility restrictions that apply for possessing or receiving a handgun .

for example , persons convicted of a felony , the subject of certain types of orders of protection , or who have been committed to a mental institution are disqualified from receiving a concealed carry permit in many states .

since 2002 , more states are required by law to issue permits and more permits have been issued to eligible applicants , although some states still maintain discretion in determining who receives permits .

states can issue to either residents of the state only or to both residents and nonresidents , depending on state law .

because eligibility requirements differ , an individual could obtain a permit in one state but not another .

in addition , the number of states that recognize other states' permits has grown since 2002 , but some states do not recognize any other states' permits .

over time , more states have changed their concealed carry laws either from no - issue or may - issue to shall - issue , as shown in table 1 below .

figure 1 below shows changes in issue designation , by state , for 2002 and 2012 .

see app .

iv for a list of issue designation by state ) .

shall - issue states generally issue more permits than may - issue states relative to the state population .

 ( see app .

v for information on the approximate number of active permits by state as of december 31 , 2011. ) .

of the 48 states that issue permits , 45 provided us with permit information .

the top 5 states by ratio of active permits issued to the adult population ( 20 years or older ) are shall - issue states — utah , iowa , south dakota , georgia , and indiana .

the ratio of active permits relative to adult population in georgia and south dakota ( shall - issue states ) is approximately 9 percent and 11 percent respectively , while the same ratio in california and maryland ( may - issue states ) is approximately 0.1 percent and 0.3 percent respectively.profiles ( see apps .

iii , iv , and v for detailed information on each state ) .

move mouse over the name of each state for its concealed carry information .

mont .

vt. wisc .

s.dak .

wyo .

mich. nebr .

ill. del .

colo. w.va. kans .

mo .

ky. d.c. n.c. okla. n.mex .

ark .

miss .

ala. ga. la .

if applicants do not meet states' eligibility requirements , issuing authorities may deny the applicant a permit .

of the 45 states that reported permit information , 36 stated that they track denials and 29 provided some common reasons for the denials .

for example , in 2011 , louisiana reported that the state denied approximately 400 permits and issued 12,000 concealed handgun permits ( this includes original and renewal ) citing failure to provide information within the specified time frames as required by the state as a common cause of denial .

likewise , florida reported that from july 1 , 2010 , to june 30 , 2011 , the state issued approximately 124,000 concealed carry permits ( this includes original ) , and denied approximately 2,000 permits .

like louisiana officials , florida officials identified failure to provide required information , such as proof of citizenship and legible fingerprint cards , as common reasons for denial .

authorities in 26 states ( 10 may - issue and 16 shall - issue ) that grant permits have discretion in making permit decisions .

while 10 may - issue states have broad discretion in making permit decisions , authorities in 16 shall - issue states have limited discretion in making permit decisions , if no statutory reason for denial exists .

in virginia ( a shall - issue state ) , for example , issuing authorities stated that they can deny individuals whom the court finds are likely to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others , based on a preponderance of the evidence .

similarly , in georgia ( a shall - issue state ) , issuing authorities noted that applicants are subject to denial if the issuing authority determines , among other things , that the applicant is not of good moral character .

however , both virginia and georgia officials told us that although they have the discretion to deny a permit based on the factors mentioned above , it is rarely utilized .

in the 10 may - issue states , issuing authorities may issue a permit to eligible individuals after considering additional requirements , such as the applicant's history and personal character .

for example , maryland issues permits to residents who , on the basis of an investigation , can demonstrate a good and substantial reason for needing a permit , and maryland's issuing authority is responsible for making the determination of what constitutes a good and substantial reason .

for example , in one instance , maryland's issuing authority denied a permit to a community activist working in anti - drug and anti - crime programs because , although the activist claimed that people had told him that others had made threats of bodily harm against him , the activist could not provide the names of the persons who had made the threats and had not reported any assaults .

in upholding the denial on appeal , the issuing authority explained that a good and substantial reason should include additional evidence , rather than be based solely on personal anxiety or concern about unsubstantiated threats .

similarly , issuing authorities in california use discretion to determine if the applicant is of good moral character , and good cause exists for the issuance of the permit.authorities in california ( local law enforcement ) told us that an example of a good cause is a business owner who may regularly retain cash on - hand used to pay employees .

the issuing authorities of the 2 may - issue states in our case study also conduct additional detailed investigations ( eg , physical verification of residency , reviews of applicants' financial history , and in - person interviews , etc. ) .

of permit applicants .

for example , maryland's issuing authority sends local law enforcement to an applicant's neighborhood or place of business to verify the applicant's address and help decide whether to issue a permit , according to the maryland state police .

likewise , several of the issuing authorities in california that we interviewed noted that they hold face - to - face interviews with applicants when determining permit eligibility .

of the 48 states that issue permits , 22 states' laws allow for authorities to issue only to residents of their state , while 26 allow for issuance to both residents and nonresidents .

state laws allow issuing authorities to issue permits to nonresidents in 10 of these 26 states on a limited basis .

for example , the issuing authorities in california may issue permits to nonresidents whose principal place of employment or business is within the state .

the remaining 16 states do not have such limitations .

see appendix vi for a listing of states that issue nonresident permits and the number of permits issued as of december 31 , 2011 .

while the majority of states share some common eligibility requirements for qualifying an individual for a concealed carry permit , such as firearms safety training and being at least 21 years of age , the 9 states included in our case study that issue permits define certain eligibility requirements very differently , which can affect who is granted a permit ( see app .

i for individual state summaries in our case study ) .

states disqualify individuals convicted of a felony , but these 9 states differed in defining what crimes constitute a felony ( i.e. , a particular crime could be a felony in a particular state , but a misdemeanor in another ) .

for example , in virginia , certain types of larceny are considered class 6 felonies and would disqualify an individual convicted of these crimes from being if an individual either takes money eligible for a concealed carry permit.or an item worth at least $5 directly from a person , or takes goods valued at $200 or more not directly from a person , he or she could be convicted of a class 6 felony in virginia .

alternatively , in tennessee , if an individual commits a crime of theft of property or services that is valued at $500 or less , it would be classified as a class a misdemeanor and the individual would remain eligible for a concealed carry permit .

thus , permit applicants who have committed a particular crime could be eligible to receive a permit in some states , but not in others .

la .

rev .

stat .

ann .

§ 40:1379.3 ( c ) ( 8 ) .

specifically disqualify applicants who suffer from a mental or physical infirmity , while the other 6 states in our case study that issue permits do not .

similarly , texas and tennessee disqualify applicants for delinquency on child support .

the other 7 states in our case study that issue permits did not cite this as a factor for denial or revocation .

see table 2 below for a listing of state disqualifiers for the 9 states included in our case study .

the laws of 8 of the 9 states we examined that issue permits also require applicants to complete training related to firearms safety to qualify for a permit ; however , the training requirements differ considerably .

these requirements range from a list of approved training courses with no specified curriculum to a prescriptive state curriculum that can include a combination of classroom and live fire proficiency testing , which table 3 illustrates ( also see app .

i for state summaries ) : further , differences in the information required by issuing authorities for eligibility determination exist not only between states but within states .

issuing authorities in some decentralized states augment their application process with additional requirements , which means the steps an individual must take to get a permit will vary by jurisdiction .

for example , the issuing authority in one of the california counties we interviewed reported that it requires applicants to have three letters of reference before considering applicants for a permit .

other california counties in our review do not have this requirement .

in another example , in virginia , a shall - issue state , the decision of requiring applicants to submit fingerprints was left to the discretion of each issuing authority , however this discretion has been removed by the virginia legislature effective july 1 , 2012 .

as of march 2012 , 39 of the 48 states that issue permits and vermont allow concealed carry , and recognize permits from other states .

of these , the number of other states whose permits they recognize varies , as follows: 7 states recognize permits issued in 1 to 19 states , 17 states recognize permits issued in 20 to 39 states , and 15 states recognize permits issued in 40 or more states — of these , 13 states recognize permits issued in all 47 other states that issue permits .

vermont does not require a permit to carry concealed handguns and does not issue permits ( residents and nonresidents can carry concealed handguns ) .

the other 9 states that issue permits do not recognize permits issued from other states ; 8 of these states are may - issue states .

in addition , illinois and the district of columbia do not allow concealed carrying of handguns or issue permits , nor do they recognize other states' permits .

over the last 10 years , shall - issue states have increasingly honored more states' permits .

for example , georgia honored 12 states' permits in 2002 , but increased that number to 26 by 2012 .

similarly , louisiana honored 5 states' permits in 2002 , but honored 38 states' permits as of march 2012 .

figure 3 shows which states' permits each state will recognize ( see app .

vii for a listing by state ) .

move mouse over the black and teal circle in each state to see carry permit information for states .

mont .

n.dak .

minn. vt. n.h. wisc .

s.dak .

n.y. mass .

wyo .

mich. pa. r.i. conn. nebr .

n.j. ill. ind .

w.va. colo. del .

md .

kans .

mo .

va. ky. d.c. n.c. tenn. okla. n.mex .

ark .

s.c. miss .

ala. ga. la .

tex .

fla .

in general , shall - issue states recognize permits from more states than may - issue states .

for example , texas honors the permits of 40 states , while 32 states honor texas permits ; and arizona and tennessee honor the permits of 47 states , while 35 states honor arizona permits , and 37 honor tennessee permits .

alternatively , may - issue states do not generally grant reciprocity .

of the 10 may - issue states , alabama and delaware are the only states whose laws allow for recognition of permits states may not grant reciprocity for a number of issued by other states.reasons .

for example , states may require that eligibility requirements are similar to those of their own state , or that similar background checks are conducted on permit applicants ; if this is not the case , they are unlikely to enter into a reciprocity agreement .

for the 9 states included in our case study , state laws prescribe the criteria for recognizing other states' permits , as discussed below .

tennessee and arizona ( shall - issue states ) , as required by law , will recognize permits issued in any other state .

tenn. code ann .

§ 39-17-1351 ( r ) , ( recognizing that a facially valid handgun permit , firearms permit , weapons permit or license issued by another state is valid in tennessee according to its terms and is treated as if it is a handgun permit issued by tennessee ; provided , however , this is not construed to authorize the holder of any out - of - state permit or license to carry any firearm or weapon other than a handgun within the state ) .

ariz. rev .

stat .

§ 13-3112 ( q ) ( recognizing concealed weapon permits issued by other states if the permit is recognized as valid in the issuing state , and the permit holder is legally present in arizona and not legally prohibited from possessing a firearm in arizona ) .

however , even when these requirements are met , a person with a permit from another state may not carry a concealed weapon in arizona if the person is under 21 years of age , or is under indictment for , or has been convicted of , a felony in any jurisdiction , unless the conviction has been expunged , set aside or vacated , or the person's rights have been restored pursuant to ariz. rev .

stat .

§ 13-3112 ( s ) .

fla. stat .

ann .

§ 790.015. criminal history databases that make up nics when screening applicants for a concealed carry permit .

virginia ( a shall - issue state ) law allows for recognition of permits issued only in states that provide the means for validation of a permit 24 hours a day , among other things .

california and maryland ( may - issue states ) alternatively , by law , do not recognize permits issued in any other state .

states also have the ability to rescind reciprocity agreements , particularly if reciprocal states make changes to their concealed carry laws or requirements .

for example , according to a florida issuing authority official , nevada no longer recognizes florida permits because the time between renewals , and subsequent background checks , was changed from 5 to 7 years in 2009 , and thus deemed too long for nevada's standards .

currently , permit holders who want to carry concealed during their travel to or through other states must know which states will recognize their permits or else they must obtain a nonresident permit in the state they are traveling to or through .

this can be challenging since state laws change regularly and permit holders may not always be aware of the most recent changes , though state websites post information on whose permits they honor .

for example , because of a recent change in louisiana's reciprocity laws , while louisiana recognizes nonresident permits issued in other states , louisiana residents can no longer use a nonresident permit from another state to carry a concealed weapon in louisiana .

all 9 states in our case study reported reconfirming permit holders' eligibility at renewal , and 8 reported having mechanisms to monitor eligibility between issuance and renewal .

these 9 states utilize similar methods to revoke permits , provide for an appeal process , and use varying processes to retrieve revoked permits .

issuing authorities from all 9 states included in our case study reported that they take action to confirm an individual's continued eligibility to hold a permit as part of the permit renewal process , and 8 of these 9 states also use mechanisms to monitor resident permit holders' continued eligibility between issuance and renewal .

as part of this process , issuing authorities consider the length of time permits are valid .

during this period , they look for any violations committed by the permit holders since issuance of the permit .

the length of time that issuing authorities have to monitor permits holders generally ranges from 1 to 7 years , as shown in figure 4 , with the majority ( 38 of 48 ) of the states that issue permits having a 4 to 5-year period of validity ( see app .

v for specific state information on length of time a permit is valid ) .

in 8 of the 9 states that issue permits in our case study , issuing authorities are to be notified if a resident or nonresident permit holder commits a disqualifying act within their state through law enforcement or state databases .

for example , according to officials from the virginia state police , they monitor their state criminal databases on a daily basis and receive information from the courts that they use to identify resident permit holders who commit offenses that would make them ineligible to hold permits .

in such cases , the virginia state police is to inform the state's local permit issuing authorities via fax when permit holders are convicted of a criminal offense or commit an act that would make them ineligible .

however , authorities may not be made aware if permit holders commit disqualifying acts outside of their state until conducting background checks during the renewal period or if an out - of - state law enforcement official contacts the state issuing authority .

in florida and tennessee , issuing authority officials said that they receive arrest reports and review the reports for matches against their permit databases , and when necessary , take appropriate action , such as revoking the permit .

in arizona , california , louisiana , maryland , texas , and virginia , issuing authority officials reported that they receive an automatic alert if permit holders are arrested within their state , which they refer to as “rap back.”the issuing authorities in these states then review the charges and take appropriate action , to include revoking of a permit if warranted .

according to fbi officials , in response to user needs including those of law enforcement for notification of nationwide , subsequent criminal activity , the fbi is developing a national rap back service .

specifically , through the next generation identification's ( ngi ) rap back service of the fbi cjis division , states may have the opportunity to subscribe to this service and automatically be notified of subsequent arrests across the united states for crimes committed by permit holders and other individuals who have had a federal background check .

in order for states to use fbi's ngi rap back , technical and legislative updates may be required .

states by the summer of 2014 .

the fbi's ngi rap back service is expected to be available to in georgia , the remaining case study state , the state's 159 county probate courts that issue permits in the state could become aware of disqualifying acts committed by permit holders through other means .

for example , according to georgia permit issuing authority officials , law enforcement entities within the issuing county may call the issuing probate courts of permit holders who have committed disqualifying acts , which may result in the court revoking the permit .

additionally , probate court officials could become aware of disqualifying acts committed by permit holders through other means , such as reading or scanning the local newspaper and watching local news television broadcasts , which may result in a revocation .

with respect to legislation , states that wish to use the fbi's ngi rap back services need legislation requiring concealed carry permit applicants to be fingerprinted and a background check conducted at the federal level .

further , state legislation would also have to allow for retention of those fingerprints at the federal level for use in the fbi's ngi rap back services .

of the 45 states that reported permitting information , 35 reported that they track revocation information , such as the number of permits revoked and the general reasons for the revocations .

for the 9 states in our case study , in 2011 , the number of revocations per state ranged from approximately 30 to 900 .

all except 1 select state ( georgia ) provided data as shown in table 4 , the number on the number of revocations for 2011.of revocations and issuances vary across the case study states .

generally , issuing authorities in the 9 states in our case study that issue permits revoke permits when a permit holder commits a criminal offense , such as a felony , that would make the individual no longer eligible to hold a permit .

in virginia , an issuing authority reported that a common reason for a revocation is if a permit holder is found to be driving under the influence .

in louisiana , the issuing authority reported that a common reason for a revocation is if a permit holder failed to notify the department of public safety of an arrest within 15 days .

in virginia , for example , a revocation could also be warranted if the permit holder has a noncriminal prohibition against carrying a concealed firearm , such as being diagnosed with a mental illness or subject to a domestic violence restraining order .

for example , in arizona , if a judge orders a permit holder to receive mental health treatment or a permit holder is involuntarily committed to a mental health facility , the holder's permit is revoked .

after detecting a disqualifying criminal offense or other disqualifying factors , officials from each of the 9 states in our case study that issues permits reported that they begin the revocation process by notifying the permit holder through a letter or court order , or in some cases , issuing authorities send law enforcement to deliver the letter and retrieve the permit .

the letter is to outline the procedures for either appealing the revocation ( if applicable ) or physically surrendering the permit .

further , all 9 states in our case study have an appeals process .

some states , such as louisiana and texas , have a suspension process until the appeal process is completed , final disposition is determined by a court , or the individual surrenders the permit .

for example , when a permit holder is arrested , the issuing authority is to suspend the permit until the final disposition has been determined by the court .

if the court convicts the permit holder , the issuing authority is to revoke the permit .

for example , louisiana offers permit holders the option of providing additional evidence for the issuing authority to consider as part of its appeals process before final revocation .

texas offers its permit holders the option of requesting a hearing to review the denial , suspension , or revocation of their permit .

as mentioned above , the 9 states in our case study that issue permits have mechanisms for indicating in their respective systems that a permit has been revoked .

in addition , these states have varying retrieval processes .

for example: in arizona , the permit holder is required to surrender a revoked permit .

if the holder does not surrender the permit and is caught by law enforcement with the revoked permit , the law enforcement officer is directed to seize the permit and return it to the issuing authority .

in california , although doing so is not a requirement in state law , local law enforcement officials said that permit holders are asked to physically return their revoked permit to the issuing authority ( a city police department or sheriff's department ) .

some georgia issuing authorities send a letter communicating the court order via certified mail notifying permit holders that their permits have been revoked and to surrender the permits .

if the issuing authorities do not receive a response , they can send local law enforcement to retrieve the revoked permit .

virginia's issuing authorities use different processes to retrieve revoked permits .

for example , one issuing authority in virginia sends local law enforcement to the permit holder's residence to retrieve the revoked permit .

another jurisdiction requires the permit holder to come to the circuit court for a hearing .

the judge may charge the permit holder with contempt if the person does not show up for the hearing .

of the 9 states in our case study that issue permits , 3 ( georgia , maryland , and tennessee ) reported that they can impose a penalty for failure to surrender a revoked permit or continuing to possess one .

permit issuing authority officials in 5 out of the remaining 6 states ( arizona , california , florida , louisiana , texas , and virginia ) said that they were not aware of any instances where individuals have presented revoked permits to law enforcement and noted that because revocations are annotated in their state - wide systems available to law enforcement , law enforcement could know if someone presented a revoked permit .

when encountering an individual with a concealed carry permit , such as during a routine traffic stop , law enforcement officials in our 9 case study states that issue permits told us that they visually inspect a permit to verify its status to ensure it is valid and active .

they also have mechanisms available to further validate the permit , as needed , such as checking a permit against state databases or contacting state dispatchers .

law enforcement in these states may take steps to confirm a permit is valid and active if law enforcement knows a person has a permit and determines a need to take this action .

in texas , permit holders are required by law to present their permit when encountering law enforcement and identification is requested .

in addition , in 5 of our case study states ( arizona , florida , louisiana , tennessee , and virginia ) , permit holders are required to produce a permit if law enforcement demands it .

for example , in 4 of these states ( louisiana , tennessee , texas , and virginia ) , law enforcement could become aware if an individual had an active permit when running his or her driver's license , as permits in these states are linked to the driver's license system .

during these checks , law enforcement in these states would also receive information on whether the individual had a permit revoked .

permit holders may also voluntarily present permits to law enforcement officials immediately when being pulled over for a traffic stop regardless of state requirements .

while tennessee law does not require permit holders to present permits unless requested by law enforcement officers , according to tennessee issuing authority officials , firearms safety training required for all tennessee permit holders teaches them to do so when encountering law enforcement .

generally , law enforcement officials in all 9 case study states said that when presented with a permit , they would visually inspect the permit to verify that the permit was current and belonged to the individual .

all of these states have a standardized permit prescribed by state law , which can make it easier for law enforcement to verify .

further , all of these states' permits contain the permit holders' name , permit expiration date , and unique permit number — this information assists law enforcement in verifying whether a permit is current .

as shown in table 5 , the permits have other physical features such as a photograph , the date of birth , or a state seal or hologram , among others .

law enforcement officials in all 9 case study states said they would not routinely take additional steps to verify a permit beyond visual inspection and verifying permit information in the driver's license system in states where permits are linked to such systems .

these officials explained that their top priorities during a traffic stop would be officer safety and the reason for the stop ( eg , traffic violation ) .

however , law enforcement in all of these states has other means to further validate a permit as needed , although some methods are easier to use than others .

according to issuing authority officials in arizona , california , florida , louisiana , maryland , tennessee , texas , and virginia , law enforcement within their state can instantly access state databases , which have permit holders' information , to validate the status of a permit as needed .

in florida , for example , issuing authority officials said that they update all information related to permit holders in the state's criminal database nightly .

the florida department of law enforcement — which manages the database — makes the information available to all law enforcement agencies .

thus , a law enforcement officer in the field can obtain current information on the status of a permit usually by contacting the officer's dispatcher , or in some florida jurisdictions , law enforcement can obtain current permit information from their vehicles' on - board computer systems .

in georgia and maryland , law enforcement officers can call the issuing authority to verify the status of resident permits .

however , law enforcement may not be able to instantly validate a permit because permit issuing authorities generally operate during normal business hours ( monday through friday , between the hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. ) .

in addition , law enforcement may have mechanisms to validate permits issued by other states .

as noted above , louisiana , tennessee , texas , and virginia provide access to permit information when officers check these driver's licenses ; consequently , this check can be used to validate permits within their state or outside of their state .

further , an out - of - state law enforcement agency can obtain current information on florida - issued permits by submitting an information request to the florida department of law enforcement customer support center .

additionally , arizona , florida , louisiana , tennessee , texas , and virginia input permit information into the international justice and public safety network ( nlets ) , an information - sharing system available to all states' law enforcement agencies .

nlets provides users instant access to permit holder information , such as permit status ( i.e. , whether the permit is valid , active , or revoked , etc .

 ) , and a description of the permit holder .

submission of permit holder information into nlets is strictly voluntary for states that have a centralized state database .

currently , approximately 20 states input permit information into nlets .

states that do not have a centralized state database of permit holders ( eg , georgia ) cannot make information available in nlets .

law enforcement in other states can also call select states' dispatchers in florida and maryland to validate permits issued by these states .

to validate a permit issued in california , officers from other states could call the california department of justice , which collects permit information from the issuing authorities throughout the state .

we provided portions of a draft of this report to state and local officials in arizona , california , florida , georgia , louisiana , maryland , tennessee , texas , and virginia .

we did not obtain official comments from the department of justice because we were not directly auditing its programs .

however to ensure the accuracy of the information in the report that relates to the department provided , the department provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the attorney general of the united states ; and other interested parties .

in addition , this report is available at no charge on the gao web site at: http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report please contact carol cha at ( 202 ) 512-4456 or chac@gao.gov or eileen larence at ( 202 ) 512-6510 or larencee@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 163,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 4,572,376 unlicensed open carry permitted: yes permit to carry concealed: arizona significantly revised its weapons permit laws in 2010 .

arizona had allowed the open carrying of a weapon without a permit prior to that time , but since 2010 , arizona has allowed residents to carry a firearm open or concealed without a permit .

however , arizona does issue concealed carry permits , which may be used for purposes of reciprocity , and to carry in certain locations .

length of permit validity: 5 years eligibility requirements: the arizona department of public safety is required to issue a permit to carry a concealed weapon to a person who meets all of the following eligibility requirements: 1. is a resident of arizona or a united states citizen ( i.e. , in - state and 2. is 21 years of age or older ; 3. is not under indictment for and has not been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony ; 4. does not suffer from mental illness and has not been adjudicated mentally incompetent or committed to a mental institution ; 5. is not unlawfully present in the united states ; 6. has ever demonstrated competence with a firearm ( as described in the training requirement section below ) and provides adequate documentation that the person has satisfactorily completed a training program a. adequate documentation means: a ) a current or expired arizona permit ; b ) a certificate or affidavit of completion from the conductor of the course ; c ) evidence of current military service or proof of honorable discharge or general discharge under honorable conditions from the united states armed forces ; d ) a concealed weapon permit as described in the training requirement section below .

firearms training requirements: an applicant shall demonstrate competence with a firearm through any of the following: 1 .

completion of any firearms safety or training course or class that is available to the general public ; that is offered by a law enforcement agency , a junior college , a college or a private or public institution , academy , organization or firearms training school ; and that is approved by the department of public safety or that uses instructors who are certified by the national rifle association .

2 .

completion of any hunter education or hunter safety course approved by the arizona game and fish department or a similar agency of another state .

3 .

completion of any national rifle association firearms safety or training course .

4 .

completion of any law enforcement firearms safety or training course or class that is offered for security guards , investigators , special deputies , or other divisions or subdivisions of law enforcement or security enforcement and that is approved by the department of public safety .

5 .

evidence of current military service or proof of honorable discharge or general discharge under honorable conditions from the united states armed forces .

6 .

a valid current or expired concealed weapon , firearm , or handgun permit or license that is issued by another state or a political subdivision of another state and that has a training or testing requirement for initial issuance .

7 .

completion of any governmental police agency firearms training course and qualification to carry a firearm in the course of normal police duties .

8 .

completion of any other firearms safety or training course or class that is conducted by a department of public safety - approved or national rifle association - certified firearms instructor .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: arizona law requires that the concealed weapon , firearm , or handgun permit or license issued by another state or its political subdivision be recognized if the following conditions are met: 1. the permit or license is recognized as valid in the issuing state ; 2. the permit holder is legally present in arizona ; 3. the permit holder is not legally prohibited from possessing a firearm in arizona.4 .

the permit holder is 21 years of age or older ; and 5. the permit holder is not under indictment for , or been convicted of , a felony offense in any jurisdiction ( unless the conviction has been set aside in some way , or the applicant's rights have been restored , and the permit holder is not a prohibited possessor under state or federal law ) .

revocation process: the permit must be suspended or revoked if the person no longer meets the eligibility requirements listed above .

the department must notify the permit holder in writing within 15 working days of the revocation or suspension and state the reasons for the action.arizona law also provides that if a person is arrested or indicted for an offense that would disqualify him or her from obtaining a permit , or prohibited from possessing a weapon under state law , the permit is required to be immediately suspended and seized .

the permit is to be restored if the permittee is found not guilty or the charges are dismissed .

permits may also be suspended when permittees do not present their permit at the request of law enforcement .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement officials in arizona , and in states that participate in the international justice and public safety network ( nlets ) , can run a concealed weapons query through the system .

law enforcement officials in states that do not participate in nlets can call dispatch at the arizona department of public safety .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of september 1 , 2011: 35,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 26,801,914 unlicensed open carry permitted: no permit to carry concealed: california law provides license - issuing authority to various officials: a sheriff of a county ; or the chief or other head of a municipal police department of any city , or city and county .

the issuing authority may issue one or two forms of concealed carry license: a license to carry a firearm capable of being concealed on the person ; or in a county of less than 200,000 , a license to carry , only in that county , a loaded and exposed firearm capable of being concealed upon the person .

the issuing authority may include any reasonable restrictions or conditions that the issuing authority deems warranted , including restrictions as to the time , place , manner , and circumstances under which the person may carry the concealed firearm .

these restrictions are to be indicated on the permit .

length of permit validity: the license is generally valid for a period not to exceed 2 years .

for peace officers , it is 4 years .

for judges , it is 3 years .

eligibility requirements: the license may be issued if the following conditions are met: 1. the person applying is of good moral character ; 2. good cause exists for the issuance ; 3. the applicant is a resident of the county or city within the county ; 4. the applicant has completed a course of training ; and 5 .

the california department of justice ( ca doj ) has determined that the person is not prohibited by state or federal law from possessing , receiving , owning , or purchasing a firearm .

firearms training requirements: applicant must complete a firearms safety training course: a .

for new applicants , the course must be acceptable to the licensing authority , not be longer than 16 hours , and must include instruction on at least firearm safety and the law regarding the permissible use of a firearm .

b .

for renewal applicants , the course must be acceptable to the licensing authority , be at least 4 hours , and must include instruction on at least firearm safety and the law regarding the permissible use of a firearm .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: california does not recognize concealed carry permits from other states .

revocation process: the license must be revoked by the local licensing authority if it has either been notified by the ca doj or determines that the person is prohibited by california or federal law from possessing , receiving , owning , or purchasing a firearm .

correspondingly , if the ca doj determines that the licensee is subject to any of these prohibitions , it must notify the local licensing authority .

if the licensing authority revokes the license , the ca doj must be notified of the revocation immediately .

the licensee must also be immediately notified of the revocation in writing .

if a person moves from his or her original county of residence , the license will expire 90 days after the move .

if the license was to carry a loaded and exposed firearm , the license will be revoked immediately when the licensee changes his or her place of residence .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: california law enforcement uses local law enforcement and the ca doj databases to verify the validity of permits ; for example: a california police department enters all concealed carry permit information into the police department records management system which is linked to coplink ( a computer system that accepts information from all law enforcement agencies that are linked into coplink ) .

other law enforcement entities that are linked into coplink can get concealed carry permit information .

another police department stated that it can check its database or ca doj databases to verify the status of a concealed carry holder's permit .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 887,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 14,288,320 unlicensed open carry permitted: no permit to carry concealed: yes .

under florida law , it is a crime to carry a concealed firearm without having a license to carry .

length of permit validity: licenses are valid for 7 years from the date of issuance .

eligibility requirements: the department of agriculture and consumer services is required to issue a license when the applicant meets the following requirements:a .

is a resident of the united states or permanent resident alien , in certain circumstances , a foreign government official ; b .

is 21 years of age or older ; c. does not suffer from a physical infirmity that prevents the safe handling of a firearm ; d. desires a legal means to carry a concealed firearm for lawful self - 2 .

criminal history information: a .

is not ineligible to possess a firearm by virtue of a felony b .

is not prohibited from purchasing or possessing a firearm by any other provision of florida or federal laws .

c. has not had adjudication of guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on any felony or misdemeanor crime of domestic violence unless 3 years have elapsed since probation or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled , or the record has been sealed or expunged ; d. has not been issued an injunction that is currently in force and effect and that restrains the applicant from committing acts of domestic violence or acts of repeat violence ; e. licenses must be denied if the applicant has been found guilty of , had adjudication of guilt withheld for , or had imposition of sentence suspended for one or more crimes of violence constituting a misdemeanor , unless 3 years have elapsed since probation or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled or the record has been sealed or expunged .

if the applicant is charged with a disqualifying crime or injunction related to domestic violence during the processing , the processing must be suspended pending final disposition.1 .

substance abuse and mental health information a .

has not been committed for the abuse of a controlled substance or been found guilty under florida's drug laws or similar laws of another state within 3 years prior to the application submission ; b .

does not chronically and habitually use alcoholic beverages or other substances to the extent that his or her normal faculties are impaired ; c. has not been adjudicated an incapacitated person under florida law or similar laws or another state unless 5 years have elapsed since the applicant's restoration to capacity by court order ; d. has not been committed to a mental institution under florida law or similar laws of another state , unless the applicant produces a certificate from a licensed psychiatrist that the applicant has not suffered from the disability for at least 5 years prior to the date of submission .

firearms training requirements: the department of agriculture and consumer services is required to issue a license when the applicant: demonstrates competence with a firearm by completion of an approved class , such as one offered by the national rifle association , a certified instructor , or law enforcement , or through evidence of experience through the military service , among other things .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: florida will grant reciprocity to only those states that honor its concealed weapons permit .

revocation or suspension process: licenses must be revoked if the licensee has been found guilty of a crime of violence within the preceding 3 years .

once the department has been notified by a law enforcement agency , court , or the florida department of law enforcement that an applicant or licensee has been arrested or formally charged for a disqualifying crime , or an injunction related to domestic violence , the department must obtain written verification and then must suspend the license .

florida also provides suspension and revocation authority to the department if a licensee becomes ineligible due to the previously outlined physical , mental health or criminal disqualifications .

mechanism available for law enforcement officer's within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement ( in - state and out - of - state ) can check the validity of a florida permit through the florida department of law enforcement's database .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 600,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per us 2010 census: 6,906,024 unlicensed open carry permitted: no permit to carry concealed: georgia law allows an individual to carry a weapon in a concealed or open manner — in the person's home , car , or place of business .

an applicant is eligible for a license to carry a concealed 1. is domiciled in that county .

this also includes non - citizens , who provide certain identifying information .

2. is at least 21 years of age .

3. has not been convicted of a felony by any court ( unless pardoned ) ; 4. does not have felony proceedings pending against the person ; 5. is not a fugitive from justice ; 6. is not federally prohibited from possessing or shipping a firearm ; 7. has not been convicted of the offense of unlawful manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance or other dangerous drug ; 8. has not had his or her weapons carry license revoked ; 9. has not been convicted of specified weapons - related offenses , such as carrying a weapon without a license , unless it has been 5 years since any related restraint or supervision or other conviction ; and10 .

has not been convicted of a drug - related offense and is not subject to related restraint and supervision , a second drug related conviction , or a conviction related to ( 6 ) – ( 8 ) above , in the 5 years prior to the date of application .

may also provide licenses to military personnel .

ga. code ann .

§16-11-129 ( a ) .

ga. code ann .

§ 16-11-129 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) .

mental health and substance abuse 11 .

has not been hospitalized as an inpatient in any mental hospital or alcohol or drug treatment center within the 5 years immediately preceding the application ; however , the judge has discretion to issue the weapons carry license or renewal license , considering the circumstances surrounding the hospitalization and the recommendation of the superintendent of the hospital or treatment center where the individual was a patient .

firearms training requirements: not required factors state considers in granting reciprocity: georgia law provides that an out - of - state resident who is licensed to carry a weapon in a state whose laws recognize georgia licenses can carry a weapon in georgia .

the license holder must follow georgia law in carrying the weapon .

other states' permits are not valid for georgia residents .

revocation process: if the judge learns or has brought to his or her attention any reasonable ground to believe that the licensee is not eligible to have the license , after notice and hearing , the judge may revoke the license .

the judge must find that the person does not meet the weapons carry license eligibility requirements , has falsified the application , is mentally incompetent , or chronically uses alcohol or narcotics .

possession of a revoked license is a misdemeanor offense .

ga. code ann .

§ 16-11-129 ( e ) .

law enforcement officers within and outside of the state can call the issuing probate court during normal business hours to verify the validity of permits .

some probate courts require documentation or other proof that the person requesting is a member of law enforcement ( a faxed request on letterhead , or an in - person request by a uniformed officer with a proper identification such as a badge ) .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 40,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 3,279,135 unlicensed open carry permitted: yes permit to carry concealed: the deputy secretary of public safety services of the department of public safety and corrections is required to issue a concealed handgun permit to any louisiana resident who qualifies for a permit under the louisiana permit eligibility provisions .

length of permit validity: 5 years .

la .

rev .

stat .

ann .

§ 40:1379.3 ( h ) ( 2 ) .

there is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant has a history of engaging in violent behavior upon proof that , within a 10-year period immediately preceding the date of the application , the applicant has been arrested or charged on three or more occasions for any crime of violence , or has been arrested or charged on two or more occasions for any crime of violence that may be punished by death .

6. not have been discharged from the u.s. armed forces under certain circumstances ( eg , dishonorable discharge ) .

7 .

prior permit applications: a. not have had a permit denied within 1-year prior to the most b. not have a permit revoked within 4 years prior to the most recent application.8 .

demonstrate competence with a handgun .

firearms training requirements: upon application to the department for a permit , all applicants shall demonstrate competence with a handgun by any one of the following: a. completion of any department of public safety and corrections - approved firearms safety or training course that shall include at least a minimum of 9 hours of instruction as detailed below: i. ii .

iii .

iv .

v. vi .

one hour of instruction on handgun nomenclature and safe handling procedures of a revolver and semi - automatic pistol ; one hour of instruction on ammunition knowledge and fundamentals of pistol shooting ; one hour of instruction on handgun shooting positions ; three hours of instruction on the use of deadly force and conflict resolution that will include a review of la .

rev .

stat .

ann .

§§14:18 through 14:22 and which may include a review of any other laws relating to the use of deadly force ; one hour of instruction on child access prevention ; and two hours of actual live range fire and proper handgun cleaning procedures: 1. live range fire shall include 12 rounds each at 6 feet , 10 feet , and 15 feet for a total of 36 rounds ; 2. each applicant or permittee must perform at least one safe reload of the handgun at each distance ; 3. each applicant or permittee must score 100 percent hits within the silhouette portion of a national rifle association ( nra ) b - 27-type silhouette target with at least 36 rounds ; b. completion of the nra personal protection course including instruction in child access prevention conducted by a nra certified instructor ; c. completion of the nra basic pistol shooting course including instruction in child access prevention conducted by a nra certified instructor ; d. completion of a firearms training course approved by the louisiana state board of private security examiners , in accordance with la .

rev .

stat .

ann .

§ 37:3284 et seq. , including instruction in child access prevention ; e. possession of a current valid license or permit to carry a concealed handgun issued by a parish law enforcement officer ; f. completion of a law enforcement training academy program certified by the council on peace officer standards and training ; or g. proof of completion of small arms training while serving with the armed forces of the united states of america as described in la .

rev .

stat .

ann .

§ 40:1379.3 ( d ) ( 1 ) .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: while louisiana law recognizes the validity of out - of - state permits when carried by out - of - state residents , it does not allow louisiana residents to obtain permits from other states for the purpose of carrying a concealed weapon in louisiana .

the permits of out - of - state residents are valid in louisiana in the following circumstances: 1 .

the permit is current and valid ; 2. the permit holder is at least 21 years of age ; and 3. the state in which the permit was issued recognizes permits issued by louisiana .

louisiana residents may not use permits issued by another state for the purpose of authorizing the carrying of a concealed weapon in louisiana .

the deputy secretary for public safety services is authorized to enter into reciprocity agreements with other states so that full - time active peace officers commissioned in another state have the same authority as a person issued a concealed handgun permit to carry a concealed handgun while in louisiana , regardless of whether or not they are in the official discharge of their duties .

revocation process: a permit is to be revoked if the permittee fails to satisfy any of the qualification requirements .

permit holders are prohibited from carrying a weapon while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance ; the permit is considered automatically suspended and is not valid .

the department is required to revoke the permit where the holder has carried the weapon in these circumstances , refuses to submit to a chemical test , or where the holder commits negligent carrying of a concealed handgun .

permit holders are required to make law enforcement officers aware that the holder has a weapon and the permit is to be revoked for violation of this requirement .

whenever a peace officer determines that grounds under exist for the revocation of a concealed handgun permit , the officer is to prepare an affidavit indicating the reasons for the revocation and all other available information regarding the revocation .

a copy of the peace officer's report relating to the incident must be attached to the affidavit when submitted to the department .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement officers can access concealed carry permit status when checking a louisiana resident's driver's license .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of october 1 , 2011: 12,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 4,256,926 unlicensed open carry permitted: maryland state law requires a person to have a permit issued “before the person carries , wears , or transports a handgun.” the person must have the permit in his or her possession whenever carrying , wearing , or transporting a handgun .

permit to carry concealed: a permit is to be issued to a person when the secretary of the maryland state police finds that the applicant meets specific eligibility requirements .

length of permit validity: permits expire on the last day of the holder's birth month following 2 years after the date the permit is issued and may be renewed for successive 3-year periods .

eligibility requirements: a permit is to be issued to a person when the secretary of the maryland state police finds that the applicant: 1. is an adult ; 2. has not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor for which a sentence of imprisonment of more than 1 year has been imposed ; 3. has not been convicted or a crime involving the possession , use , or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance ; 4. is not presently an alcoholic , addict , or habitual user of a controlled dangerous substance , unless under legitimate medical direction ; 5. based on an investigation , has not exhibited a propensity for violence or instability that may reasonably render the person's possession of a handgun a danger to the person or to another ; and 6. based on an investigation , has good and substantial reason to wear , carry , or transport a handgun , such as a finding that the permit is necessary as a reasonable precaution against apprehended danger .

when an applicant is under 30 years of age , the secretary must additionally find that the applicant has not been: 1. committed to a juvenile facility for longer than 1 year after an adjudication of delinquency by a juvenile court ; or 2. adjudicated delinquent by a juvenile court for an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime of violence , a felony under maryland law , or a misdemeanor under maryland law that carries a statutory penalty of more than 2 years .

these requirements are in addition to those enumerated in maryland law to legally possess a firearm .

firearms training requirements: maryland does not require handgun safety training for residents wishing to obtain a concealed handgun permit for specific purposes of personal protection .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: maryland does not recognize other states' concealed carry handgun permits with the exception of other states' armored car personnel who possess a valid permit who are on duty in maryland .

revocation process: the secretary may revoke the permit after finding that the holder does not meet the permit application requirements listed above , or did not have the permit in the person's possession when carrying , wearing , or transporting a handgun .

the failure to return a revoked permit is a misdemeanor offense , subject to the imprisonment of up to 1 year , and / or a fine between $100 and $1,000 .

a permit holder is prohibited from wearing , carrying , or transporting a handgun while under the influence of alcohol or drugs , and doing so may result in a misdemeanor violation subject to 1 year of imprisonment and / or a fine of up to $1,000 .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement officers within maryland can check the maryland automated firearms services system to verify the validity of concealed carry weapons permits .

law enforcement officers from other states can call the licensing division of the maryland state police during normal business hours to verify the validity of permits .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of january 3 , 2012: 341,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 4,669,984 unlicensed open carry permitted: no permit to carry concealed: permit holders do not have to carry handguns in a concealed manner .

length of permit validity: permits are generally valid for 4 years .

tenn. code ann .

§ 39-17-1351 ( n ) .

a resident is someone who has lived in tennessee for more than 30 days , is employed in the state , would qualify as registered voter , or has taken action to establish the state as his or her principal place of domicile .

tenn. code ann .

§ 55-50-102 ( 47 ) .

b. that the applicant is not currently subject to any order of protection and , if so , the applicant must provide a copy of the order ; and that the applicant is not a fugitive from justice ; c. 3 .

substance abuse and mental health information: a. that the applicant is not an unlawful user of or addicted to alcohol or any controlled substance , and the applicant has not been a patient in a rehabilitation program or hospitalized for alcohol or controlled substance abuse or addiction within 10 years from the date of application ; b. that the applicant has not been adjudicated as a mental c. defective ; has not been judicially committed to or hospitalized in a mental institution ; has not had a court appoint a conservator for the applicant by reason of a mental defect ; has not been judicially determined to be disabled by reason of mental illness , developmental disability , or other mental incapacity ; and has not , within 7 years from the date of application , been found by a court to pose an immediate substantial likelihood of serious harm because of mental illness ; and that the applicant is not receiving social security disability benefits by reason of alcohol dependence , drug dependence , or mental disability ; 1. that the applicant is not an alien and is not illegally or unlawfully in the united states ; 2. that the applicant has not renounced the applicant's united 3. that the applicant has not been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions .

the applicant must also provide two sets of classifiable fingerprints and must be photographed for the permit .

the applicant must present photo identification to the department when filing the application ; the name and photo must match those of the application .

firearms training requirements: the department must require applicants to provide proof of successful completion of an approved handgun safety course .

the course must include both classroom hours and firing range hours , as well as instruction on alcohol and drugs ; the effects of those substances on a person's reflexes , judgment , and ability to handle a firearm ; and laws related to possession of a firearm while intoxicated .

an applicant may be exempt from the firing range and classroom hours requirements if , within the past 5 years , the applicant completed training or had been certified related to being a law enforcement officer , security guard , or in the military .

once a permit has been obtained , permit holders cannot be required to complete a handgun safety course to maintain or renew a permit .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: an out - of - state permit is valid in tennessee to carry a handgun , and the holder must carry the permit at all times the person carries a handgun in tennessee .

tennessee law requires the commissioner of safety to enter into reciprocity agreements with other states that require the execution of such agreements .

the commissioner is to publish a list of the states that honor the permits of tennessee , as well as a list of the states that refuse to enter into reciprocity agreements with the state , or honor tennessee handgun carry permits .

if another state imposes conditions on tennessee permit holder in a reciprocity agreement , the conditions will apply to the other state's permit holder when they carry a handgun in tennessee .

tenn. code ann .

§ 39-17-1351 ( r ) ( 1 ) - ( 2 ) .

already has a permit .

if the permit application is denied in tennessee , that person cannot carry a handgun based on the former state's permit .

persons who work in tennessee: if a person is a resident and a permit holder of another state , but is employed in tennessee and wants to carry a handgun in tennessee , once the person has been working in tennessee for 6 months , the person has 6 months to obtain a tennessee handgun permit .

if the state the person has a permit from has substantially similar permit eligibility requirements , the permit may be issued based on the fact that the person already has a permit .

if the application for a permit is denied in tennessee , that person cannot carry a handgun based on the former state's permit .

these provisions do not apply if the state of residence of the person employed has a reciprocity agreement with tennessee .

revocation process: the department is required to suspend or revoke a handgun permit when its records or other evidence show that the holder: 1. is prohibited from purchasing a handgun under applicable state or 2. has not accurately disclosed material information required for 3. poses a material likelihood of risk of harm to the public ; 4. has been arrested for a felony that involves the use or attempted use of force , violence , or a deadly weapon , or for a felony drug offense ; 5. has been convicted of a felony ; 6. has violated any provision of the tennessee code related to 7. has engaged in conduct that would make the holder ineligible to apply for or obtain a permit under the permit eligibility requirements ; 8. has been convicted of domestic assault or other misdemeanor crime of domestic violence and is still subject to the disabilities of such a conviction ; 9. is subject to a current order of protection ; or 10. has been judicially committed to a mental institution or adjudicated as a mental defective .

once the department suspends or revokes a permit , the department is required to send notice to the holder and appropriate law enforcement officers .

in addition to stating that the permit has been suspended or revoked , the notice must tell the holder to surrender the permit within 10 days and that it is a crime not to do so , and that the permit holder has 30 days to request a hearing , among other things .

the permit holder has 10 days to surrender the permit once the holder has notice it has been surrendered or revoked .

failure to do so is a class a misdemeanor .

the permit holder has a right to have the suspension or revocation reviewed in court .

if the holder has been arrested and charged with certain felony offenses , including a felony offense involving violence or the use of a firearm , the court with jurisdiction over the criminal charge is required to find out if the defendant has a permit and order the surrender of the permit .

on other felony charges , the permit holder can petition for a hearing to keep the permit and may retain the permit if the court determines that the permit holder will not present a material risk of physical harm to the public if released and allowed to retain the permit .

if the holder is acquitted of charges , the permit is restored ; if the holder is convicted , the permit is revoked .

permits are suspended during pre - trial diversion or judicial diversion .

permit holders must also surrender their permits if convicted of a class a misdemeanor for the term of the sentence imposed .

permit holders who have received a notice of suspension or revocation may make a written request for review of the determination at a hearing .

the hearing must be scheduled within 30 days .

after this determination , there is a right of review in court .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: information about the status of a tennessee handgun permit ( whether it is valid , or revoked , or there is no permit ) is in the tennessee driver's license system and the status is shown on the driver's license .

however , there is no way to check all states' databases to determine the status of a permit unless the states' permits are linked to their driver's license systems .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 519,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 17,523,847 unlicensed open carry permitted: no permit to carry concealed: if specific eligibility and application requirements are met , the texas department of public safety is required to issue a license to the applicant .

length of permit validity: texas licenses to carry concealed weapons expire on the first birthday of the license holder occurring after the fourth anniversary of the date of issuance , and renewed licenses expire on the license holder's birth date , 5 years after the date of the expiration of the previous license .

texas's eligibility statute gives further content to these requirements .

specifically , there is a definition for what constitutes a felony .

tex .

gov't code ann .

§ 411.172 ( b ) .

a person is incapable of exercising sound judgment with respect to the proper use and storage of a handgun if the person has been diagnosed with or suffers from certain psychiatric disorders or conditions ; has been declared incompetent to manage the person's own affairs ; or has entered a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity , among other things .

tex .

gov't code ann .

§ 411.172 ( d ) .

evidence that a person has a psychiatric disorder , or condition may include , for example , involuntary psychiatric hospitalization ; inpatient or residential substance abuse treatment in the preceding 5-year period ; or diagnoses by a physician that the person is dependent on alcohol or drugs , or has certain mental disorders including bipolar disorder , antisocial personality disorder , or chronic dementia , among others .

tex .

gov't code ann .

§ 411.172 ( e ) .

the person may , however , provide a certificate from a physician stating that the disorder or condition is in remission and not likely to develop at a future time .

tex .

gov't code ann .

§ 411.172 ( f ) .

9. is not subject to a restraining order or court protective order ; and 10. has not made any material misrepresentation , or failed to disclose any material fact in the permit application .

firearms training requirements: the department of public safety is required to establish minimum standards for handgun proficiency , develop a course to teach proficiency , and administer examinations to measure proficiency .

one part of the course is to be classroom , and the other part range instruction , where the applicant must demonstrate the applicant's ability to safely and proficiently use the applicable category of handgun .

the course must be administered by a qualified instructor .

the course must include between 10 and 15 hours of instruction on 1 ) laws related to deadly force ; 2 ) handgun use , proficiency , and safety ; 3 ) nonviolent dispute resolution ; and 4 ) proper storage practices .

the department must also develop a continuing education course for holders who want to renew a license .

the course must be administrated by a qualified instructor and must include at least 4 hours of the subjects from the initial course .

the proficiency exam includes a written exam on the subjects taught in the course and a physical demonstration of proficiency and handgun safety procedures .

the qualified handgun instructor may submit to the department a recommendation concerning an applicant's proficiency .

certain applicants and license holders do not have to complete the range instruction portion of the course .

these include persons who are currently serving or were honorably discharged from the u.s. or texas state military forces ; and who within the last 5 years have completed a course in handgun proficiency with the military forces .

applicants and license holders that work in the criminal justice system may also avail themselves of alternative proficiency procedures .

unique state disqualifiers / prohibitions: delinquent taxes or child support payment .

factors state considers in granting reciprocity: texas law requires the governor to negotiate reciprocity agreements with any other states that provide conceal carry licenses , if the texas attorney general determines that the authorities of the other state initiate background checks of its applicants .

the background check must include a search of the fbi's national crime information center database and the interstate identification index .

every year , the texas attorney general must submit a report listing the states that the attorney general has determined qualify for reciprocity and review the statutes of states that do not to determine whether changes to their statues are necessary to qualify .

revocation process: licenses are to be revoked if the holder: 1. was not entitled to the license when it was issued ; 2. made a material misrepresentation or failed to disclose a material fact 3. becomes ineligible , unless the only basis of ineligibility is being charged with the commission of a crime ( in which case the license is suspended ) ; 4. is convicted of an offense related to the unlawful carrying of a handgun by a license holder ; 5. is determined to have engaged in conduct constituting a reason to suspend a license ( listed above ) after the person's license has been previously suspended twice for the same reason ; or 6. the holder's fee is returned and the holder does not repay it plus $25 , within 30 days of being notified .

the holder can reapply for a license after 2 years and the reason for revocation does not exist and has not existed for 2 years .

a holder whose fee was returned can reapply at any time .

after receiving written notice of a denial , revocation , or suspension of a license , the holder has 30 days to request a hearing before a justice of the peace acting as an administrative hearing officer .

the hearing must be scheduled within 30 days of the request and held within no more than 60 days .

the ruling may be appealed within 30 days to a county court .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement officials in texas , and other states , have access to concealed carry permit information when they run a wanted person check on permit holders .

texas law enforcement officers can also access concealed carry permit information from the computers of squad cars .

approximate number of active concealed carry permit holders as of december 31 , 2011: 279,000 ( rounded to the nearest thousand ) state adult population ( age 20 or over ) per u.s. 2010 census: 5,917,339 unlicensed open carry permitted: virginia allows residents to carry firearms openly without a permit .

permit to carry concealed: persons wishing to apply for a concealed carry permit can apply to the clerk of the circuit court of their county or city .

length of permit validity: 5 yearseligibility requirements: the applicant must be 21 years of age or older and the following persons are ineligible to be issued a permit: criminal history: 1 .

persons who have been convicted of a felony ; 2. individuals subject to a restraining or protective order and prohibited from purchasing or transporting a firearm ; 3. persons who have been adjudicated delinquent for certain crimes , unless they file a petition to the circuit court that is granted ; 4. individuals who have been convicted of two or more misdemeanors within the 5 years prior to the application , if one of the misdemeanors was class 1 ; if two or more of the misdemeanors are not class 1 , then the judge has discretion ; 5. individuals who have been convicted of driving while under the influence or public drunkenness within the 3-year period preceding the application , or have been determined to be a habitual drunkard under virginia law .

6. fugitives from justice ; 7. individuals who have been convicted within 3 years of the application , or have a charge pending for , specified crimes , including assault , assault and battery , sexual battery , discharging a firearm , and brandishing a firearm ; 8. individuals who have been convicted of or have a charge pending for 9 .

individuals who have previous convictions or adjudications of delinquency that would have been a felony if committed by an adult ; mental health and substance abuse: 10. persons who were admitted to outpatient treatment ; adjudicated mentally incapacitated or legally incompetent ; or were acquitted by reason of insanity under virginia or similar state law , unless the person was discharged or released from custody , or competency was restored , as applicable , more than 5 years prior to the date of application ; 11. individuals addicted to , using , or distributing any controlled substance ; 12. individuals who have received mental health treatment or substance abuse treatment in a residential setting within 5 years prior to the date of their application ; and 13. individuals who within the 3 years prior to the date of application were found guilty of any criminal offense set forth in virginia's controlled substances laws , or of illegal possession or distribution of any controlled substance ; this prohibitor also applies where the court find the facts sufficient for a finding of guilty but ordered probation or other conditions ; other: 14. aliens not lawfully admitted for permanent residence ; 15. persons who have been discharged from the u.s. armed forces under dishonorable conditions ; and 16. individuals who the court finds , by a preponderance of the evidence , based on specific acts by the applicant , are likely to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others .

this final condition provides for limited discretion to deny a permit .

to support this finding , the sheriff , chief of police , or attorney for the commonwealth may submit to the court a sworn written statement indicating the applicant is likely to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others .

this statement is to be based on personal knowledge or that of a sheriff , police officer , or assistant attorney for the commonwealth , or a sworn statement of a competent person having personal knowledge of specific acts .

firearms training requirements: each applicant is required to submit proof that the applicant has demonstrated competence with a handgun .

this can be satisfied in one of the following ways: 1 .

completing any hunter education or hunter safety course approved by the department of game and inland fisheries or a similar agency of another state ; 2. completing any national rifle association ( nra ) firearms safety or 3. completing any firearms safety or training course or class that is available to the general public that is approved by the department of public safety or that uses nra - certified instructors .

the course may be offered by a law enforcement agency , a junior college , a college or a private or public institution , academy , organization , or firearms training school ; 4. completing any law enforcement firearms safety or training course or class approved by the department of public safety offered for security guards , investigators , etc ; 5. presenting evidence of equivalent experience with a firearm through participation in organized shooting competition or current military service or proof of an honorable discharge from any branch of the armed services ; 6. obtaining or previously having held a license to carry a firearm in virginia or a locality , unless such license has been revoked for cause ; 7. completing any firearms training or safety course or class , including an electronic , video , or on - line course , conducted by a state - certified or nra - certified firearms instructor ; 8. completing any governmental police agency firearms training course and qualifying to carry a firearm in the course of normal police duties ; or 9. completing any other firearms training that the court deems adequate .

the documentation must include one of the following: a photocopy of a certificate of completion of any of the courses or classes , an affidavit from the instructor or organization that conducted the course or class attesting to the completion by the applicant , or a copy of any document that shows completion of the course or evidences participation in a firearms competition .

factor ( s ) state considers in granting reciprocity: virginia law provides for an out - of - state permit to be valid if the following requirements are met: 1. the holder is at least 21 years of age ; 2. the issuing state authority provides the means for instantaneous verification of the validity permits issued within that state , accessible 24 hours a day ; and 3. the requirements and qualifications of that state's law are adequate to prevent possession of a permit by persons who would be denied a permit in virginia ( other than the age requirements and the type of weapon authorized to be carried ) .

the superintendent of state police , in consultation with the office of the attorney general , is required to determine whether states meet these requirements , maintain a registry of the qualifying states on the virginia criminal information network , and enter into agreements for reciprocal recognition with qualifying states .

the registry is to be available to law enforcement officers for investigative purposes revocation process: virginia law provides for revocation of a permit for generally any offense that would disqualify a person from obtaining a permit and also provides for some specific grounds for revocation .

any person who is convicted of an offense that would disqualify that person from obtaining a permit , or who made materially false statements on the person's application , is required to forfeit his or her permit and surrender it to the court .

when the central criminal records exchange obtains a record of arrest , conviction or occurrence of any other event that would disqualify a person from obtaining a concealed handgun permit , the central criminal records exchange must notify the court that issued the permit .

the court will then revoke the permit of the disqualified person , and notify the state police and the person whose permit was revoked .

the permit is also required to be revoked if the permit holder is under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs while carrying the handgun in a public place , which is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor .

the convicting court is required to revoke the permit and notify the issuing circuit court .

the permit holder is ineligible to apply for a permit for 5 years .

the court must revoke the permit of a person who is admitted to outpatient treatment or adjudicated mentally incapacitated or legally incompetent under virginia or similar state law , and must notify the state police and the permit holder of the revocation .

virginia law provides for suspension only in limited circumstances , where a person has a felony charge pending for stalking or assault , assault and battery , sexual battery , discharging a firearm , or brandishing a firearm .

in these instances , the court hearing the charge or the court that issued the permit may have the permit suspended while the charge is pending .

mechanism available for law enforcement officers within and outside the state to verify the validity of permits issued in this state: law enforcement officials in virginia can check the virginia crime information network to obtain information related to the status of permits issued in virginia .

law enforcement officials from other states can run a concealed weapons query in the international justice and public safety network to verify the status of permits issued in virginia .

law enforcement officials from other states can also query the federal bureau of investigation's interstate identification index , or call the duty sergeant at the virginia state police to verify the validity of a virginia permit .

this report describes ( 1 ) the extent to which states allow concealed carry permits , and how select states' eligibility requirements and laws regarding and recognition of other states' permits differ , ( 2 ) what processes select states use to help ensure they revoke permits when holders no longer meet eligibility requirements , and ( 3 ) how law enforcement officials in select states determine whether permits they encounter are current and valid .

to address all three objectives , we conducted a case study on 9 states — arizona , california , florida , georgia , louisiana , maryland , tennessee , texas , and virginia — which we selected to illustrate a variety of applicable state laws and procedures .

however the results cannot be generalized across all states .

the information obtained from these case studies provides a broad understanding of the different requirements and processes states utilize in issuing permits .

our selection covers states representing each of the factors outlined below: states from each of the permit issue designations - states classify themselves based on their issuing laws: ( 1 ) no - issue: where concealed carry is prohibited ; ( 2 ) may - issue: the issuing authority has discretion to grant concealed carry permits to eligible individuals ; ( 3 ) shall - issue: a concealed carry permit must be issued if no statutory reason for denial exists ; and ( 4 ) permit not required to carry concealed handguns .

we selected states that issue to residents only , and states that issue to both residents and nonresidents .

issuing authority — states with a centralized ( singular ) issuing authority and decentralized — multiple issuing authorities within a state .

reciprocity — the number of states that have reciprocity with each other and the number of agreements in place .

the selection includes states that represent a range of the length of time concealed carry permits are valid , as well as differing eligibility requirements such as mandatory training on a gun safety program or demonstrating proficiency of firing a handgun , and reason ( s ) for requesting the permit .

to determine states' concealed carry permit practices and whose permits they honor , we gathered information on permit issuing laws , issuing authorities , and reciprocity agreements for the 50 states and the district of columbia .

this report presents the states' laws as they were as of march 2012 .

to obtain data on the current number of active concealed carry permits , and the length of time a permit is valid , we contacted 48 states .

we also contacted the 48 states to obtain information on their permit tracking systems , reasons for denials , and revocations .

of the 48 states , we received data from 45 states .

we requested data for the period 2007 through 2011 to illustrate any trends ; however some states could not provide complete data for this period .

most states were able to provide 2011 data .

to assess the reliability of these data , we asked the states questions about the systems they use to track the data , any steps taken to verity accuracy , and any limitations to the data .

our analysis was largely dependent on the availability of state data on the number of concealed carry permits .

in some cases , statewide data were not available , and in other cases only data from certain time periods were available .

as a result of these limitations , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable solely to illustrate a minimum number of total active permits and approximate number of state specific permits .

in addition , we obtained information from and interviewed federal agencies with firearms - related experience and law enforcement responsibilities — the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) and the federal bureau of investigations ( fbi ) .

we obtained information from and interviewed fbi headquarters officials on their audits of select states that utilize federal databases that states query when screening concealed carry permit applicants .

we obtained information and interviewed atf headquarters officials and field special agents on their experience and perspective on state permits .

in addition , we interviewed non - governmental groups representing a cross section of different views on concealed carry permit issues to obtain information regarding a historical perspective of carry conceal issues .

to obtain more detailed information about specific state laws and procedures for carry concealed permits , we met with officials at various state and local agencies in the 9 states in our case study .

we obtained and analyzed information about state laws , eligibility requirements , and procedures including , ( 1 ) how states screen , approve , and deny permit applicants and ( 2 ) factors considered by states when entering into reciprocity agreements with other states and the number of current reciprocity agreements in place .

we also obtained and analyzed state data on state - maintained statistics on the number of active and denied permits , and other firearms - related information such as specific requirements and training guidance .

to determine how the 9 states we selected for our case study monitor active holders to ensure they remain eligible to possess firearms and what actions the states take to revoke permits when permit holders become ineligible , we obtained information from the 9 states that issue permits: arizona , california , florida , georgia , louisiana , maryland , tennessee , texas , and virginia .

of these 9 , 3 states ( california , georgia , and virginia ) have a decentralized process for issuing permits .

we obtained information and interviewed the issuing officials ( county sheriffs , probate court staff , and circuit court staff ) from three to five jurisdictions per state .

from the 9 states , we selected for our case study that issue permits , we obtained and analyzed available data on the number of permits revoked , and the extent to which states recovered revoked permits from permit holders .

we also interviewed state and local officials responsible for issuing permits to obtain information on applicable laws and procedures for monitoring , and revoking permits .

to identify how law enforcement officials in the 9 select states that issue permits determine whether permits they encounter are current and valid , we obtained information on the physical features embedded in each state's permit , and the state and federal systems utilized to check the status of permits , and we interviewed state and local law enforcement officials across the 9 states to obtain information on processes they use to validate permits .

these law enforcement officials included those representing state department of law enforcement , state departments of public safety , state police or state highway patrol , county sheriffs , and city police .

we conducted our work from august 2011 through july 2012 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings in this product .

local police or colonel of the state police counties concealed weapon licensing boards 17 approximate number of authorities ( if decentralized ) clerk of circuit courts for residents , department of state police for nonresidents chiefs of police of municipalities , county sheriffs not applicable ( n / a ) attorney general's office through the division of criminal investigation for states that have a + symbol beside the number of authorities , the approximate number of authorities may be significantly higher .

while there is no federal law specifically addressing the issuance of concealed carry permits , 48 states have passed laws allowing the state to issue citizens concealed carry permits .

a few states do not require a permit to carry certain firearms in public within that particular state , but issue permits for reciprocity purposes in other states .

see table 6 below .

length of time permit / license valid ( years ) for initial applicants 5 years 1.5 4 years ( 5 years for retired law enforcement ) 3 years in new york city ; 5 years for nassau , suffolk , and westchester ; until revoked for all other counties 3.2 5 years on / after 3 / 14 / 07 ; 4 years prior to 3 / 14 / 07 4.5 5 or 10 years ( optional if no prohibitions ) 4 years ; 5 years after renewal 5 years states that have missing data either do not track , could not provide , or declined to provide the information requested .

of the four counties that issue permits in hawaii , only two provided information .

new york has no mechanism to purge inactive files .

the new york state police became the repository for concealed carry permit data in 1936 .

as of december 31 , 2011 , new york had 1,281,662 applications on file since 1936 .

however , this number is not an accurate count of people who possess a valid carry concealed weapons permit from the state of new york .

some permit holders may have died and some permit holders may have had their permits revoked or cancelled since 1936 .

of the 48 states that issue concealed carry permits , 26 issue to residents and nonresidents of their state , and of these 26 states that issue to nonresidents , 10 provided data on the number of valid nonresident permits , as shown in the table .

permits from other states that are recognized by this state ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , nh , nc , nd , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wy ( 23 ) states that recognize permits issued in this state ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , nh , nc , nd , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wy ( 23 ) al , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wy ( 35 ) al , ak , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi , wv , wy ( 35 ) al , ak , az , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nd , nc , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 38 ) al , ak , az , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 37 ) ca does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi ( 17 ) al , ak , az , ar , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 30 ) al , ak , az , ar , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 30 ) ct does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi ( 17 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , ky , me , mi , mo , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , tn , tx , ut , va , wv ( 19 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , id , in , ia , ky , me , mi , mo , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv ( 23 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , vt , va , wa , wv , wy ( 35 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 33 ) al , ak , ar , az , co , fl , ia , id , in , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , nd , nh , nc , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 26 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , nh , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 26 ) hi does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ks , ky , mi , mo , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi ( 17 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , in , ia , ky , la , mi , mo , mt , ne , nh , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 27 ) il does not honor permits issued in other states .

al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , nh , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 26 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ky , la , mi , mo , mt , ne , nh , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wy ( 26 ) permits from other states that are recognized by this state ak , az , ar , co , fl , hi , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , ne , nv , nj , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , sc , tn , tx , wv ( 23 ) states that recognize permits issued in this state ak , az , ar , co , fl , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , mt , ne , nv , nc , nd , oh , ok , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi , wv ( 27 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi , wv , wy ( 36 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nm , nv , nh , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , vt , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 38 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 36 ) ar , de , la , mi , nd , pa , sd , wy ( 8 ) ak , az , ar , de , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , mo , ne , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , ut , wy ( 20 ) md does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , nc ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi ( 16 ) ma does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut ( 15 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 38 ) ak , ar , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , nm , nv , oh , ok , tn , tx , ut , wy ( 15 ) ak , az , ar , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nm , nc , ok , sd , tn , ut , va , wi , wy ( 23 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , in , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , mt , nh , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 25 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , mo , mt , nh , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 26 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 36 ) ak , az , ar , ca , co , ct , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , ne , nv , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 41 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , ne , nm , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi , wy ( 27 ) ak , az , ar , ca , co , ct , fl , hi , id , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mi , mn , mt , mo , nv , nj , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , ri , sc , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wy ( 34 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , mt , nv , nc , nd , oh , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi , wy ( 26 ) ak , az , ar , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , ne , nm , nc , oh , tn , ri , wv ( 15 ) ak , az , ar , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , mt , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut ( 20 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , ia , id , in , ky , la , mi , mo , ms , nc , nd , ok , pa , tn , ut , wy ( 22 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , ut , wy ( 23 ) nj does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ks , ky , mi , mo , mt , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut ( 17 ) ak , az , co , de , fl , ky , mi , mn , mo , mt , nc , nd , oh , ok , sc , tn , tx , va , wy ( 19 ) ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , mt , ne , nv , nc , nd , oh , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wi , wy ( 30 ) .

states that recognize permits issued in this state ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , wi ( 16 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 36 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mi , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wi , wv , wy ( 35 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , me , mi , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , oh , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 34 ) ak , az , ar , de , fl , id , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , ne , nm , nc , nd , ok , sc , tn , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 23 ) ak , az , ar , de , fl , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , mo , mt , ne , nv , nm , nc , nd , ok , sc , sd , tn , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 29 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 35 ) or does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , mt , ne , nc , ok , sd , tn , ut ( 15 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , ia , id , in , ky , la .

me , mi , mo , mt , nd , nh , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi , wv , wy ( 27 ) ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , me , mi , mo , mt , nh , nc , nd , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wi , wy ( 27 ) ri does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , id , in , ia , ky , mi , mo , ne , nv , nc , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut ( 16 ) ak , az , ar , fl , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , nc , oh , ok , tx , tn , va , wv , wy ( 17 ) ak , az , ar , fl , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mo , mt , ne , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wy ( 26 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , me , mi , ms , mo , mt , nc , nd , ok , pa , tn , tx , ut , va , wv , wy ( 27 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tx , ut , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 37 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co , ct , de , fl , ga , hi , ia , id , in , ks , ky , la , ma , md , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nm , nc , nd , nj , nv , ny , ok , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , ut , va , wa , wv , wy ( 41 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nm , nc , nd , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , ut , va , wi , wv , wy ( 33 ) al , ak , az , ar , ca , co ,ct , de , fl , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , me , md , ma , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nj , nm , ny , nc , nd , oh , ok , or , pa , ri , sc , sd , tn , tx , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 47 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , de , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sd , tn , tx , va , wa , wv , wi , wy ( 34 ) vt does not require concealed weapons carriers to have a permit .

therefore , reciprocity does not apply in the state .

local statutes may vary .

permits from other states that are recognized by this state ak , az , ar , de , fl , ky , la , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nc , nd , nm , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , wa , wv , wy ( 27 ) states that recognize permits issued in this state ak , az , ar , de , fl , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , wv , wi , wy ( 29 ) ar , fl , la , mi , ms , mo , nc , nd , oh , ok , tn , ut ( 12 ) ak , az , ar , fl , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , nc , nd , oh , ok , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi ( 23 ) dc does not honor permits issued in other states .

ak , az , ar , de , fl , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , nm , nc , nd , ok , oh , pa , sc , sd , tx , tn , ut , va , wi ( 24 ) ak , az , ar , de , fl , id , in , ia , ks , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tx , tn , ut , va , wy ( 29 ) az , ar , ca , co , ct , ga , hi , id , ia , in , ks , ky , la , md , mi , mn , mt , ne , nm , ny , nc , nd , pa , tn , tx , ut , va , wa , wy ( 29 ) ak , az , ar , co , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , mi , ms , mo , mt , ne , nv , nh , nc , nd , ok , pa , sd , tn , ut , wv ( 26 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wv ( 33 ) al , ak , az , ar , co , fl , ga , id , in , ia , ky , la , me , mi , mn , ms , mo , mt , ne , nh , nm , nc , nd , oh , ok , pa , sc , sd , tn , tx , ut , va , wi ( 33 ) .

in addition to the contacts named above , kirk kiester ( assistant director ) , aditi s. archer , willie commons iii , michele c. fejfar , sally p. gilley , andrew c. moore , and janet g. temko made significant contributions to the work .

also contributing to this report were katherine m. davis , eric hauswirth , linda s. miller , and robert robinson .

