the threat of terrorism presents a number of risks to our nation's seaports and other types of critical infrastructure .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has three components responsible for the security of critical infrastructure related to ports and other facilities .

the u.s. coast guard has responsibility for port security overall .

the office for domestic preparedness ( odp ) is responsible for providing port security grants to selected maritime facility owners .

the information analysis and infrastructure protection ( iaip ) directorate is responsible for working with other federal , state , local , and private organizations to identify and protect critical infrastructure across the nation .

risk management is a tool for assessing risks , evaluating alternatives , making decisions , and implementing and monitoring protective measures .

this report provides an evaluation of the progress made , and challenges faced , by the coast guard , odp , and iaip in using risk management to improve homeland security .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date .

at that time , we will provide copies of this report to appropriate departments and interested congressional committees .

this report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 415 ) 904-2200 or at wrightsonm@gao.gov .

key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

this appendix describes how we developed the risk management framework and how we used it to evaluate activities related to homeland security and combating terrorism .

the framework is intended to be a starting point for risk management activities and will likely evolve as processes mature and lessons are learned .

a glossary is included at the end of this appendix .

although the homeland security act and subsequent strategies advocate the use of risk management to protect the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources , they did not define how this was to be accomplished .

homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) directed the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to establish uniform policies , approaches , guidelines , and methodologies integrating federal infrastructure protection and risk management activities .

however , no further direction or guidance as to the course of action has been forthcoming .

the ability to anticipate future happenings and to choose among alternatives lies at the heart of risk management and provides us with a guide , based on good management practices and supported by established internal controls that can enhance decision making .

although risk management has long been used for assessing risk in some sectors , such as environmental issues , health care , finance , and the insurance industry , the application of risk management principles to the homeland security area is relatively new .

the many areas and activities under homeland security provide untested and difficult challenges because the source of the risk is an intelligent adversary with whom there exists little domestic experience .

as a result , the probabilities and consequences of a terrorist attack are difficult to predict .

in spite of this high degree of uncertainty and the knowledge that not all risk can be eliminated , enhancing protection from known or potential threats can help prevent or mitigate adverse events .

given that there is no established universally agreed upon set of requirements or processes for a risk management framework specifically related to homeland security and combating terrorism , we developed a framework that would be applicable by reviewing , analyzing , and synthesizing several sources of information .

we began by reviewing current risk literature and previous gao reports and testimonies .

we consulted the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 ; the government auditing standards , 2003 revision , gao's standards for internal control in the federal government ( november 1999 ) ; guidance from the office of management and budget ( omb ) ; the work of the president's commission on risk management ; consulting papers ; and the enterprise risk management approach of the committee of sponsoring organizations ( coso ) of the treadway commission .

in addition , we consulted with experts in the fields of risk management , risk modeling , and terrorism .

we reviewed numerous frameworks from industry , government , and academic sources .

we synthesized information from these numerous government , industry , and academic sources in developing our risk management framework .

the framework was field - tested on several gao reviews .

the draft framework was then reviewed by three academic experts in risk management .

no substantial changes to the draft framework were recommended .

the framework should be considered to be a starting point in a field that is evolving , and the entire cycle of risk management activities should be viewed as a goal .

the phases contained in the framework are strategic goals , objectives , and constraints ; risk assessment ; alternatives evaluation ; management selection ; and implementation and monitoring .

the framework has been developed so that individual phases of the approach , such as risk assessment , do not become ends in themselves , but provide a full cycle of related activities , from strategic planning through implementation and monitoring .

the process is dynamic , and although the various phases appear linear , new information can be entered at any phase .

the framework can be used to inform agency officials and decision makers of the basic components of a risk management system or can be used as a stand - alone guide .

figure 4 illustrates our risk management framework and some sources of criteria , such as gao best practices , office of management and budget circulars , gao guidance on internal controls , and the government and performance act of 1993 and their link with management processes .

while statistical methods and risk - ranking approaches frequently underlie risk assessment approaches , different application areas tend to develop their own terminologies and their own logical sequences for the cause of risk .

the risk management framework is designed to be flexible , in that the approach may be applied at various organizational levels ranging from that of a department level of a multiagency organization down to that of a specific project or program .

because there is no one uniformly accepted approach to risk management , terms and activities may differ across applications .

however , any approach that omits the substance of the steps shown in figure 4 is likely to have material weaknesses .

table 11 summarizes the phases of our risk management framework and provides examples of elements contained in those phases .

the following sections provide more detail on the five phases of our risk management framework .

this phase addresses what the strategic goals are attempting to achieve and the steps needed to attain those results , including milestones and performance measures to permit measurement of progress toward those goals .

ideally , management decisions should be made in the context of a strategic plan , with clearly articulated goals and objectives that flow from the plan .

strategic goals at the highest level could be considered an “end - state” followed by a logical hierarchy of major goals and subordinate objectives composed of clear , concise , measurable activities and timelines to achieve results and ensure accountability .

an organization's program or plan and risk planning documents should address risk - related issues that are central to its mission .

our work related to the government performance and results act of 1993 has produced guidance that identifies risk for the congressional oversight of federal agencies' strategic plans .

the consideration of risk in strategic planning may be incorporated into planning documents or into specific management strategies .

currently , it is difficult to translate plans and actions into a clear sense of how we are progressing in making our nation more secure .

one reason is that homeland security efforts , in general , lack clear goals with corresponding performance measures to evaluate progress toward these goals .

as others , such as the gilmore commission , have stated , a continuing problem for homeland security has been the lack of clear strategic guidance about the definition and objectives of preparedness .

risk management allows entities to operate more effectively in environments of uncertainty by providing the discipline and structure in which to address these issues , since risk management is not an end in itself , but an important component of an entity's management process .

as such , risk management is interrelated with , among other things , an entity's governance , performance management , and internal controls .

the process of risk management provides the rigor and structure necessary to identify and select among alternative risk responses whose cumulative effect is intended to reduce risk , and the methodologies and techniques for making selection decisions .

this process enables entities to enhance their capability to identify potential adverse events , assess risks , and establish integrated responses .

further , this phase in the planning process would include support and buy - in from upper levels of management and stakeholders .

acceptance for concepts of the model from this group provides the groundwork for future discussions .

finally , various constraints may have an impact on risk management plans .

some constraints may be imposed by statute , higher - level policy , budget , or other factors beyond management's control and may vary with the scale of the application .

managers at different levels within an organization will have different degrees of flexibility to institute risk management countermeasures .

an important constraint for federal agencies , such as dhs , is the role that congress plays in authorizing and funding programs .

for example , congress may direct specific actions affecting how agencies allocate funding .

this phase addresses the process of evaluating the threats and vulnerabilities of assets so that countermeasures might be instituted to prevent or mitigate risks .

threat , in the risk management model , concerns the probability that a specific type of attack will be initiated against a specific target .

it includes any circumstance or event with the potential to cause loss or damage to the asset .

although agencies may not have enough information to identify and characterize all threats related to their assets , known or imagined adverse events would be characterized in some detail .

effective threat analysis is dependent on an understanding of an adversary's intention , motivation , historical data , and capability to damage .

an additional crucial component of risk assessment is vulnerability , that is , any weakness that an adversary can exploit to harm or damage the asset .

an asset may be highly vulnerable to one mode of attack but have a low level of vulnerability to another , depending on a variety of factors , such as countermeasures already in place .

while consequence concerns the result of an adverse event on a particular asset , criticality is the asset's relative importance to the entity .

a criticality assessment identifies and prioritizes assets and functions in terms of specific criteria , such as their importance to public safety and the economy , as a basis for identifying which structures or processes are relatively more important to protect from attack .

criticality assessments are important because they provide , in combination with the framework's threat and risk assessments , the basis for prioritizing which assets require greater protection relative to finite resources and provide information for later stages in the risk management process .

risk assessments should utilize the most appropriate subject matter experts in assessing the components of risk .

when dealing with bayesian probability estimates , this is critical .

in addition , mathematical constructs must be chosen carefully , specifically tailoring approaches in the context of uncertainty and data quality .

this phase addresses the evaluation of risk reduction methods by consideration of countermeasures or countermeasure systems and the costs and benefits associated with them .

ideally , a risk management framework would include an evaluation of a risk assessment as a valid decision support tool to establish and prioritize a risk management strategy .

furthermore , a strategy might include risk management consultants and decision - making tools , such as software that simulates a particular type of attack .

information developed in previous phases would inform decisions .

specific countermeasures would be considered and prioritized based on a number of factors , such as the degree of risk reduction they afford and the cost and difficulty to implement them .

risk assessment may give guidance to implementing countermeasures or countermeasure systems that may be used for more than one critical asset , or to prevent , mitigate , or respond to multiple adverse events occurring simultaneously .

in addition , external risk consultants can be advantageous at this phase in terms of creating a variety of countermeasure options .

while external reviewers cannot ensure the success of a plan , they can increase the probability of selecting the most effective countermeasures for the least cost because of their expertise in the area .

further , risk scenarios might also provide valuable information pertaining to an entity's ability to respond to a terrorist event , evaluate its coordination with other entities , identify problems , and institute corrective action .

finally , a risk management strategy should include a cost - benefit analysis of countermeasure options as they are a critical element of alternatives evaluation .

major regulatory actions or capital investments of federal expenditures generally require a cost - benefit or cost - effectiveness approach .

this approach can be useful in evaluating alternatives , since it links the benefits from risk - reducing countermeasures to the costs associated with them .

in the development of such analyses , quantitative impacts affecting both costs and benefits are , to the extent possible , identified in monetary terms .

while the core omb guidance for evaluating countermeasures for budgetary and regulatory purposes focuses on monetary cost - benefit evaluation , omb is essentially silent when costs and benefits cannot be easily quantified or monetized .

costs that are not generally estimated or included in monetary terms include opportunity costs , that is , the value of opportunities forgone because resources are applied to antiterrorism countermeasures .

these costs are most controversial when considered in areas such as public service programs or services curtailed or cancelled .

benefits are usually measured in terms of the risk reduction they provide .

they are considered in terms of the overall effectiveness of the countermeasures with respect to the estimated vulnerabilities .

this phase addresses such issues as determining where resources and investments will be made , the sources and types of resources needed , and where those resources would be targeted .

management's active participation in this phase is important as decisions are of necessity influenced by the preferences and value judgments of agency leadership .

for example , some managers will prefer to concentrate countermeasures on a relatively few critical assets , while others may value distributional impacts , that is , to distribute resources over a wide variety of assets .

ideally , a risk management strategy would also identify appropriate mechanisms to allocate resources , such as grants based on identified needs .

furthermore , a key factor in the selection of risk reducing measures is risk tolerance , the level of comfort management has with various levels of risk .

this tolerance may change over time , depending on new information , changes in financial constraints , and attitude toward risk .

the risk management strategy , with stakeholder input , will identify what constitutes an acceptable level of risk for assets and how resources are delegated .

the risk management strategy reflects consideration as to which risks should be managed immediately and to what extent , and which risks can be deferred and addressed at a later time .

milestones and timelines for implementation are important elements that allow evaluating the extent to which progress is being made toward achieving goals .

it also illustrates the degree of protection that can be obtained and places security and costs in perspective .

the documentation of management decisions , including the rationales that support the decisions , will provide valuable information for future adjustments .

this phase addresses the degree to which risk management strategies contain internal controls and performance measurement guidelines .

in addition to implementing countermeasures , it may also include implementing new organizational policies and procedures , as well as human , physical , and technical controls .

countermeasures would be initiated in accordance with the timelines in the risk management schedule .

monitoring and evaluation include , when and where appropriate , external peer review , testing and validation of countermeasures , evaluating the effects of these actions on future operation , and identifying unintended consequences .

gao has also discussed the importance of these activities as they ensure actions are taken to address risks .

internal control monitoring should assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved .

internal controls help to ensure that procedures are documented and maintained .

risk management represents a unique set of challenges .

developing such a framework is designed to guide the actions of management to prepare for and respond to adverse events in an environment of uncertainty .

as applied to homeland security , the ability to determine the likelihood of terrorism - related events occurring and quantifying the resulting outcomes is balanced against the benefit as protection ( security ) provided at an acceptable cost .

generally , a major difficulty in executing and implementing a risk management system occurs because of what is commonly called decision uncertainty , that is , the assumed goal of minimizing risk does not have a common meaning .

for example , minimizing risk is based on values , the measure of risk , and the comparison of values and risk .

decision uncertainty arises when there is controversy or ambiguity concerning how to compare and weight social objectives .

three major sources of decision uncertainty are risk measurement — although the selection of risk measurement is both an art and a science , it must be technically correct as well as both valid and meaningful .

the social cost of risk — in order to make different risks comparable , various risks often have to be quantified into comparable quantities and placing values on cost and benefits involves judgments .

the quantification of social values — uncertainty surrounds the level of risk that is acceptable or can be tolerated .

that is , how much money is to be spent on protection meaning risk reduction and what is the cost in terms of opportunities forgone because of finite resources .

this value is dependent upon determining society's risk attitude or tolerance and may change over time .

coordination activities suggest that for the results of a risk management system to be meaningful and useful , all related agencies should be using similar methods .

if agencies' methods are not compatible , then comparisons between agencies become difficult and sector or national risk assessments becomes less reliable .

in our earlier work , we concluded that a structured , systematic approach to risk management offers the best assurance that activities designed to protect the homeland and combat the effects of terrorism will produce the most effective and efficient results .

specific difficulties implementing risk management systems are contained in chapters 2 , 3 , and 4 .

for purposes of our risk management framework , we use the following definitions: asset — - any person , facility , material , information , or activity that has a positive or symbolic value .

an asset may have a value to an adversary as well as to its owner , although the nature and magnitude of these values may differ .

assets may be categorized or combined in many ways ; examples are people , information , equipment , facilities , operations , and activities .

benefit — - net outcome , usually translated into monetary terms ; a benefit may include both direct and indirect effects .

consequence — - the expected worse case or reasonable worse case impact of a successful attack .

the consequence to a particular asset can be evaluated when threat and vulnerability are considered together .

this loss or damage may be long - or short - term in nature .

cost — - input , both direct and indirect .

cost - benefit analysis — - part of the management decision - making process in which the costs and benefits of each countermeasure alternative are compared and the most appropriate alternative is selected .

costs include the price paid for tangible materials and the ongoing operational costs associated with implementing the countermeasures .

benefits are expressed in terms of the amount of risk reduction based on the overall effectiveness of the countermeasure with respect to the assessed vulnerabilities .

countermeasure — - any action taken or physical equipment used principally to reduce or eliminate one or more vulnerabilities .

the cost of a countermeasure is usually expressed in monetary terms but may include nonmonetary costs such as reduced operational effectiveness , unfavorable working conditions , adverse publicity and political consequences .

criticality assessment — - identifies and evaluates an entity's assets or operations on the basis of a variety of factors , including the importance of an asset or function and the significance of a system in terms of national security , economic activity , and public safety .

a criticality assessment provides the basis for determining which assets require greater or special protection relative to finite resources .

impact — - the amount of loss or damage that can be expected from a successful attack on an asset .

loss may be monetary , but may include loss of lives and destruction of a symbolic structure .

monitoring and evaluation — - is a continuous repetitive assessment process to keep a risk management process current and relevant .

it includes , among other activities , external peer review , testing , and validation .

opportunity cost — the value of opportunities forgone .

risk — an event that has a potentially negative impact and the possibility that such an event will occur and adversely affect an entity's assets , activities , and operations .

the principal classes of risk from terrorism are to the general public , targets of symbolic value , organizational , governmental , and societal infrastructure , cyber and physical infrastructure , and economic sectors and structures .

risk assessment — - the process of qualitatively or quantitatively determining the probability of an adverse event and the severity of its impact on an asset .

it is a function of threat , vulnerability , and consequence .

a risk assessment may include scenarios in which two or more risks interact to create a greater or lesser impact .

a risk assessment provides the basis for the rank ordering of risks and for establishing priorities for applying countermeasures .

risk management — - a continuous process of managing — through a series of mitigating actions that permeate an entity's activities — the likelihood of an adverse event and its negative impact .

risk management addresses risk before mitigating action , as well as the risk that remains after countermeasures have been taken .

scenario — - the combination of weapon and attack mode on a specific target or critical asset ( for example , the release of sarin gas in a subway train ) .

threat — - an indication of the likelihood that a specific type of attack will be initiated against a specific target or class of targets .

it may include any indication , circumstance , or event with the potential to cause the loss of or damage to an asset .

it can also be defined as an adversary's intention and capability to undertake actions that would be detrimental to a valued asset .

threat assessment — - the identification and evaluation of adverse events that can harm or damage an asset .

a threat assessment includes the probability of an event and the extent of its lethality .

threats may be present at the global , national , or local level .

vulnerability — - the probability that a particular attempted attack will succeed against a particular target or class of targets .

vulnerability assessment — - the identification of weaknesses in physical structures , personal protection systems , processes or other areas that may be exploited .

a vulnerability assessment identifies inherent states and the extent of their susceptibility to exploitation relative to the existence of any countermeasures .

in addition to the persons named above , david alexander , neil asaba , nancy a. briggs , christine davis , scott farrow , kevin heinz , emily s. pickrell , albert schmidt , stan stenersen , april thompson , and l. james valverde made key contributions to this report .

critical infrastructure protection: challenges in addressing cybersecurity .

gao - 05-827t .

washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2005 critical infrastructure protection: department of homeland security faces challenges in fulfilling cybersecurity responsibilities .

gao - 05-434 .

washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2005 .

homeland security: agency plans , implementation , and challenges regarding the national strategy for homeland security .

gao - 05-33 .

washington , d.c.: january 14 , 2005 .

homeland security: further actions needed to coordinate federal agencies' facility protection efforts and promote key practices .

gao - 05-49 .

washington , d.c.: november 30 , 2004 .

u.s .

postal service: physical security measures have increased at some core facilities , but security problems continue .

gao - 05-48 .

washington , d.c.: november 16 , 2004 .

drinking water: experts' views on how federal funding can best be spent to improve security .

gao - 04-1098t .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2004 .

financial market preparedness: improvements made , but more action needed to prepare for wide - scale disasters .

gao - 04-984 .

washington , d.c.: september 27 , 2004 .

nuclear regulatory commission: preliminary observations on efforts to improve security at nuclear power plants .

gao - 04-1064t .

washington , d.c.: september 14 , 2004 .

u.s .

postal service: better guidance is needed to ensure an appropriate response to anthrax contamination .

gao - 04-239 .

washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2004 .

public key infrastructure: examples of risk and internal control objectives associated with certification authorities .

gao - 04-1023r .

washington , d.c.: august 10 , 2004 .

combating terrorism: dod efforts to improve installation preparedness can be enhanced with clarified responsibilities and comprehensive planning .

gao - 04-855 .

washington , d.c.: august 9 , 2004 .

homeland security: transformation strategy needed to address challenges facing the federal protective service .

gao - 04-537 .

washington , d.c.: july 14 , 2004 .

critical infrastructure protection: improving information sharing with infrastructure sectors .

gao - 04-780 .

washington , d.c.: july 9 , 2004 .

information security: agencies need to implement consistent processes in authorizing systems for operation .

gao - 04-376 .

washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2004 .

national nuclear security administration: key management structure and workforce planning issues remain as nnsa conducts downsizing .

gao - 04-545 .

washington , d.c.: june 25 , 2004 .

nuclear security: several issues could impede ability of doe's office of energy , science , and environment to meet the may 2003 design basis threat .

gao - 04-894t .

washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2004 .

information security: information system controls at the federal deposit insurance corporation .

gao - 04-630 .

washington , d.c.: may 28 , 2004 .

posthearing questions related to fragmentation and overlap in the federal food safety system .

gao - 04-832r .

washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2004 .

terrorism insurance: effects of terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 .

gao - 04-720t .

washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2004 .

nuclear security: doe needs to resolve significant issues before it fully meets the new design basis threat .

gao - 04-623 .

washington , d.c.: april 27 , 2004 .

terrorism insurance: implementation of the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 .

gao - 04-307 .

washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2004 .

critical infrastructure protection: establishing effective information sharing with infrastructure sectors .

gao - 04-699t .

washington , d.c.: april 21 , 2004 .

homeland security: federal action needed to address security challenges at chemical facilities .

gao - 04-482t .

washington , d.c.: february 23 , 2004 .

posthearing questions from the september 17 , 2003 , hearing on “implications of power blackouts for the nation's cybersecurity and critical infrastructure protection: the electric grid , critical interdependencies , vulnerabilities , and readiness.” gao - 04-300r .

washington , d.c.: december 8 , 2003 .

security: counterfeit identification raises homeland security concerns .

gao - 04-133t .

washington , d.c.: october 1 , 2003 .

nuclear regulatory commission: oversight of security at commercial nuclear power plants needs to be strengthened .

gao - 03-752 .

washington , d.c.: september 4 , 2003 .

nuclear security: doe faces security challenges in the post september 11 , 2001 , environment .

gao - 03-896tni .

washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2003 .

nuclear security: nnsa needs to better manage its safeguards and security program .

gao - 03-471 .

washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2003 .

information security: progress made , but challenges remain to protect federal systems and the nation's critical infrastructures .

gao - 03-564t .

washington , d.c.: april 8 , 2003 .

homeland security: epa's management of clean air act chemical facility data .

gao - 03-509r .

washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 .

homeland security: voluntary initiatives are under way at chemical facilities , but the extent of security preparedness is unknown .

gao - 03-439 .

washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 .

potential terrorist attacks: additional actions needed to better prepare critical financial market participants .

gao - 03-414 .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2003 .

potential terrorist attacks: more actions needed to better prepare critical financial markets .

gao - 03-468t .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2003 .

potential terrorist attacks: additional actions needed to better prepare critical financial market participants .

gao - 03-251 .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2003 .

high - risk series: protecting information systems supporting the federal government and the nation's critical infrastructures .

gao - 03-121 .

washington , d.c.: january 1 , 2003 .

combating terrorism: actions needed to guide services' antiterrorism efforts at installations .

gao - 03-14 .

washington , d.c.: november 1 , 2002 .

homeland security: department of justice's response to its congressional mandate to assess and report on chemical industry vulnerabilities .

gao - 03-24r .

washington , d.c.: october 10 , 2002 .

building security: interagency security committee has had limited success in fulfilling its responsibilities .

gao - 02-1004 .

washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2002 .

chemical safety: emergency response community views on the adequacy of federally required chemical information .

gao - 02-799 .

washington , d.c.: july 31 , 2002 .

critical infrastructure protection: significant homeland security challenges need to be addressed .

gao - 02-918t .

washington , d.c.: july 9 , 2002 .

information security: corps of engineers making improvements , but weaknesses continue .

gao - 02-589 .

washington , d.c.: june 10 , 2002 .

security breaches at federal buildings in atlanta , georgia .

gao - 02-668t .

washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2002 .

national preparedness: technologies to secure federal buildings .

gao - 02-687t .

washington , d.c.: april 25 , 2002 .

diffuse security threats: technologies for mail sanitation exist , but challenges remain .

gao - 02-365 .

washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2002 .

terrorism insurance: rising uninsured exposure to attacks heightens potential economic vulnerabilities .

gao - 02-472t .

washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2002 .

critical infrastructure protection: significant challenges in safeguarding government and privately controlled systems from computer - based attacks .

gao - 01-1168t .

washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2001 .

combating terrorism: actions needed to improve dod antiterrorism program implementation and management .

gao - 01-909 .

washington , d.c.: september 19 , 2001 .

critical infrastructure protection: significant challenges in protecting federal systems and developing analysis and warning capabilities .

gao - 01-1132t .

washington , d.c.: september 12 , 2001 .

coast guard: progress being made on addressing deepwater legacy asset condition issues and program management , but acquisition challenges remain .

gao - 05-757 .

washington , d.c.: july 22 , 2005 .

coast guard — electronic certification procedures .

b - 302789 .

washington , d.c.: july 6 , 2005 coast guard: preliminary observations on the condition of deepwater legacy assets and acquisition management challenges .

gao - 05-651t .

washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2005 .

maritime security: enhancements made , but implementation and sustainability remain key challenges .

gao - 05-448t .

washington , d.c.: may 17 , 2005 .

coast guard: preliminary observations on the condition of deepwater legacy assets and acquisition management challenges .

gao - 05-307t .

washington , d.c.: april 20 , 2005 .

maritime security: new structures have improved information sharing , but security clearance processing requires further attention .

gao - 05-394 .

washington , d.c.: april 15 , 2005 .

coast guard: observations on agency priorities in fiscal year 2006 budget request .

gao - 05-364t .

washington , d.c.: march 17 , 2005 .

homeland security: process for reporting lessons learned from seaport exercises needs further attention .

gao - 05-17 .

washington , d.c.: january 14 , 2005 .

coast guard: station readiness improving , but resources challenges and management concerns remain .

gao - 05-161 .

washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2005 .

port security: planning needed to develop and operate maritime worker identification card program .

gao - 05-106 .

washington , d.c.: december 10 , 2004 .

maritime security: better planning needed to help ensure an effective port security assessment program .

gao - 04-1062 .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2004 .

maritime security: partnering could reduce federal costs and facilitate implementation of automatic vessel identification system .

gao - 04-868 .

washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2004 .

maritime security: substantial work remains to translate new planning requirements into effective port security .

gao - 04-838 .

washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2004 .

coast guard: station spending requirements met , but better processes needed to track designated funds .

gao - 04-695 .

june 14 , 2004 .

coast guard: key management and budget challenges for fiscal year 2005 and beyond .

gao - 04-636t .

washington , d.c.: april 7 , 2004 .

homeland security: summary of challenges faced in targeting oceangoing cargo containers for inspection .

gao - 04-557t .

washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2004 .

coast guard programs: relationship between resources used and results achieved needs to be clearer .

gao - 04-432 .

washington , d.c.: march 22 , 2004 .

homeland security: preliminary observations on efforts to target security inspections of cargo containers .

gao - 04-325t .

washington , d.c.: december 16 , 2003 .

posthearing questions related to aviation and port security .

gao - 04-315r .

washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2003 .

maritime security: progress made in implementing maritime transportation security act , but concerns remain .

gao - 03-1155t .

washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2003 .

container security: expansion of key customs programs will require greater attention to critical success factors .

gao - 03-770 .

washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2003 .

homeland security: challenges facing the department of homeland security in balancing its border security and trade facilitation missions .

gao - 03-902t .

washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2003 .

coast guard: challenges during the transition to the department of homeland security .

gao - 03-594t .

washington , d.c.: april 1 , 2003 .

transportation security: post - september 11th initiatives and long - term challenges .

gao - 03-616t .

washington , d.c.: april 1 , 2003 .

coast guard: comprehensive blueprint needed to balance and monitor resource use and measure performance for all missions .

gao - 03-544t .

washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2003 .

homeland security: challenges facing the coast guard as it transitions to the new department .

gao - 03-467t .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2003 .

coast guard: strategy needed for setting and monitoring levels of effort for all missions .

gao - 03-155 .

washington , d.c.: november 12 , 2002 .

port security: nation faces formidable challenges in making new initiatives successful .

gao - 02-993t .

washington , d.c.: august 5 , 2002 .

combating terrorism: preliminary observations on weaknesses in force protection for dod deployments through domestic seaports .

gao - 02-955tni .

washington , d.c.: july 23 , 2002 .

passenger rail security: enhanced federal leadership needed to prioritize and guide security efforts .

gao - 05-851 .

september 9 , 2005 homeland security: actions needed to better protect national icons and federal office buildings from terrorism .

gao - 05-790 .

june 24 , 2005 .

protection of chemical and water infrastructure: federal requirements , actions of selected facilities , and remaining challenges .

gao - 05-327 .

washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2005 .

transportation security: systematic planning needed to optimize resources .

gao - 05-357t .

february 15 , 2005 homeland security: agency plans , implementation , and challenges regarding the national strategy for homeland security .

gao - 05-33 .

january 14 , 2005 .

homeland security: further actions needed to coordinate federal agencies' facility protection efforts and promote key practices .

gao - 05-49 .

november 30 , 2004 general aviation security: increased federal oversight is needed , but continued partnership with the private sector is critical to long - term success .

gao - 05-144 .

november 10 , 2004 .

air traffic control: system management capabilities improved , but more can be done to institutionalize improvements .

gao - 04-901 .

august 20 , 2004 aviation security: challenges in using biometric technologies .

gao - 04-785t .

may 19 , 2004 .

homeland security: summary of challenges faced in targeting oceangoing cargo containers for inspection .

gao - 04-557t .

march 31 , 2004 rail security: some actions taken to enhance passenger and freight rail security , but significant challenges remain .

gao - 04-598t .

march 23 , 2004 .

homeland security: a risk management approach can guide preparedness efforts .

gao - 02-208t .

washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2001 .

homeland security: key elements of a risk management approach .

gao - 02-150t .

washington , d.c.: october 12 , 2001 .

