the department of health and human services ( hhs ) oversees states' administration of the temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) program to provide cash assistance , childcare , and other services to low - income families .

among the program's goals are the promotion of job preparation , employment , and marriage among parents of dependent children .

hhs oversees the program at the federal level and distributes $16.5 billion in annual federal block grants to states to provide benefits and services to recipients .

as a federal block - grant program , tanf allows states broad flexibility in designing and implementing their programs .

to purchase goods and services , tanf recipients receive cash assistance , which in most states they can access at automated teller machines ( atm ) , banks , or retailers , using electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) cards .

cash assistance may be used for goods and services , and the amount of cash assistance received can vary by state .

the ebt cards are similar to debit or stored - value cards , but do not carry a line of credit , and the purchases or withdrawals made with these cards cannot exceed the amount of recipients' tanf benefits as determined by each state's tanf program .

until february 2012 , there were no nationwide federal requirements for states to take steps aimed at preventing access to tanf cash assistance at certain locations .

however , media coverage in some states highlighted cases of individuals accessing cash or conducting transactions at gambling establishments , adult - entertainment establishments , and liquor stores that could be considered inconsistent with the tanf program .

in response , some states took steps aimed at implementing certain restrictions that would prevent such transactions .

in february 2012 , congress passed , as part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , the welfare integrity and data improvement act , which requires all states to maintain policies and practices as necessary to prevent tanf assistance from being used in any electronic benefit transfer transaction in ( 1 ) liquor stores ; ( 2 ) casinos , gambling casinos , or gaming establishments ; and ( 3 ) adult - oriented entertainment establishments in which performers disrobe or perform in an unclothed state for entertainment.taken to implement such policies and practices by february 22 , 2014 .

states must report to hhs the steps they have in this context , you asked us to review the ability of tanf recipients to withdraw tanf funds at certain locations inconsistent with the purpose of tanf , such as gambling or other establishments .

to understand this ability better , we reviewed actions selected states have taken to prevent unauthorized tanf transactions , and the challenges they can face in taking such steps in compliance with new federal legislation .

to perform our work , we reviewed tanf laws , regulations , and other documentation and interviewed officials from hhs .

we also reviewed documentation and interviewed officials from the top 10 states in terms of tanf basic block - grant dollars — california , new york , michigan , ohio , pennsylvania , illinois , florida , texas , massachusetts , and washington .

these 10 states received the greatest tanf basic block - grant dollars , and collectively represent 66 percent of the tanf basic block grants funded in federal fiscal year 2012 .

in addition , we interviewed and reviewed documentation from key industry stakeholders , including ebt vendors , related to the selected states' efforts to prevent unauthorized tanf transactions .

for the purposes of this report , we consider “unauthorized” to mean all tanf transactions that are prohibited under state laws , regulations , policies , or other actions .

used a generalizable , random sample of each of the 4 selected states' ebt transaction data and compared it to electronic geo - coding information that pinpoints places and identifies locations .

we also assessed whether the data would allow the 4 selected states to identify individual tanf transactions at certain types of locations by conducting keyword searches of merchant names for terms associated with casinos , liquor stores , and adult - entertainment establishments .

we conducted electronic data testing to determine the reliability of the california , florida , new york , and texas ebt data .

for all four states , we determined that the ebt data are not sufficiently reliable for the purpose of performing systematic monitoring of transactions in locations that are inconsistent with the purposes of tanf .

however , ebt transaction data are sufficiently reliable for the purpose of identifying examples of transactions with merchant names that contain words associated with casinos , liquor stores , and adult - entertainment establishments .

a more - detailed description of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from october 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) significantly changed federal welfare policy for low - income families with children , from a program that entitled eligible families to monthly cash payments to a capped block grant that emphasizes employment and work supports for most adult recipients .

as part of prwora , congress created the tanf program , through which hhs provides states about $16.5 billion each year in block grant funds to implement the program .

to receive the tanf block grant , each state must also spend at least a specified level of its own funds , which is referred to as state maintenance of effort ( moe ) .block grant , prwora defines four goals for the program: 1. provide assistance so that children could be cared for in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; 2. end families' dependence on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; 3. prevent and reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and 4. encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

tanf is a flexible funding stream that states can use to provide cash assistance and a wide range of services that are “reasonably calculated” to further the program's four goals .

in federal fiscal year 2011 , states used about 29 percent of their tanf funds on basic assistance that included cash assistance for needy families , and the remaining funds were spent on other purposes , such as child care , employment programs , and child welfare services .

due to the flexibility given to states , tanf programs differ substantially by state .

states are required to develop plans that outline their intended use of funds and report data on families receiving assistance .

while the federal tanf statute does not define “assistance,” hhs defines assistance in regulation as cash payments , vouchers , and other forms of benefits designed to meet a family's “ongoing basic needs,” such as food , clothing , shelter , utilities , household goods , personal - care items , and general incidental expenses .

traditionally , states disbursed cash assistance benefit payments by means of paper check .

the ebt program was devised in the 1980s originally to meet the needs of the department of agriculture's ( usda ) food stamp program , in which federal benefits were electronically disbursed to eligible recipients .

these cards are not tied to a consumer asset account , and generally the account structures and processing requirements differ from other payment cards .

ebt cards can be used to deliver benefits to banked and unbanked recipients and can be used to deliver multiple benefits using a single card .

the cost savings in the food stamp program ( now known as the supplemental nutrition assistance program or snap ) from using electronic payments to distribute benefits prompted states to use ebt cards to also distribute tanf benefits electronically , leveraging the existent ebt system designed for snap .

electronic benefit distribution methods also include electronic payment cards ( epc ) .

some epc cards are prepaid or debit cards that are branded with a mastercard , american express , discover , or visa logo , which allows cardholders to conduct signature - based transactions anywhere that those brands are accepted as well as at atm and point - of - sale ( pos ) machines .

electronic benefit cards — both ebt and epc — generally can be used like traditional debit or credit cards , in that recipients can use them at atms to withdraw cash , or at retailers' pos terminals for purchases or to receive cash by selecting a cash - back option .

however , there are some key differences between the electronic benefit card and commercial credit cards .

the main difference is that electronic benefit cards do not carry a credit line , and the purchases or withdrawals made with these cards cannot exceed the amount of recipients' tanf benefits .

with commercial credit cards , cardholders borrow to make a purchase and then pay the money back later .

electronic benefit cards are more like debit or stored - value cards and provide an alternative to cash — each time that a cardholder uses his or her electronic benefit card , the money spent or withdrawn is deducted from the cardholder's tanf benefits account .

states consider various factors when implementing ebt or epc programs , including potential financial burden to recipients , such as transaction fees at atms that charge a surcharge for each transaction ; recipient characteristics , such as disabilities ; implementation costs ; and fraud and security risks .

states also take into account how readily recipients can access cash assistance .

for example , in some rural areas or low - income neighborhoods the only access point for cash assistance benefits may be a location such as a grocery store , single depository institution , or even a liquor store .

some of the benefits to recipients from states choosing ebt or epc programs include quicker disbursement of benefits , the elimination of lost or undelivered paper checks , access to benefits without an established bank account , and no need to locate check - cashing venues in order to access benefits .

prior to 2012 , states were not required under federal law to take steps aimed at preventing specific tanf transactions at certain locations .

however , the welfare integrity and data improvement act , part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , signed into law on february 22 , 2012 , introduced several changes to tanf that can affect recipients' ability to access cash assistance at certain locations .

specifically , the act requires that each state receiving a tanf block grant maintain policies and practices as necessary to prevent tanf assistance from being used in any “electronic benefit transfer transaction” in any liquor store ; any casino , gambling casino , or gaming establishment ; or any retail establishment that provides adult - oriented entertainment in which performers disrobe or perform in an unclothed state for entertainment .

the act calls for hhs to determine whether states have implemented and maintained policies and practices to prevent such transactions , within 2 years of the act's enactment .

if hhs determines that a state has not implemented and maintained these policies and practices , or if a state has not reported to hhs on its policies and practices , hhs may reduce the state's family assistance grant by an amount equal to 5 percent of the state's grant amount for the federal fiscal year following the 2-year period after enactment and each succeeding federal fiscal year in which the state does not demonstrate that it has implemented and maintained such policies and practices .

however , hhs may reduce the amount of this penalty on the basis of the degree of noncompliance of the state in question .

in addition , the act specifies that states are not responsible for individuals who engage in fraudulent activity to circumvent the state's policies and practices , and will not face a reduction in their family assistance grant amounts in such cases .

the act defines liquor store as “any retail establishment which sells exclusively or primarily intoxicating liquor .

such term does not include a grocery store which sells both intoxicating liquor and groceries including staple foods ( within the meaning of section 3 ( r ) of the food and nutrition act of 2008 ( 7 u.s.c .

2012 ( r ) ) ) .” id .

the act also contains requirements for states related to maintaining recipients' access to tanf cash assistance .

as part of the plan that each state is required to submit to hhs , states must include policies and procedures to ensure that recipients have adequate access to their cash assistance .

in addition , states must ensure that recipients have access to using or withdrawing assistance with minimal fees or charges , including an opportunity to access assistance with no fees or charges , and that they are provided information on applicable fees and surcharges that apply to electronic fund transactions involving the assistance , and that such information is made publicly available .

hhs issued a request for public comment in april 2012 , seeking information by june 2012 on: how states deliver tanf assistance to beneficiaries , whether states have implemented policies and practices to prevent electronic benefit transfer transactions at the locations mentioned above , states' experiences with these policies and practices , and other similar restrictions states place on tanf assistance usage .

in its notice , hhs identified multiple questions for states to answer , including questions on the methods states use to track the locations where transactions occur , challenges states experienced when implementing any restrictions on transactions at certain locations , the initial and ongoing costs of restrictions , the effectiveness of restrictions and the factors influencing the effectiveness , and any concerns that have been raised about the restrictions , among other things .

in addition , hhs requested input from states' ebt vendors on potential issues that states may face in implementing restrictions , including technical issues , cost implications , access implications , and mechanisms for addressing problems identified .

six of the 10 states we reviewed have taken steps to prevent certain types of inappropriate tanf transactions — restrictions that in some cases are broader than recent federal requirements that require states to take steps aimed at preventing transactions in casinos , liquor stores , and adult - entertainment establishments .

these 6 states faced a variety of challenges in identifying inappropriate locations and preventing transactions at these locations .

at the time these efforts were undertaken , there were no federal requirements that required states to take steps aimed at restricting such transactions .

in addition , ebt transaction data from federal fiscal year 2010 from 4 of the 10 selected states were generally incomplete or unreliable , and were of limited use to the states for systematically identifying or monitoring inappropriate locations .

while the federal requirements to restrict inappropriate transactions now exist , data issues and other challenges , if unaddressed , may continue to affect efforts to comply with these new requirements .

six of the 10 states we selected and reviewed have taken steps to prevent certain types of tanf transactions ; these actions vary in their degree and means of implementation , from widespread disabling of ebt access at atms in certain locations across a state to , according to officials from one state , passing a law without implementing steps for enforcing it .

the restrictions generally involve prohibiting the use of ebt cards at certain locations or prohibiting purchases of certain goods or services , or both , as shown in figure 1 below .

in 4 of the 10 selected states , there were no restrictions on tanf transactions , as no transactions were unauthorized based on the location of the transactions or the nature of the goods or services purchased .

as mentioned above , before the 2012 enactment of federal legislation , states were not required by the federal government to maintain or implement policies and practices aimed at preventing tanf transactions based on the location of the transactions .

figure 1 below , an interactive map , provides rollover information ( see interactive instructions below ) that describes the steps that selected states have taken aimed at preventing the use of tanf cash assistance for certain purchases or in certain locations .

 ( see app .

ii for the steps taken within each selected state. ) .

the purpose of tanf is to help needy families achieve self - sufficiency .

providing tanf benefits by means of electronic benefit cards helps the banked and unbanked tanf recipients , gives tanf recipients an alternate to cash , and allows states to use existing infrastructures .

however , any misuse of tanf funds not only deprives low - income families of needed assistance , but also diminishes public trust in both the integrity of the program and the federal government .

before congress passed the welfare integrity and data improvement act , as part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , some states acted independently to implement restrictions on certain tanf transactions .

as a result , their approach to enacting restrictions varies significantly .

however , until hhs issues regulations or provides further guidance as to what policies and practices are sufficient to comply with the new federal requirements , it is unclear to what extent the various restrictions implemented by states would be in compliance .

the experience of these states — especially any information related to the cost - effectiveness and success rates for various restrictions — could be beneficial for hhs to consider as it works toward determining what policies and practices are sufficient to comply with the new federal law .

as we heard from officials in multiple states , preventing unauthorized transactions can be time - intensive and is impaired by flaws in available transaction data and other challenges .

addressing the limitations we found in transaction data that impede the identification and monitoring of certain locations could require significant resources .

therefore , restriction methods that do not rely on flawed transaction data may be the most practical , such as washington state's requirement for businesses to independently disable ebt access or risk losing or not obtaining their state licenses to operate .

we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment .

in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iii , hhs noted that our report highlights many of the challenges and issues states and others face in issuing the tanf requirements that congress enacted in february 2012 .

in addition , hhs stated that our report's findings and analysis will be helpful as hhs drafts implementing regulations relevant to these tanf requirements .

hhs also provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate .

in may 2012 , we also provided the 10 selected states with an opportunity to comment on our draft findings relevant to their specific tanf programs .

in may 2012 , 7 of the 10 selected states provided us with technical comments by e - mail , and we incorporated their technical comments as appropriate .

three states , illinois , massachusetts , and pennsylvania , had no comments .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to other interested congressional committees and the secretary of health and human services .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

our objective was to determine the extent to which selected states have taken action to prevent unauthorized temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) transactions .

to conduct our work , we reviewed tanf laws , regulations , and other documentation — including the welfare integrity and data improvement act , part of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 , which introduced new state requirements for preventing certain tanf transactions — and interviewed officials from health and human services ( hhs ) .

from each selected state , we reviewed information related to its laws , policies , practices , and other factors affecting its tanf program .

in addition , we interviewed and reviewed documentation from several key industry stakeholders related to states' efforts to prevent unauthorized tanf transactions .

we also interviewed officials from the top 10 states in terms of tanf basic block - grant dollars — california , new york , michigan , ohio , pennsylvania , illinois , florida , texas , massachusetts , and washington .

together , these 10 states represent a total of 66 percent of tanf basic block - grant funds .

the industry stakeholders included: jp morgan chase and affiliated computer services , the two largest vendors providing tanf electronic benefit card services to the states ; the electronic funds transfer association , an industry trade association that conducts work related to electronic benefit card services for government agencies at the federal and state level ; the national conference of state legislatures , a bipartisan organization that provides research and other services to state legislators and their staff ; and the american public human services association , a bipartisan , nonprofit organization representing appointed state and local health and human - services agency commissioners .

we obtained electronic benefit card transaction data from 4 of the 10 selected states — california , florida , new york , and texas — covering transactions from federal fiscal year 2010 .

we selected these 4 states based on geographical diversity .

the results of our analysis of these 4 states' data cannot be generalized to other states .

using these data , we assessed the extent to which the data would allow the 4 selected states to conduct systematic monitoring of tanf transactions .

such monitoring might include an assessment of the prevalence of transactions at certain locations .

to do so , we used a generalizable , random sample of each of the 4 selected states' electronic benefit transfer ( ebt ) transaction data and compared it to electronic geo - coding information that pinpoints places and subsequent visual inspection and manual cleaning of identifies locations.obvious address errors in the ebt data only resulted in a small portion of corrected location addresses .

we also assessed whether the data would allow states to identify individual tanf transactions at certain types of locations .

to do so , we conducted keyword searches of merchant names for terms that are potentially associated with casinos , liquor stores , and adult - entertainment establishments .

we performed data checks to determine the reliability of the california , florida , new york , and texas ebt data for the purposes of our engagement .

for all four states , we determined that the ebt data are not sufficiently reliable for the purpose of performing systematic monitoring , as the selected states' data contained incomplete or inaccurate information for the addresses of the locations where the transactions occurred .

given the combination of both completeness and accuracy issues in the 4 selected states , we also determined most of the data in the 4 selected states could not match to address location information that would allow for suitable comparisons to other potential data sources .

however , we determined that the transaction data would support keyword searches of merchant names for terms that are associated potentially with casinos , liquor stores , and adult - entertainment establishments , for records that contain merchant names .

we conducted this performance audit from october 2012 to july 2012 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the table below includes figure 1's ( see above ) rollover information and describes the steps that 6 of the 10 states we reviewed have taken that are aimed at preventing the use temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) cash assistance for certain purchases or in certain locations .

in addition to the contact named above , cindy brown barnes , assistant director ; erika axelson , assistant director ; christopher w. backley ; melinda cordero ; justin fisher ; katherine forsyth ; gale harris ; olivia lopez ; grant mallie ; flavio j. martinez ; maria mcmullen ; james murphy ; anna maria ortiz ; robert c. rodgers ; rebecca shea ; and timothy walker made key contributions to this report .

