we are pleased to be here today to discuss our findings on anthrax detection testing .

the threat of bioterrorism has been recognized for a considerable time .

long before the anthrax attacks of 2001 , several hoax letters indicating the presence of anthrax had been mailed to federal and state agencies , as well as to private sector organizations .

these events raised the possibility that facilities could become contaminated and would therefore have to be evaluated for environmental contamination .

however , federal agencies were not fully prepared to deal with environmental contamination — that is , anthrax released through the mail — including the potential for multiple dispersals in indoor environments .

in september and october 2001 , contaminated letters laced with bacillus anthracis were sent through the mail to two u.s. senators , thomas daschle and patrick leahy , and members of the media .

the postal facilities in new jersey and washington , d.c. , that processed the senators' letters became heavily contaminated .

other mail routed through these facilities , as well as additional facilities in the postal network , also became contaminated .

in addition , numerous federal facilities in the washington , d.c. , area were later found to be contaminated .

the letters led to the first cases of anthrax disease related to bioterrorism in the united states .

in all , 22 individuals contracted anthrax disease in four states — connecticut , florida , new jersey , and new york — as well as in washington , d.c. five of these 22 individuals died .

the anthrax incidents in september and october 2001 highlighted major gaps in civilian preparedness to detect and respond .

in today's testimony , i will discuss our findings concerning anthrax sampling activities , recommendations we made , and a major issue we identified — the department of homeland security ( dhs ) cannot ensure and guarantee that sampling activities will be validated .

in developing this testimony , we relied on our prior work .

we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in october 2001 , an american media incorporated employee died from inhalation anthrax disease .

in the same month , contaminated letters laced with bacillus anthracis , or anthrax spores , were sent through the mail to senators thomas daschle and patrick leahy .

the response to the incident in the american media incorporated building in florida in september 2001 led to the identification of mail as the potential source of contamination ; eventually , it led to the sampling of the postal facilities .

the agencies began sampling on october 12 , 2001 , in florida and stopped on april 21 , 2002 , when the wallingford , connecticut , facility was sampled for the last time .

the letters led to the first cases of anthrax disease related to bioterrorism in the united states .

in all , 22 individuals contracted anthrax disease in connecticut , florida , new jersey , and new york , as well as in washington , d.c. , and 5 died .

the federal agencies involved in the response in the postal facilities have different responsibilities .

cdc and state and local health departments primarily provided public health advice and assistance to usps .

cdc has primary responsibility for national surveillance of specific diseases , including anthrax ; it also conducts epidemiologic investigations to determine , among other things , the source of the disease , and it participates in environmental sample collection and analysis activities .

the fbi is responsible for criminal investigations involving interstate commerce and the mail and crimes committed on federal property .

epa is the nation's lead agency for responding to a release of hazardous substances into the environment and subsequent decontamination .

on october 8 , 2001 , the president created the office of homeland security to develop and coordinate a comprehensive national strategy for dealing with domestic terrorist threats or attacks .

the office , which had limited involvement in the 2001 response , was superseded by the homeland security act of 2002 , which transferred many of its functions to dhs , which became operational in 2003 .

dhs was created by combining many previously separate agencies and is assigned a lead role in coordinating the efforts of federal agencies that respond to acts of terrorism in the united states .

the federal agencies primarily used a targeted strategy — they collected samples from specific areas considered more likely to be contaminated , based on judgments .

such judgments can be effective in some situations — for example , in determining whether a facility is contaminated when information on the source of potential contamination is definitive .

however , in the case of a negative finding , when the source of potential contamination is not definitive , the basic question — is this building contaminated ? — will remain unanswered .

cdc and usps officials said that they used a targeted strategy for several reasons , including limitations on how many samples could be collected and analyzed .

they also said that in 2001 , they lacked the data from empirical research to develop an initial sampling strategy that incorporated probability sampling .

we disagree with this interpretation .

probability sampling is statistically based and does not depend solely on empirical criteria regarding the details of possible contamination .

the situation in 2001 was unique , and the agencies were not fully prepared to deal with environmental contamination .

in the future , if the agencies decide to use a targeted rather than a probability sampling strategy , they must recognize that they could lose a number of days if their targeted sampling produces negative test results .

in this case , additional samples would have to be collected and analyzed , resulting in the loss of critical time for public health interventions .

this was so at the wallingford postal facility in the fall of 2001 , when about 3 weeks elapsed between the time the first sampling took place and the results of the fourth testing , which revealed positive results .

furthermore , about 5 months elapsed between the time of the first sampling event and the time anthrax was found in the wallingford facility's high - bay area .

therefore , strategies that include probability sampling need to be developed in order to provide statistical confidence in negative results .

further , even if information on all the performance characteristics of methods is not yet available , a probability sampling strategy could be developed from assumptions about the efficiency of some of the methods .

and even if precise data are not available , a conservative , approximate number could be used for developing a sampling strategy .

this would give agencies and the public greater confidence in negative test results than was associated with the sampling strategy used in 2001 .

cdc , epa , and usps , the federal agencies involved in sampling the postal facilities in 2001 to detect anthrax , undertook several activities .

these included development of a sampling strategy followed by collecting samples , using a variety of methods , and transporting , extracting , and analyzing the samples .

neither these activities nor the overall process was validated for anthrax testing .

consequently , the agencies were challenged by limited information for reliably choosing one method over another and by lack of information on the detection limit to use when evaluating negative results .

federal agencies used different methods for collecting samples .

while usps generally used dry swabs to collect samples ( the least effective method ) , cdc and epa used multiple methods — dry swabs , premoistened swabs , wet wipes , and a high - efficiency particulate air ( hepa ) vacuum — in various combinations or alone .

however , none of the agencies' collection methods were evaluated for anthrax detection in environmental samples .

in the absence of empirical research , agencies had no information available for reliably choosing one method over another and no information on the limits of detection to use when evaluating negative results .

the majority of the samples collected from the postal facilities tested negative .

in all , federal agencies collected about 10,000 samples during initial testing .

it is interesting that of the 9,807 samples that the agencies collected , more than 98 percent , or 9,648 , were negative ; a little more than 1 percent , or 159 , were positive .

in all , 286 facilities were tested for anthrax contamination .

of these , brentwood , trenton , and morgan were primary facilities ; that is , these 3 facilities processed the original letters containing the anthrax .

the results of the cdc , epa , and usps testing in 286 postal facilities were largely negative .

of 286 facilities , 23 tested positive .

for 2 of these 23 facilities , test results were negative at first but positive on a subsequent testing .

however , in 1 of these facilities — the wallingford , connecticut , facility — it was not until the fourth testing that positive results were obtained .

testing results differed between the primary facilities and wallingford .

in the 3 primary facilities , results were positive each time a facility was tested , with the important exception of the two quick tests in brentwood .

in wallingford , considered less likely to be contaminated , results were positive only on the fourth sampling .

these results underscore the importance of retesting and cast doubt on the efficiency of the judgmental sampling strategy .

of the 263 facilities that tested negative , only 9 were sampled more than once .

a facility in west trenton tested negative , even though an employee had contracted cutaneous anthrax .

the facility in west trenton was tested twice by the fbi and once by cdc , during which a total of 57 samples were collected , with negative results .

final , or confirmed , results will be negative if contamination is not present in a facility .

however , a result can be erroneously negative for several other reasons , such as ( 1 ) the sampling method was not efficient enough , ( 2 ) samples were not collected from places where contamination was present , ( 3 ) not enough samples were collected , ( 4 ) not enough spores were recovered from the sample material , or ( 5 ) analysis of the sample extract was not sensitive enough to detect anthrax spores that were present .

the agencies that sampled postal facilities in 2001 — usps , cdc , and epa — did not use validated sample collection and analysis methods to perform their tests .

according to these agencies , validated methods were not available at that time .

they conducted several interdependent activities , including sample strategy development , followed by sample collection , transportation , and analysis of the samples to detect anthrax .

neither these activities nor the overall process had been validated for anthrax testing .

validation is a formal , empirical process in which an authority determines and certifies the performance characteristics of a given method .

therefore , investments are also needed to validate these methods , as well as the overall anthrax detection process .

validating the overall process , as well as the individual activities , is important because operational and health - related decisions are made on the basis of testing results that the process generates .

cdc and usps officials said that they used targeted sampling ; that is , they collected samples from specific areas considered — based on agencies' technical judgments — more likely to be contaminated .

such judgments can be effective in some situations , for example , in determining the source of contamination in a disease outbreak investigation , provided results are positive .

however , if the results are negative , the basic question — is this building contaminated ? — cannot be answered with statistical confidence .

when the level of contamination is extremely high and dispersed in a facility , the method of sampling ( for example , wipes versus swabs ) is not as critical if the purpose is to find some contaminant .

however , at lower levels , a way of interpreting the significance of negative results is needed , and this requirement emphasizes the importance of validation of the methods and the need for statistically based sampling strategies .

this emphasizes the need for methods that have been validated , and sampling strategies that are likely to find contamination at low levels .

probability - based sampling does allow conclusions , at specific levels of confidence , about testing results .

using a probability - based sampling strategy , together with validated methods for detecting contamination , would provide a known level of confidence with which to interpret any negative results .

this would allow agencies to be more definitive in determining necessary actions .

figure 1 shows how lack of validation could affect individual activities — including the sampling strategy — as well as the results generated by the overall process .

the lack of validated methods for assessing contamination in postal facilities impeded the agencies in responding to the incidents .

the significance of the lack of validated methods was exemplified in the case of the one postal facility where negative preliminary results were obtained by field - based methods of analysis , with limitations that appear not to have been well understood by some agencies .

negative results do not necessarily mean a facility is free from contamination .

as we reported , results can be negative if ( 1 ) samples were not collected from places where anthrax was present , ( 2 ) the detection limit of the method was greater than the actual contamination level , ( 3 ) not enough samples were recovered from the sample material , ( 4 ) analysis of the sample extract did not detect spores , or ( 5 ) anthrax was not present in the facility .

in addition , while the 2001 events involved anthrax , many other biothreat agents exist .

differences in their characteristics mean different solutions .

accordingly , efforts to develop sampling strategies and to validate methods should address requirements specific to those threat agents as well .

however , since addressing other agents would consume resources and time , all these efforts should be prioritized in a long - term strategy .

the several agencies that dealt with the anthrax attacks generally worked well together , but we have identified areas that would have benefited from one agency's taking the lead in coordinating the response .

given the mission of dhs and its responsibilities , it appears that dhs is now well positioned to take a lead role in promoting and coordinating the activities of the various agencies that have technical expertise related to environmental testing .

in addition , it is important that all participating agencies recognize and support dhs in that role and that they have an effective structure for participating in identifying and addressing the appropriate issues .

given the lack of validated methods for detecting anthrax contamination in facilities , we recommended in our 2005 report that the secretary of homeland security develop a coordinated approach to ( 1 ) improve the overall process for detecting anthrax and ( 2 ) increase confidence in negative test results generated by that process .

this approach would include working with agencies to ensure that appropriate validation studies of the overall process of sampling activities , including the methods , are conducted .

specifically , we recommended that the secretary 1. take a lead role in promoting and coordinating the activities of the various agencies that have the technical expertise related to environmental testing ; 2. ensure that a definition of validation is developed and agreed on ; 3. guarantee that the overall process of sampling activities , including methods , is validated so that performance characteristics , including limitations , are clearly understood and results can be correctly interpreted ; 4. see that appropriate investments are made in empirical studies to develop probability - based sampling strategies that take into account the complexities of indoor environments ; 5. ensure that appropriate , prioritized investments are made for all 6. make sure that agency policies , procedures , and guidelines reflect the results of such efforts .

when we issued our report , cdc , dhs , and usps agreed with our conclusion — that methods for detecting anthrax contamination in facilities were not validated — and with the thrust of our recommendations — calling for a coordinated , systematic effort to validate the methods to be used for such testing .

but they ( 1 ) disagreed with or expressed concern about our conclusions or the recommendation dealing with targeted versus probability sampling , ( 2 ) emphasized that validated testing methods for anthrax were not available in 2001 and that federal and state organizations did the best they could under the circumstances , and ( 3 ) identified factors or issues that need to be considered in validating testing methods .

after we issued our 2005 report , it became evident that there was uncertainty over which agency would take the lead role in improving the overall process for detecting anthrax and how studies were to be funded .

for example , dhs stated that while it has overall responsibility for coordinating the federal response during future biological attacks , epa had the “primary responsibility for establishing the strategies , guidelines , and plans for the recovery from a biological attack” and hhs had the lead role for any related public health response and guidelines .

dhs also stated that it coordinated regularly with epa's national homeland research center to exchange information on research needs and to discuss priorities and gaps for a wide range of security - related research areas .

dhs stated that it would coordinate with epa to ensure that appropriate investments were made to explore improved sampling .

however , it is unclear to us how dhs would ensure that appropriate prioritized investments are made for all biothreat agents and how such priorities and gaps would be addressed .

on the basis of these uncertainties , we recommended in our may 9 , 2006 , testimony that dhs's approach to validating the overall process should start with a strategic plan that includes a road map outlining how individual agencies efforts would lead to the validation of the individual activities as well as the overall process , noting that such a plan would assist dhs in monitoring progress and measuring agency performance toward improving the detection of anthrax and other prioritized threat agents .

on may 19 , 2006 , dhs officials stated that while they concurred with the recommendations from our report and accepted the overall responsibility to ensure the methods will be validated , they stated that “there are legal limitations in dhs authority to direct the activities of other agencies.” they said that while they take a lead role in coordinating the meetings and in bringing people from different agencies together , they cannot guarantee that the overall process of sampling will be validated because different agencies have responsibility for different aspects of validation , and dhs's control over other agencies actions and budgets is ultimately limited .

they stated that dhs cannot ensure and guarantee that validation studies would be done , since this is a shared responsibility among different agencies .

also , since validation would require a sustained effort over a long period , dhs noted that it could not mandate commitment of other agencies' funds , over which it has no control .

dhs officials told us in july 2006 that they recognize that dhs is the principal agency responsible for coordinating the federal response and they would work with a good faith effort toward developing a strategy for validation studies and a road map by the end of calendar year 2006 outlining how individual agencies' efforts would lead to the validation of the overall sampling process .

on march 27 , 2007 , dhs told us that it had developed a working draft of the strategic plan and the road map by december 2006 but it could not share these with us because they were not final .

until responsibility is accepted for ensuring that sampling activities will be validated , the fate of the validation process will remain uncertain .

without validation , if another anthrax attack were to occur tomorrow , federal civilian agencies would not be able to conclude with any given level of statistical confidence , in cases of negative results , that a building is free of contamination .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information regarding this statement , please contact keith rhodes at ( 202 ) 512-6412 , or rhodesk@gao.gov , or sushil k. sharma , ph.d. , dr.ph , at ( 202 ) 512-3460 , or sharmas@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

william carrigg , barbara chapman , crystal jones , penny pickett , and elaine vaurio made key contributions to this statement .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

