i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of defense's ( dod ) space system acquisitions .

dod's space systems provide critical capabilities that support military and other government operations and can take a long time to develop , produce , and launch .

these systems can also be expensive to acquire and field , amounting to billions of dollars each year .

given the time and resource demands of dod's space systems and to ensure taxpayer dollars are used effectively , especially in light of today's constrained government budget environment , it is essential that dod manage system acquisition carefully and avoid repeating past problems .

major space system acquisition programs now in production have largely overcome problems .

but despite efforts to lower acquisition risk , newer dod space programs in development are encountering challenges and issues with synchronizing the delivery of satellites , ground processing , and user system capabilities remain .

further , the way forward for major systems is uncertain .

dod is studying the future of several key mission areas but has not yet made decisions on how to provide capabilities or address leadership issues .

my testimony today will focus on ( 1 ) the current status and cost of major dod space system acquisitions and ( 2 ) how dod is preparing to address future space - based mission needs .

this testimony is based on gao reports issued over the past 6 years on space programs and weapon system acquisition best practices .

it is also based on work performed in support of our annual weapon system assessments ; space - related work in support of our previous report on duplication , overlap , and fragmentation across the federal government ; updates on cost increases , investment trends , and improvements in the last year ; and preliminary observations from ongoing work related to space system acquisition efforts .

to conduct these updates , we analyzed dod funding estimates from dod's 2014 selected acquisition reports for selected major space system acquisition programs for fiscal years 2014 through 2019 .

ongoing work includes analyzing program status documents , such as acquisition program baselines , delivery schedules , and program plans ; reviewing acquisition strategies ; interviewing relevant dod officials , contractors , and experts ; and comparing information with acquisition best practices and dod guidance .

more information on our scope and methodology is available in our related gao products .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

dod provided technical comments which were incorporated as appropriate .

over the last decade , dod space system acquisitions have been characterized by the long - standing problem of program costs increasing significantly from original cost estimates .

while some programs have overcome problems with development , and actions have been taken to better position programs for success , the large cost growth of space systems continues to affect the department .

as shown in figure 1 , as of december 2014 , current annual estimated costs for selected major space system acquisition programs have overrun and are projected to exceed original annual estimates by a cumulative $16.7 billion — 186 percent — over fiscal years 2014 through 2019 .

the cost increases that dod is dealing with today are partly the result of management and oversight problems , many of which dod experienced before 2010 .

other reasons for cost increases include quantity increases and extensions for some programs , such as the evolved expendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) program .

the gap between original and current cost estimates represents money the department did not plan to spend on the programs , and thus could not invest in other efforts .

gaps between original and current estimates over the 6-year period are slightly larger for some years .

for example , the gaps in 2016 and 2017 are in large part driven by significant annual cost increases for the eelv program .

specifically , original annual estimates for eelv were over $900 million and $600 million for 2016 and 2017 , respectively , but grew to over $2 billion for each year in the current annual estimates .

eelv cost increases are due primarily to an increase in the number of expected launch services by 60 and an extension of the program for 10 more years , in addition to increases in the cost of acquiring launch services , which have recently been stemmed .

three programs — global broadcast service , space based infrared system ( sbirs ) , and wideband global satcom — did not estimate any annual costs for fiscal years 2014 through 2019 originally , but current cumulative estimates for these programs over that time frame total about $4 billion , driven by cost growth and quantity increases .

the overall declining investment in fiscal year 2019 is in part the result of programs that have planned lower out - year funding as they approach the end of production or operational capability .

however , this decline is mitigated by plans to invest nearly $2.5 billion in launch services in 2019 , and will be further mitigated by new programs , which are still in the early stages of planning and development .

these new programs are not included in this figure because they have not yet established official cost baselines .

our prior body of work has identified a number of causes of acquisition problems in dod programs .

in the past , dod tended to start more weapon programs than was affordable , creating competition for funding that focused on advocacy at the expense of realism and sound management .

in addition , dod tended to start space system acquisition programs before it had the assurance that the pursued capabilities could be achieved within available resources and time constraints .

there is no way to accurately estimate how long it takes to design , develop , and build a satellite system when key technologies planned for that system are still in the relatively early stages of discovery and invention .

finally , programs have historically attempted to satisfy all requirements in a single step , regardless of the design challenges or the maturity of the technologies necessary to achieve the full capability .

dod's past inclination to make large , complex satellites that perform multiple missions has stretched technology challenges beyond current capabilities , in some cases .

to address the problems identified , we have recommended that dod take a number of actions .

broadly , we have recommended that dod separate technology discovery from acquisition , follow an incremental path toward meeting user needs , match resources and requirements at program start , and use quantifiable data and demonstrable knowledge to make decisions about moving to next acquisition phases .

we have also identified practices related to cost estimating , program manager tenure , quality assurance , technology transition , and an array of other aspects of acquisition program management that could benefit space system acquisition programs .

dod has generally concurred with our recommendations and has undertaken a number of actions to establish a better foundation for acquisition success .

for example , we reported in the past that , among other actions , dod created a new office within the office of the undersecretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics to focus attention on oversight for space programs and it eliminated offices considered to perform duplicative oversight functions .

we have also reported that the department took actions to strengthen cost estimating and to reinstitute stricter standards for quality .

most of dod's major space programs are in the mature phases of acquisition and are now producing and launching satellites .

cost and schedule growth — a significant problem for these programs in past years — is not currently as prevalent , though still a problem for some programs .

table 1 describes the status of the space system acquisitions we have been tracking in detail .

several of dod's space system acquisitions have largely overcome challenges — such as matching resources to requirements , facilitating competition , and parts quality issues — and are in the process of producing and launching satellites .

other programs , however , continue to experience challenges , both in technology development and the optimal timing of system component deliveries , meaning delivery of ground , space , and end user assets may not be synchronized .

when satellites are placed on orbit without corresponding ground systems and limited user equipment in place , their capability is effectively wasted , as a portion of their limited lifespan is spent without being fully utilized .

this has been a significant problem for dod given the high cost to develop satellites , systemic delays in delivering ground and user components , and the importance of maintaining continuity of service .

problems we have identified with the development of satellites , ground systems , and user components are highlighted below .

in september 2010 , we found that the global positioning system ( gps ) iii satellite program took a number of steps to avoid past problems with gps satellite acquisitions , such as adopting higher quality standards and better managing requirements .

however , in our more recent work from march 2015 , we found that the first gps iii satellite launch is facing a significant delay due to problems with the development of its navigation payload .

the payload has now been delivered , but the first launch has been delayed 28 months .

the program office reports that early testing of a satellite prototype helped identify problems sooner , but a complete gps iii satellite has yet to be tested .

as a result , additional issues could emerge .

though the program had taken steps to include in its initial cost and schedule estimates the impacts of addressing problems in development , it is now rebaselining those estimates — expected to be completed in july 2015 — as a result of this delay and associated increased costs .

the first satellite design will not be fully tested until may 2015 at the earliest ; meanwhile , an additional 7 satellites are in various stages of production and dod has authorized an additional 2 satellites to be acquired .

additional delays or problems discovered during tests of the first satellite could require rework to the remaining satellites in production — carrying the risk of further cost growth .

in our ongoing work , we are finding that the gps next generation operational control system ( ocx ) , the next ground system for gps , has experienced significant schedule delays and cost growth , and is still encountering technical challenges .

the program awarded a development contract in february 2010 , nearly 3 years before the formal decision to begin system development , when requirements are to be matched with resources .

the contract was awarded early in order to save money during the competitive phase , but the contractor encountered problems completing software engineering and implementing cybersecurity requirements , among other things , which led to a higher - than - expected level of defects in the software , and ultimately to significant rework and code growth .

significant work and risk remain in the development of key upgrades , which are expected to be delivered about 4 years later than planned .

this means some satellite capability will likely go unutilized for several years while the capability of the ground system catches up to the functionality of the satellites .

further , as of april 2015 , contract costs have more than doubled over initial estimates , from $886 million in february 2010 to $1.98 billion , and dod has delayed initial ocx capability from 2015 to 2019 .

the office of the director , operational test and evaluation has stated that the delays to ocx pose risks to dod's ability to sustain the operational gps constellation , since dod may require use of the gps iii satellites before ocx is available to control them .

we are examining ocx in greater detail , as mandated by this committee , and expect to report on the results of our review in july 2015 .

through our ongoing work , we are finding that dod , building on a troubled , lengthy 9-year effort to mature military - code ( m - code ) receiver technology , initiated the military gps user equipment ( mgue ) program in 2012 to develop m - code receiver cards for the military services' respective ground , air , and sea weapon systems .

in 2014 , the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics directed the air force to accelerate mgue development and fielding , as guided by a 2011 statutory requirement instructing dod to procure only m - code capable equipment after fiscal year 2017 .

to that end , dod expects to complete developmental testing and operational assembly by july 2016 and provide technical support to inform the military services' mgue production decisions .

however , mgue integration and performance risks will not be fully known until the military services can complete individual operational tests on their respective test platforms .

the completion of the first of those tests is scheduled for september 2017 , and the last in september 2019 .

we are reviewing these and other issues within the mgue program as part of our ongoing work , and plan to report to your committee on the program in july 2015 .

in march 2015 , we reported that the family of advanced beyond line - of - sight terminals ( fab - t ) program , which is to deliver user terminals for the aehf satellite system and is a vital component of nuclear command and control operations , is nearing the end of development and anticipates entering production in late fiscal year 2015 .

in 2012 , following 10 years of continued cost and schedule growth developing fab - t , dod competed and awarded a contract to develop a new design for the program .

at the time of our last review , the low - rate production decision was expected in september 2014 , but due to delays in completing hardware qualification and system level testing , among other things , the decision is now expected almost a year later , in august 2015 .

the sbirs ground system , which provides command and control and data processing support , continues to experience development delays .

the delayed delivery of the initial block of the ground system — intended to facilitate processing of integrated data from legacy defense support program satellites , sbirs geo satellites , and sbirs sensors in highly elliptical orbit — means complete and usable data from a critical sensor will not be available until june 2016 , based on dod's december 2014 selected acquisition report , over 5 years after the first sbirs geo satellite was launched .

the sbirs system will not be fully operational until 2018 , when the final block of the sbirs ground system — which adds processing capability to mobile ground terminals — is expected to be completed .

the mobile user objective system ( muos ) program also faces challenges that prevent full use of its satellite capabilities .

issues related to the development of the muos waveform — meant to provide increased communications capabilities beyond those offered by the legacy system — have caused delays in the use of radios being developed by the army as the first operational terminals to incorporate the waveform , as we reported in march 2015 .

use of over 90 percent of muos' planned capability is dependent on resolving problems with integrating the waveform , terminals , and ground systems .

the muos program extended testing to fix software and reliability issues with the waveform integration and now plans to complete operational testing by november 2015 — a 17-month delay from the initial schedule estimate .

as a result , the army's plans to field its muos - compatible radios have now slipped from 2014 to 2016 , roughly four years since the first muos satellite launched .

fiscal constraints and growing threats to space systems have led dod to consider alternatives for acquiring and launching space - based capabilities .

these include disaggregating — or breaking up — large satellites into multiple , smaller satellites or payloads , and introducing competition into the acquisition of launch services .

for some mission areas , such as space - based environmental ( or weather ) monitoring , protected satellite communications , and overhead persistent infrared sensing , decisions on the way forward , including satellite architectures , have not yet been made .

for others , such as national security space launch , plans have been decided , but implementation poses new challenges .

as dod moves forward with changes to the acquisition approaches for these mission areas , some with the potential to set off cascading effects , strong leadership across dod's space programs will be critical .

in 2014 , we examined dod's efforts to explore disaggregation as a potential means to provide space - based capabilities in an increasingly constrained budget environment and a threatened space environment .

we found that the effects of disaggregation are largely unknown , and that , at the time of our review , dod had not comprehensively assessed the wide range of potential benefits and limitations in key areas , such as affordability , capability , and resilience .

consequently , we recommended dod conduct a comprehensive examination of disaggregation , develop common measures for resilience , and expand demonstration efforts to assess its feasibility , before making decisions on whether to disaggregate its space systems .

dod generally agreed with our recommendations .

one way dod is assessing disaggregation is through various analyses of alternatives ( aoa ) , or reviews that compare the operational effectiveness , suitability , and life cycle cost of solutions to satisfy capability needs .

dod has completed one aoa for the weather monitoring mission area and is working to complete others for protected satellite communications and overhead persistent infrared sensing .

these aoas have the potential to dramatically shift dod's approach to providing capabilities , affecting not only satellite design , but also ground systems , networks , user equipment , and the industrial base .

to allow enough time to institute potential changes in contracting and development approaches , and maintain continuity of service , dod is faced with making decisions over the next several years about the way forward .

details about the aoas , including when acquisition decisions need to be made for follow - on systems , are depicted in table 2 .

the longer dod takes to complete the aoas and come to a consensus on how to proceed , the more its range of choices will be constrained .

completing an aoa is the first in a series of important steps to providing future capabilities .

in addition , an approach must be selected — whether it is a disaggregated architecture , an evolved version of an existing system , or some other variation — funding must be programmed , and technology development and acquisition strategies must be developed .

if decisions are not timely , dod may be forced to continue with existing approaches for its next systems , effectively continuing with legacy systems .

while doing so may offer benefits , such as lower likelihood of unexpected cost and schedule problems , there are also risks associated with technology obsolescence and likely continued risks to missions because of the threats satellites on orbit face today .

to date , dod has not positioned itself to implement significant changes into follow - on systems .

for example , in a january 2014 assessment of a dod report on overhead persistent infrared technology , we noted that although the need for a sbirs follow - on aoa was determined in 2008 , it was not pursued until early 2014 , at which time dod began planning efforts for the aoa study .

additionally , we reported in april 2015 that dod's minimal investment in planning for technology insertion on sbirs geo satellites 5 and 6 limited the options available to upgrade technologies on these satellites .

at present , dod is planning to address technology obsolescence issues rather than upgrade the onboard technologies .

additionally , we concluded in april 2015 that the current lack of direction in the program's path forward could make it difficult to develop a technology insertion plan before the next system is needed .

dod concurred with our recommendation to establish a technology insertion plan that identifies specific needs , technologies , and insertion points , to ensure planning efforts are clearly aligned with the follow - on system and that past problems are not repeated .

in the case of the weather monitoring mission area , dod has passed the point where it could consider new designs or approaches for certain capabilities .

at least one capability has an immediate need , requiring dod to choose among existing approaches .

it is not certain disaggregation is a good approach .

to the extent it may offer a viable option for addressing the affordability and resilience challenges that dod is facing , it is not a simple solution and should be decided on a case - by - case basis .

the changes to satellite designs that are being contemplated could have far - reaching effects on requirements , supporting infrastructure , management and oversight of acquisitions , industry , and other areas .

dod is taking good steps by assessing alternatives thoroughly , but , as our work has found , it has not yet resolved underlying challenges to space acquisition that could be exacerbated by disaggregation .

for example , disaggregating satellites may require more complex ground systems and user terminals .

however , we consistently find ground systems and user equipment programs are plagued by requirements instability , underestimation of technical complexity , and poor contractor oversight .

clearly , these problems , including the misalignment of satellites , ground systems , and user equipment , will pose challenges to successfully implementing a disaggregated approach .

once decisions are reached for future satellites and launch acquisitions , dod may still face hurdles in implementing the plan .

for example , in 2012 , dod made a commitment to introduce competition into its eelv program — a shift of dramatic proportions from the longstanding status quo of procuring launch services through a sole - source provider .

following this decision , the department , in coordination with the national aeronautics and space administration , the national reconnaissance office , and several private space launch companies , has been working to certify new launch providers for national security space launches , but to date , none have met the criteria to become certified , although dod expects spacex to be certified by june 2015 .

additionally , the department has faced unexpected complications , such as challenges to its competitive process in the form of a private lawsuit that has been settled , according to dod officials ; a foreign conflict that brought attention to a russian engine used on one of the sole - source contractor's launch vehicles ; and engine development demands requiring new technological innovation .

without addressing leadership shortcomings , dod space programs could continue to face challenges in implementing new approaches .

dod's culture has generally been resistant to changes in acquisition approaches , as we have reported , and fragmented responsibilities in dod space programs have made it difficult to implement new processes and coordinate and deliver interdependent systems .

such challenges could , for example , hinder dod's efforts to examine options for acquisition efficiencies in military and commercial satellite communications services .

historically , dod has procured commercial satellite communications services to augment military capacity and became increasingly reliant on these services to support ongoing military operations .

dod is looking for ways to better streamline procurements of these services , but according to dod officials , it has had difficulty adhering to past policies that required centralized procurement , especially during operations in iraq and afghanistan , when efficiency was not a priority .

similarly , dod has been unable to align the delivery of space system segments in part because budgeting authority for the segments is spread across the military services and dod lacks a single authority to ensure programs are funded in a manner that aligns their deliveries .

as programs continue to face challenges in aligning components , the warfighter cannot take advantage of full system capabilities , and the large investments into these programs are not fully exploited .

dod has begun implementing efforts to address some leadership challenges more recently .

for example , increased use of shared satellite control networks and leading practices within dod could reduce fragmentation and potential duplication associated with dedicated systems , resulting in millions of dollars in savings annually .

in response to our recommendation , dod has developed a department - wide plan , currently in final coordination , to support the implementation of alternative methods for performing satellite control operations to achieve optimal systems .

it has also taken actions to better coordinate and plan space situational awareness activities — efforts to detect , track , and characterize space objects and space - related events — an area where we identified leadership disconnects in a 2011 report .

however , in both cases , it is too early to tell whether such efforts will be effective .

in closing , we recognize dod has made strides in recent years in enhancing its management and oversight of space acquisitions and that sustaining our superiority in space is inherently challenging , both from a technical perspective and a management perspective .

further , to its credit , dod is looking for ways to provide more avenues for innovation , competition , efficiency , and resilience .

this is not easy to do in light of the importance of space programs to military operations , external pressures , and the complicated nature of the national security space enterprise .

at the same time , there are persistent problems affecting space programs that need to be addressed if dod is to be successful in introducing change .

our past recommendations have focused on steps dod can take to address these problems .

while dod should not refrain from considering new approaches , we continue to believe it should complement these efforts with adequate knowledge about costs , benefits , and alternatives ; more focused leadership ; and sustained dedication to improving acquisition management , as we previously recommended .

not doing so will likely mean a repeat of dod's space system acquisition history characterized by cost growth , inefficient operations , and delayed capabilities to the warfighter .

we look forward to continuing to work with the congress and dod to improve military space system acquisition efforts and outcomes .

chairman sessions , ranking member donnelly , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you and members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information about this statement , please contact cristina chaplain at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or chaplainc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to this statement include rich horiuchi , assistant director ; claire buck ; maricela cherveny ; desiree cunningham ; brenna guarneros ; john krump ; krista mantsch ; roxanna sun ; and bob swierczek .

key contributors for the previous work on which this testimony is based are listed in the products cited .

key contributors to related ongoing work include raj chitikila ; erin cohen ; tana davis ; art gallegos ; jamie haynes ; laura hook ; and breanna trexler .

space acquisitions: space based infrared system could benefit from technology insertion planning .

gao - 15-366 .

washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2015 .

defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs .

gao - 15-342sp .

washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2015 .

dod space systems: additional knowledge would better support decisions about disaggregating large satellites .

gao - 15-7 .

washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2014 .

space acquisitions: acquisition management continues to improve but challenges persist for current and future programs .

gao - 14-382t .

washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2014 .

u.s .

launch enterprise: acquisition best practices can benefit future efforts .

gao - 14-776t .

washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2014 .

the air force's evolved expendable launch vehicle competitive procurement .

gao - 14-377r .

washington , d.c.: march 4 , 2014 .

2014 annual report: additional opportunities to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication and achieve other financial benefits .

gao - 14-343sp .

washington , d.c.: april 8 , 2014 .

defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs .

gao - 14-340sp .

washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2014 .

space acquisitions: assessment of overhead persistent infrared technology report .

gao - 14-287r .

washington , d.c.: january 13 , 2014 .

evolved expendable launch vehicle: introducing competition into national security space launch acquisitions .

gao - 14-259t .

washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2014 .

space: defense and civilian agencies request significant funding for launch - related activities .

gao - 13-802r .

washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2013 .

global positioning system: a comprehensive assessment of potential options and related costs is needed .

gao - 13-729 .

washington , d.c.: september 9 , 2013 .

space acquisitions: dod is overcoming long - standing problems , but faces challenges to ensuring its investments are optimized .

gao - 13-508t .

washington , d.c.: april 24 , 2013 .

launch services new entrant certification guide .

gao - 13-317r .

washington , d.c.: february 7 , 2013 .

satellite control: long - term planning and adoption of commercial practices could improve dod's operations .

gao - 13-315 .

washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2013 .

defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs .

gao - 13-294sp .

washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2013 .

evolved expendable launch vehicle: dod is addressing knowledge gaps in its new acquisition strategy .

gao - 12-822 .

washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2012 .

space acquisitions: dod faces challenges in fully realizing benefits of satellite acquisition improvements .

gao - 12-563t .

washington , d.c.: march 21 , 2012 .

space acquisitions: dod delivering new generations of satellites , but space system acquisition challenges remain .

gao - 11-590t .

washington , d.c.: may 11 , 2011 .

space acquisitions: development and oversight challenges in delivering improved space situational awareness capabilities .

gao - 11-545 .

washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2011 .

space and missile defense acquisitions: periodic assessment needed to correct parts quality problems in major programs .

gao - 11-404 .

washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2011 .

global positioning system: challenges in sustaining and upgrading capabilities persist .

gao - 10-636 .

washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2010 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

