u.s. asparagus imports increased by over 215 percent in the 1990s and now comprise nearly one - half of the asparagus consumed in the united states .

peru is the second largest source of imported asparagus and benefits from duty - free treatment under the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) of 1991 , as amended .

asparagus imported from peru accounted for 34 percent of u.s. imports in 1999 .

atpa was designed to promote the production of non - drug - related crops and to increase the economic development of four south american countries involved in the drug trade , including peru .

during the 1990s , peru substantially increased its production of asparagus and became a major exporter of frozen asparagus , complementing its already strong position in the canned market .

imports of peruvian asparagus have made fresh asparagus available in the united states from august through december — months that domestic fresh asparagus had generally been unavailable .

atpa expires in december 2001 , and legislation to extend the act is likely to be proposed in 2001 .

while imports of fresh and frozen asparagus and domestic production of fresh asparagus have increased , the production of domestic processed ( canned and frozen ) asparagus has declined .

for example , the value of u.s. fresh asparagus production increased from $117 million in 1990 to $172 million in 2000 .

however , the value of processed asparagus declined from $60 million to $44 million during this period .

industry representatives attribute this decline to increasing peruvian imports .

in this context , the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development and related agencies , senate committee on appropriations , and the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies , house committee on appropriations , asked us to ( 1 ) review the impact that asparagus imported from peru under atpa has had on domestic asparagus producers and consumers , ( 2 ) review atpa's likely impact on domestic asparagus producers and consumers if the act is reauthorized in december 2001 , and ( 3 ) describe the remedies available to domestic industries adversely affected by imports under atpa .

asparagus is a perennial crop that has a relatively long life expectancy of up to 20 years in commercial plantings .

since the crop is not usually harvested for the first 3 years , asparagus production represents a significant long - term investment for growers .

in addition , since the time from planting to the first harvest takes 3 years , producers cannot quickly increase production in response to market demand .

while asparagus is a native of temperate regions , its cultivation is most successful in locations where either extreme temperature or drought stops the growth of the plant , providing it with a rest period .

asparagus is produced and sold either as fresh , uncooked whole spears or processed ( heat - treated canned or frozen ) whole spears or cut pieces .

asparagus is a labor - intensive , high - value vegetable crop .

for example , according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , in 2000 , the season - average shipping - point price for fresh asparagus was $1.14 per pound .

in comparison , the price for the second and third highest value vegetables — artichokes and fresh market snap beans — was $0.64 and $0.42 per pound , respectively .

in 2000 , the united states produced 227 million pounds of asparagus having a value of about $217 million .

the majority of the asparagus produced was green asparagus for the fresh market — 66 percent was fresh , while 34 percent was processed ( about 28 percent was for canning and 6 percent for freezing ) .

figure 1 shows the annual quantity of domestic production from 1990 to 2000 .

as shown in figure 1 , the production of fresh asparagus in the united states trended downward until 1995 , when it reached a low in part due to poor weather in california .

since then , production has been increasing .

in contrast , the production of asparagus for processing has been steadily declining .

the major commercial asparagus - producing states are california , washington , and michigan .

california , the most important state for fresh production , has a harvest season from january through may .

while washington and michigan produce some asparagus for the fresh market , the majority of their production is for the processed market .

production from michigan occurs from may through june and washington from may through july .

in recent years , washington has begun shifting some production from asparagus for processing to fresh asparagus , although doing so is costly for producers .

thus , when the three states are considered , domestically produced fresh asparagus is available from january through july .

at other times of the year , only canned and frozen production is available from domestic sources .

in recent years , imports have accounted for a growing proportion of the u.s. fresh asparagus supply and , in 1999 , represented 57 percent of fresh asparagus consumption .

in 1999 , over 90 percent of total u.s. asparagus imports were of fresh asparagus .

the growth in imports has been made possible , in part , by the andean trade preference act and the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

atpa , which was signed into law in december 1991 , eliminates or reduces u.s. tariffs on eligible products from four andean countries — bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru .

atpa's primary goal is to promote broad - based economic development in these andean countries and to develop viable economic alternatives to coca cultivation and cocaine production by offering andean products broader access to the u.s. market .

the president proclaimed preferential duty treatment for peru in 1993 .

these preferences are scheduled to end effective december 4 , 2001 .

nafta , which was ratified by the congress in 1993 and implemented in january 1994 , created a free trade area between canada , mexico , and the united states .

nafta provides for the gradual elimination of tariffs — from as high as 25 percent on fresh asparagus — and other trade barriers on most goods , over a 10- to 15-year period .

as shown in figure 2 , asparagus imports were increasing prior to atpa's and nafta's enactment and have continued to increase since that time .

for example , imports grew from 44 million pounds in 1990 to 142 million pounds in 1999 — an average annual rate of increase of 14 percent , whereby mexico and peru provided most of the increase .

according to information from the peruvian asparagus institute,increases in asparagus production , assisted by the implementation of atpa , have resulted in making asparagus peru's second largest export crop , after coffee .

peru has also developed a modern frozen asparagus industry and has rapidly increased exports of this product to the united states and u.s. frozen export markets , such as japan .

asparagus accounted for 14.1 percent of peru's agricultural exports and resulted in employment for over 20,000 peruvians in 1999 .

according to the u.s. international trade commission's ( itc ) 1999 study , atpa has displaced an estimated 2 to 8 percent of the total value of domestic fresh asparagus production from what it would have been without the act .

u.s. consumers , however , benefited from the availability of fresh asparagus from peru during the months when fresh asparagus is not generally available from domestic producers — august through december .

in addition , changes in consumer preference contributed to a downward shift in the domestic demand for processed asparagus .

using 1999 data , itc estimated that the total impact of atpa's tariff reductions has been a 2- to 8-percent displacement of the total value of u.s. fresh asparagus production by peruvian imports as consumers substituted asparagus imported from peru for domestically produced product .

according to itc , asparagus and cut flowers are the two industries experiencing potentially significant displacement under atpa .

itc measured the impact of tariff reductions under atpa by comparing estimated market conditions under full tariff treatment versus actual market conditions under duty - free entry .

a decrease in the price of imported asparagus caused by tariff reductions results in the substitution of imported asparagus for domestically produced asparagus , but the displacement is not one for one because of various reasons , such as a retailer's preference for marketing domestically produced product .

consumers have benefited from atpa because fresh asparagus is now available during the months when it is generally unavailable from domestic producers .

this increased availability , combined with consumers' preference for fresh asparagus , has contributed to a downward shift in the consumption of processed asparagus .

figure 3 shows that the u.s. primarily produces and ships fresh asparagus during january through july .

in contrast , imports from peru occur nearly year - round , including months when u.s. fresh production is unavailable .

as the figure shows , the majority of imports from peru occur from august through december , when there is virtually no u.s. fresh production .

only canned or frozen asparagus is available from domestic sources during this time .

fresh asparagus from peru is available , in part , because the elimination of tariffs reduced the price of peruvian asparagus in the united states .

while imports from peru have increased the supply of fresh asparagus in the united states , demand has been strong , as demonstrated by the increased per capita consumption of fresh asparagus .

as figure 4 shows , in the mid - 1980s , the per capita consumption of asparagus shifted from processed to fresh asparagus , demonstrating consumers' preference for the latter .

this shift in consumer preference accelerated in the mid - 1990s , as fresh asparagus became available on a year - round basis .

the shift in the per capita consumption of asparagus is part of the general trend toward increased consumer preference for fresh vegetables .

in addition , the consumption of asparagus , which is a high - value product , is particularly responsive to increases in personal income , according to econometric studies .

in the latter half of the 1990s , real disposable personal income increased by an average annual rate of about 3 percent .

the increase in fresh asparagus consumption has helped keep prices trending upward despite the increase in supply from imports .

in contrast , shifts in preference and the declining consumption of processed asparagus have kept prices for processed asparagus relatively flat , as shown in figure 5 .

the decline in the consumption of processed asparagus particularly affects producers in michigan and washington , the two states that produce the majority of frozen and canned asparagus .

for example , processed asparagus accounted for approximately 86 percent and 68 percent of the production of that crop in michigan and washington , respectively , in 2000 .

our analysis shows that processed asparagus decreased from 42 percent of domestic production in 1990 to 34 percent in 2000 .

most of the decline occurred in washington .

if atpa is reauthorized , the producers of asparagus and , in particular , asparagus for processing will likely face some continued displacement from imports , but consumers can expect continued benefits from the year - round availability of fresh asparagus .

however , some of this displacement will likely occur even if atpa is not reauthorized and the normal tariff is imposed: 5 percent in 2 of the 5 months when the majority of peru's asparagus is imported , and 21.3 percent in the other 3 months .

this is because u.s. consumers prefer fresh asparagus , which domestic producers cannot supply in some months , and because of peru's advantages in climate and labor costs .

in addition , consumers would likely face decreased availability and pay higher prices than they would otherwise to the extent that the increase in tariff creates a reduction in imports from peru and hence an overall reduction in asparagus supply .

u.s. asparagus producers will also face increasing competition from mexican imports under the north american free trade agreement .

in the longer term , the free trade area of the americas , currently being negotiated , could go beyond both nafta and atpa by creating a duty - free trade zone in the western hemisphere for many products , including asparagus .

if atpa is reauthorized , u.s. asparagus producers , particularly of processed asparagus , will likely face some continued displacement from imports because the removal of tariffs on imports under atpa allows fresh asparagus to be imported year - round .

since consumers tend to prefer fresh rather than processed asparagus when it is available , this displacement will likely continue .

consumers can expect continued benefits from this year - round availability of fresh asparagus .

peruvian asparagus enters the united states when domestic production is low , resulting in an increased supply of fresh asparagus in the marketplace .

this extended product availability is believed to be partly responsible for increases in the consumption of fresh asparagus and declines in the consumption of processed asparagus .

as shown in figure 6 , the consumption of fresh asparagus reached 250 million pounds in 1999 — representing a 103-million - pound , or 70-percent , increase since 1990 .

in contrast , the consumption of processed asparagus declined by 39 million pounds , or 37 percent , since 1990 .

peruvian asparagus will likely remain a strong competitor for domestic producers even if atpa is not reauthorized and the normal tariff is restored — 5 percent in 2 of the 5 months when the majority of peru's fresh asparagus is imported and 21.3 percent in the other 3 months .

this is because u.s. consumers have expressed a preference for fresh rather than processed asparagus when it is available in the marketplace .

in addition , peru's climate allows for the year - round production and export of fresh asparagus .

peru also enjoys relatively lower labor costs for this labor - intensive crop .

these advantages have allowed peru to become the world's second largest producer of asparagus over the past decade and have given peru the potential for increasing exports in the future .

in addition , peruvian growers began a marketing promotion program in 2000 to stimulate u.s. consumers' purchases of fresh asparagus .

without atpa , consumers would likely have decreased year - round availability of fresh asparagus and pay higher prices to the extent that the increase in tariff creates a reduction in imports from peru .

since fresh asparagus would not be readily available from other foreign producers , supplies would decrease , and consumer prices would likely rise .

regardless of what happens with the reauthorization of atpa , u.s. asparagus producers will face increasing competition from other current and future trade agreements .

in the near term , mexico continues to be the most important source of imported fresh asparagus .

mexico's advantage of lower transportation costs to u.s. markets is believed to offset any production advantages in atpa countries .

in addition , mexico's sizable shipments to the united states have occurred despite relatively high tariffs .

as tariff rates under nafta are phased out through 2008 , asparagus imports from mexico will become even more competitive .

over the longer term , negotiations are under way to create a free trade zone among the 34 democracies of the western hemisphere .

the free trade area of the americas could create a duty - free trade zone more extensive than both atpa and nafta , which would result in the elimination of tariffs on many products , including asparagus , according to the u.s. trade representative .

china , the world's largest producer of asparagus , has been granted normal trade relations trading status by the united states , resulting in lower tariffs .

as a result , china has begun increasing its exports of processed asparagus to the united states .

u.s. trade law contains several provisions under which domestic industries may seek relief from injury caused by foreign imports.according to asparagus industry representatives , asparagus producers have not pursued relief under any of these provisions because the cost of bringing a case to itc is considered too burdensome for such a small industry .

alternatively , industry representatives have proposed that the andean trade preference act be amended to remove duty - free treatment for asparagus when an atpa country is deemed to be economically competitive with u.s. producers .

under section 201 of the trade act of 1974 , domestic industries can petition itc to investigate whether increased imports have caused them serious injury or threat of serious injury .

upon receiving a petition , itc conducts an investigation to substantiate the allegation .

itc's investigation is designed to determine whether a product is being imported into the united states in such increased quantities as to be a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry .

in making its determination , the commission must consider all relevant economic factors , including whether ( 1 ) productive facilities in the industry have been significantly idled , ( 2 ) a significant number of firms have been unable to operate at a reasonable level of profit , and ( 3 ) significant unemployment or underemployment has occurred within the industry .

itc also considers , among other things , whether there is a decline in sales or market share ; a higher and growing inventory of the product ; and a downward trend in production , profits , wages , productivity , or employment in the industry .

in addition , the commission must consider imports from all sources .

there is no requirement that the increases in imports or serious injury to a domestic industry be attributable to an unfair trade practice .

if itc makes an affirmative injury determination , it is required to recommend to the president an action that would be most effective in addressing the injury .

recommended actions may include increased tariffs , quotas , trade adjustment assistance to workers ( such as job training ) , or a combination of these measures .

as part of its recommendation , itc must also state whether and to what extent its findings and recommendations apply to imports from atpa countries .

following the receipt of itc's recommendations , the president may take one of several actions .

these include taking ( 1 ) the action recommended by itc , ( 2 ) other action deemed appropriate , or ( 3 ) no action .

however , the president cannot take action that is solely in the form of suspension of duty - free treatment for atpa imports unless the commission's investigation has found that the serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry resulted from the duty - free treatment .

in any event , the president is required to report to the congress what action , if any , he intends to make .

if the president takes action that differs from itc's recommendation or takes no action , the congress may enact a joint resolution , which directs that he proclaim the action recommended by itc .

the trade act also authorizes itc to make preliminary determinations and recommendations to the president for provisional relief in two situations .

under the first situation , an industry producing a perishable agricultural commodity that has already petitioned itc and is undergoing a section 201 investigation , may file a request with the u.s. trade representative for the monitoring of imports .

the u.s. trade representative may then request that itc monitor imports .

if an itc monitoring investigation has been under way for at least 90 days , then the industry producing the domestic product may request , in a section 201 petition with respect to imports of the monitored product , that a remedy be applied on a provisional basis , pending completion of a full section 201 investigation and presidential review .

itc would have 21 days to make a recommendation concerning provisional relief , and the president would have 7 days to make a decision .

any provisional relief granted by the president upon itc's recommendation would generally be in the form of increased tariffs .

under a second situation , an industry filing a section 201 petition may request provisional relief if it believes critical circumstances exist .

such circumstances exist when clear evidence shows that increased imports are a substantial cause of serious injury or threat of serious injury to the domestic industry and delay in taking action would cause damage that would be difficult to repair .

itc would have 60 days to make a critical circumstances determination and make a recommendation , and the president would have 30 days to decide what , if any , action to take .

such an action would generally be in the form of a tariff increase .

in addition , atpa specifically provides that an industry filing a section 201 petition with itc can then also petition the secretary of agriculture for provisional relief .

under the atpa special emergency relief provision , the secretary of agriculture and the president are authorized to make speedier determinations when an investigation of a perishable agricultural product under the trade act is ongoing .

if the secretary of agriculture's determination is affirmative , the president may temporarily withdraw the product's duty - free treatment or take no action .

no preexisting monitoring investigation by itc is required .

the secretary and president have a total of 21 days to make their final determination .

the emergency action would be rescinded upon a negative determination of itc's investigation , a presidential determination of changed circumstances , or the decision to take another relief action .

to date , asparagus producers have not petitioned itc for an investigation based on allegations of serious injury from imports under atpa .

according to industry representatives , the cost associated with preparing a case is burdensome , especially for such a small industry .

alternatively , industry representatives , in comments submitted to the u.s. trade representative on the operation of atpa in 1997 , have requested that the law be amended to remove duty - free treatment for asparagus when an atpa country is deemed to be economically competitive with u.s. producers .

without a petition from the industry , the itc has not initiated an investigation .

we provided usda's economic research service and foreign agricultural service , staff from the u.s. international trade commission , and the u.s. trade representative with a draft copy of this report for their review and comment .

we met with economic research service agricultural economists , including the team leader for fruit and vegetable analysis ; itc's staff representing the offices of external relations , economics , industries , and general counsel ; and u.s. trade representative officials , including the deputy assistant u.s. trade representative for latin america .

they generally agreed with the substance of the report and provided technical and clarifying comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

in a letter commenting on the report , usda's foreign agricultural service stated that the report does not adequately address the congressional rationale for providing duty - free access for asparagus imports under atpa .

the foreign agricultural service stated that it does not believe that peruvian asparagus production provides an alternative economic opportunity for coca producers and workers — the stated purpose for the trade act .

determining whether atpa is meeting its intended purpose of providing alternative economic opportunities for coca producers and workers in the four andean countries was beyond the scope of our review .

however , our report does describe how asparagus production has contributed to economic development in peru .

the foreign agricultural service also commented that the data we used in our draft report did not adequately reflect the current impact of peruvian asparagus imports on the u.s. market .

the 1999 quantity and value of domestic asparagus production data that we used to prepare our draft report were the most current available at the time of our review .

subsequently , in january 2001 , usda's national agricultural statistics service released its vegetables 2000 summary report .

we updated our draft with the production information from that report .

the updated information did not alter the results of our analyses .

appendix iii presents the foreign agricultural service's comments on the report and our detailed response .

we conducted our review from september 2000 through february 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

appendix i discusses our scope and methodology .

copies of this report are being sent to interested congressional committees ; the honorable steve koplan , u.s. international trade commission ; ambassador robert b. zoellick , u.s. trade representative ; the honorable ann veneman , secretary of agriculture ; and other interested parties .

we will make copies available to others upon request .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 .

key contributors to this report were robert c. summers , carol e. bray , and john c. smith .

to determine the impact that the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) has had on domestic asparagus producers and consumers and the likely impact of its reauthorization , we interviewed and obtained information from representatives from the federal government , asparagus producers' associations , and research institutions .

specifically , we obtained and reviewed the annual reports prepared by the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) on atpa's impact on u.s. industries and consumers and interviewed itc staff about the basis for their conclusions .

we also obtained and reviewed the model used by itc to analyze atpa's effect on the u.s. economy .

we obtained and reviewed reports from the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) on atpa's operation and interviewed officials concerning its impacts .

we analyzed domestic and international asparagus production and marketing data provided by the u.s. department of agriculture's economic research service and foreign agricultural service .

in addition , we obtained production and marketing information from representatives of the california asparagus commission , michigan asparagus advisory board , washington asparagus commission , and peruvian asparagus institute .

we reviewed studies on trade impacts from the university of california - davis and obtained and reviewed two econometric models from washington state university that investigated prices , production , and income in the u.s. asparagus industry .

we adjusted prices in this report to 1999 dollars using the gross domestic product implicit price deflator to more accurately compare prices and costs over time .

data on u.s. asparagus production and values are as of december 2000 .

all other data used in the report are as of december 1999 , the most current available at the time of our review .

to describe the trade remedies available to domestic industries adversely affected by imports under atpa , we reviewed the applicable provisions of atpa and other u.s. trade legislation , and interviewed officials from itc and ustr .

we also interviewed representatives of asparagus trade associations in california , michigan , and washington to determine their use of these remedies .

we conducted our review from september 2000 through february 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the following are gao's comments on the letter from the u.s. department of agriculture's foreign agricultural service dated march 2 , 2001 .

1 .

we do not agree .

determining whether atpa is meeting its intended purpose of providing alternative economic opportunities for coca producers and workers in the four andean countries was beyond the scope of our review .

however , our report does describe how asparagus production has contributed to economic development in peru .

2 .

we disagree .

the report provides information on both the fresh and processed sectors of the u.s. asparagus industry from 1990 to 2000 .

for example , figures 1 , 4 , 5 , and 6 contain information on fresh and processed asparagus .

3 .

we disagree .

as we reported in figure 5 , the inflation - adjusted prices for fresh asparagus have trended upward from 1990 through 2000 while prices for processed asparagus remained relatively flat during this same period .

4 .

see comment 1 .

5 .

itc's most recent study estimates that atpa displaced an estimated 2 to 8 percent of the total value of domestic fresh asparagus production from what it would have been without the act .

the 1999 data used for their study were the most current information available at the time of their analysis .

6 .

we agree .

the scope of our work did not include evaluating the economic impact on domestic growing regions .

7 .

we disagree .

the quantity and value of domestic asparagus production data for 1999 that we used to prepare our draft report were the most current available at the time of our review .

subsequently , in january 2001 , the department of agricultures's national agricultural statistics service released its vegetables 2000 summary report .

we updated our draft with the production information from that report .

the updated information did not alter the results of our analyses .

