temporary protected status ( tps ) is a form of humanitarian protection that provides a temporary benefit to eligible foreign nationals from designated countries who are residing in the united states .

tps protects beneficiaries from removal and permits work authorization .

countries may be designated for tps on the basis of statutory criteria related to armed conflict , such as civil war ; an environmental disaster , such as an earthquake or hurricane ; or extraordinary and temporary conditions in the country that prevent nationals from returning in safety .

under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , the secretary of homeland security , after consultation with other agencies , may grant tps to eligible foreign nationals in the united states from foreign countries that the secretary has designated for tps .

although the ina does not prescribe the other agencies that must be consulted , the department of state ( state ) generally has a role in providing input for the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews .

since tps was established in 1990 , 22 countries have received tps designations .

in fiscal year 2018 , more than 400,000 tps beneficiaries were living in the united states , according to data from dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) .

these beneficiaries were from 10 countries — el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , somalia , south sudan , sudan , syria , and yemen — with the majority from el salvador , honduras , and haiti .

since the beginning of fiscal year 2018 , the secretary of homeland security has announced decisions to terminate tps for six countries — el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , and sudan ; these decisions are currently the subject of litigation .

you asked us to review the decision - making process for tps designations .

this report ( 1 ) describes tps determinations and numbers of beneficiaries since tps was established ; ( 2 ) describes the approach that dhs , in consultation with state and other relevant agencies , uses to inform the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews ; and ( 3 ) examines dhs's public communication regarding tps decisions and related information , including work authorization .

to describe tps determinations and numbers of beneficiaries since tps was established , we reviewed information and data in federal register notices for tps designations for fiscal years 1990 through 2019 and analyzed uscis data on numbers of tps beneficiaries for fiscal years 1990 through 2018 .

to assess the reliability of the uscis data , we reviewed related documentation and interviewed uscis officials to identify any missing or erroneous data and resolve any discrepancies .

we determined that the data for fiscal years 2000 through 2018 were sufficiently reliable to provide general information about the size and characteristics of tps beneficiaries .

to describe the approach that dhs uses to inform tps reviews , we reviewed provisions in the ina related to tps as well as dhs and state documentation related to the processes they have used since fiscal year 2014 to collect information for these reviews .

this documentation included information that dhs and state provided for a judgmental , nongeneralizable sample of eight countries ( el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , syria , and yemen ) , representing 26 tps decisions in fiscal years 2014 through 2018 .

we selected this sample to represent a range of decision types and designation reasons , among other factors .

while this sample cannot be generalized to the countries or decisions we did not review , it provided information about the approach dhs uses for tps reviews .

additionally , we reviewed examples of information that other agencies — for example , the department of defense , the department of health and human services centers for disease control and prevention , and the u.s. agency for international development — and entities such as members of congress or nongovernmental organizations provided to dhs to inform tps reviews .

we also interviewed officials from dhs , state , the department of defense , the department of health and human services centers for disease control and prevention , and the u.s. agency for international development .

to examine dhs's public communication regarding tps decisions and related information , we reviewed information that dhs published in federal register notices from november 29 , 1990 , through october 1 , 2019 .

we also examined dhs guidance published on its website and dhs procedures as of fiscal year 2019 for communicating tps work authorization .

we compared dhs's guidance and procedures with relevant federal internal control standards .

additionally , we reviewed information from the department of justice civil rights division's website related to automatic extensions of employment authorization documents for tps beneficiaries .

we also interviewed dhs officials .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2018 to march 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that our evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the ina provides for the secretary of homeland security , after consultation with other agencies , to designate a foreign country for tps if the conditions in that country fall into one or more of three statutory categories .

these categories are generally described as consisting of ( 1 ) ongoing armed conflict , ( 2 ) environmental disaster , and ( 3 ) extraordinary and temporary conditions .

the secretary may designate a country for a period of at least 6 months but no more than 18 months .

at least 60 days before the end of the designation period , the secretary is required , after consulting with other appropriate agencies , to undertake a review of the conditions in the foreign country for which a designation is in effect and to determine whether the conditions for such designation continue to be met .

the secretary must subsequently take one of the following actions: extend the country's tps designation for a period of 6 , 12 , or 18 months , if the secretary determines that country conditions warrant an extension of tps .

this provides tps beneficiaries with an extended period of protection from removal .

terminate the country's tps designation , if the secretary determines that the country no longer meets the statutory criteria .

this results in an expiration of the period of protection for foreign nationals who were granted tps under a country's designation .

in addition , the secretary may exercise his or her discretion , on the basis of this review , to redesignate the country for tps .

with a redesignation , the secretary allows eligible nationals from the designated foreign country who have arrived in the united states since the initial designation , or another date established by the secretary , to apply for tps .

tps provides temporary humanitarian protection to eligible foreign nationals in the united states who , for various reasons , may not have otherwise lawful status and therefore , in the absence of tps , would be subject to enforcement and removal under the ina .

foreign nationals may be present in the united states without valid status and potentially removable for various reasons , such as having entered without inspection and admission at a port of entry or having remained in the country beyond the expiration of previous temporary status ( eg , tourist , foreign student ) .

eligible foreign nationals may also seek tps when they currently have another lawful status , according to uscis officials .

uscis officials noted that this may occur , for example , when a foreign national has a temporary nonimmigrant status nearing its end date when tps is designated for his or her country and applies for tps before the existing status expires .

under the ina , applicants for tps must apply during the registration period established by the secretary of homeland security for a particular country designation .

to be eligible for tps , an applicant from a designated country must have been physically present in the united states continuously since the most recent designation's effective date and must have resided in the united states continuously since the date established by the secretary of homeland security .

the ina also specifies that an individual is ineligible for tps if he or she has been convicted of any felony or of two or more misdemeanors committed in the united states ; if any of the statutory bars to asylum apply , such as involvement in persecution of others ; or if he or she is reasonably regarded as a danger to the security of the united states , among other bases .

in addition to protecting beneficiaries from removal , tps authorizes them to work in the united states for the designation period .

to receive evidence of work authorization , tps beneficiaries generally apply to uscis for an employment authorization document , form i - 766 .

uscis provides this document as a plastic card that shows proof of the individual's authorization to work in the united states and includes a photograph of the individual .

although uscis does not require beneficiaries to apply for an employment authorization document , according to uscis officials , beneficiaries typically apply to obtain these cards as evidence of their authorization to work in the united states .

figure 1 shows an example of an employment authorization document issued by uscis .

several key dhs and state components may be involved in the tps decision process , as table 1 shows .

additionally , other dhs offices and components , as well as agencies such as the department of defense or u.s. agency for international development , may provide information about country conditions to help inform the secretary of homeland security's decisions .

since tps was established in 1990 , foreign nationals in the united states from 22 countries have been granted tps .

our review of federal register notices published in fiscal years 1990 through 2019 found varying bases for the 22 countries' tps designations .

we also found that designations for 20 of these countries were subsequently extended or the countries were redesignated one or more times .

somalia , first designated for tps in september 1991 , had the longest overall designation period since tps was established .

as of the end of fiscal year 2019 , somalia's designation had been extended 21 times and the country had been redesignated twice ; its most recent extension was set to expire in march 2020 .

designations for only two countries were terminated without any extensions or redesignations — kuwait , designated in 1991 , and guinea - bissau , designated in 1999 .

figure 2 shows all effective dates of tps designations and subsequent decisions , including extensions , terminations , and redesignations , as well as the bases for the designations for each of the 22 countries in fiscal years 1990 through 2019 .

as figure 2 shows , 26 tps designations occurred in fiscal years 1990 through 2019 , and 22 designations were extended at least once .

as of september 30 , 2019 , the designations for all but four countries had been terminated and the termination of six countries' designations since fiscal year 2018 had been temporarily halted because of ongoing litigation .

redesignations occurred 20 times .

designations .

of the 26 tps designations , three were for one country , liberia , and four were for two countries , el salvador and sierra leone , that were each designated twice .

extensions .

the majority of tps designations ( 17 of 26 designations ) were extended up to eight times .

designations for five countries — el salvador , honduras , nicaragua , somalia , and sudan — were extended more than 10 times each .

three of the 22 countries' designations were not extended before termination .

terminations .

the tps designations for all countries except somalia , south sudan , syria , and yemen had been terminated as of september 30 , 2019 .

the termination of six countries' designations since fiscal year 2018 had been temporarily halted because of ongoing litigation .

several lawsuits had been filed regarding the secretary of homeland security's decisions to terminate tps for el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , and sudan .

in october 2018 , a u.s. district judge in california issued a preliminary injunction for one of the lawsuits , temporarily blocking dhs from enforcing the secretary's tps termination decisions for el salvador , haiti , nicaragua , and sudan .

the u.s. government filed an appeal in response to the preliminary injunction .

according to uscis officials , dhs has regularly published notices of its continued compliance with the court's injunction and has stated that it will continue to publish such notices pending resolution of the case in april 2019 , a district court judge in new york issued a second preliminary injunction covering haiti , which the u.s. government appealed in june 2019 .

additionally , under an agreement to stay the proceedings in response to a lawsuit filed in california in february 2019 , the government stipulated that it would temporarily halt terminations for honduras and nepal until the appeal of the october 2018 injunction had been resolved .

redesignations .

of the 20 tps redesignations , six were for countries that were redesignated once , two were for one country that was redesignated twice , and twelve were for four countries that each were redesignated thrice — the largest number of tps redesignations .

uscis data show that applications for tps were approved for a total of 431,848 foreign nationals in fiscal years 2000 through 2018 and that the number of tps beneficiaries each year grew from about 70,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 420,000 in fiscal year 2018 .

the number of tps beneficiaries increased most rapidly in fiscal years 2000 through 2005 , particularly after the designation of honduras in 1999 and el salvador in 2001 .

according to uscis officials , because adjudicating all tps applications can take years , depending on the number of applicants from a country , the number of tps beneficiaries for a designated country may continue rising after the established registration period for the specific designation .

for example , although honduras was initially designated for tps in 1999 , with an applicant registration period that ended on july 5 , 1999 , uscis data show that the number of beneficiaries from honduras who were granted tps peaked in 2007 at 85,759 foreign nationals .

see appendix ii for additional information on the numbers of tps beneficiaries in fiscal years 2000 through 2018 , by country .

data on the number of tps beneficiaries for fiscal year 2018 — the most recent available — show that the majority of tps beneficiaries were from three countries ( el salvador , honduras , and haiti ) , as figure 3 shows .

about 98 percent of beneficiaries from six countries ( sudan , honduras , nicaragua , el salvador , haiti , and nepal ) in fiscal year 2018 — 408,773 foreign nationals — held tps because the termination of their country's tps designation was temporarily halted because of ongoing litigation .

in addition , about 2 percent of beneficiaries from four countries ( somalia , south sudan , syria , and yemen ) in fiscal year 2018 — 9,019 foreign nationals — held tps because their country's designation was extended .

see appendix ii for additional information about beneficiary characteristics in fiscal year 2018 , including age , gender , and location .

our review of documentation for selected tps decisions in fiscal years 2014 through 2018 and our interviews with dhs , uscis , and state officials indicated that dhs's approach for initial or subsequent reviews of countries for tps consists of three primary steps: 1 .

the secretary of homeland security initiates a review of a country for tps .

for an initial tps designation , the secretary may initiate consideration of a country in response to various triggering factors .

such factors may include , for example , a request from a u.s. government entity or a foreign government for a tps designation based on the statutory conditions for tps ( i.e. , armed conflict , environmental disaster , or extraordinary and temporary conditions ) .

for an existing designation approaching its end date , a statutory deadline requires the secretary to undertake a review .

2 .

dhs collects information on country conditions and recommendations from uscis and state and provides this information to the secretary of homeland security to inform his or her decision regarding an initial or existing tps designation .

other dhs components and non - dhs entities , including other agencies and nongovernmental organizations , may also provide information to the secretary or uscis .

3 .

the secretary of homeland security receives the information and recommendations and makes a decision about tps for the country .

the secretary exercises discretion in determining whether to initially designate a country for tps .

for an existing designation , under the ina , the secretary is required to determine whether country conditions warrant an extension of tps or whether the country no longer meets the statutory criteria and tps must be terminated .

also , the secretary exercises discretion in determining whether to redesignate a country that was previously designated for tps .

figure 4 illustrates these three steps .

various factors may trigger consideration of a country for an initial tps designation , according to uscis officials .

officials stated that the secretary of homeland security's consideration of a country for an initial designation is discretionary .

however , subsequent reviews of existing designations are required by statute .

see figure 5 .

uscis and state officials stated that for initial tps designations , a request from dhs , state , the white house , members of congress , or foreign governments may trigger consideration of whether to designate a country on the basis of one or more of the three statutory categories ( i.e. , armed conflict , environmental disaster , or extraordinary and temporary conditions ) .

uscis officials added that , under the ina , the secretary of homeland security has the sole authority to determine whether and when to consider a country for an initial tps designation .

further , they noted that a request does not automatically result in a formal review of a country for tps even if the country has experienced country conditions specified in one or more of the statutory categories , such as an armed conflict or environmental disaster .

for subsequent reviews of existing tps designations , at least 60 days before the end of the designation period , the secretary is required , after consulting with other appropriate agencies , to undertake a review of the conditions in the foreign country for which a designation is in effect .

dhs collects similar information for each review of a country for tps , according to dhs officials and our review of selected decisions .

dhs officials identified four primary sources of information that the department collects to inform the secretary of homeland security's tps decisions: country conditions reports compiled by uscis and state and recommendations from uscis and state leadership .

according to dhs and state officials , dhs generally consults with state on tps decisions , although it is not specifically required to do so under the statute .

our review of 26 tps decisions for the eight selected countries found that dhs collected the following documents to inform each decision: 1. a country conditions report compiled by uscis , 2. a memo with a recommendation from the uscis director to the secretary of homeland security , 3. a country conditions report compiled by state , and 4. a letter with a recommendation from the secretary of state to the secretary of homeland security .

uscis manages and coordinates the tps information - gathering process for the secretary of homeland security .

while state formally provides its input through the secretary of state's letter and recommendation to the secretary of homeland security , uscis officials said that uscis generally incorporates the input from state into uscis's country conditions report and recommendation on tps .

dhs officials noted that other internal dhs components , government agencies , and other entities may also provide information about country conditions or other factors to inform the secretary of homeland security's decisions .

figure 6 shows the information collected to support the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews .

uscis officials indicated that the time frames for conducting tps reviews may vary .

they noted that a review for an initial designation may have a shorter time frame than a review for an existing designation , depending on the situation .

in addition , the officials noted that uscis generally starts the review process for an existing tps designation about 6 months to a year before the end date of the country's current designation .

they added that they generally start the review process within this timeframe , given the ina requirement that the secretary of homeland security either undertake a review and make a determination regarding country conditions at least 60 days in advance of the prior designation's end date or automatically extend the designation for 6 months .

according to uscis officials , at the start of a review for an initial or existing designation , uscis's office of policy & strategy generally reaches out to uscis's refugee , asylum and international operations directorate ( raio ) to request input on country conditions .

uscis officials also said that the office coordinates with state's bureau of population , refugees , and migration regarding the target time frame for receiving state's input .

in general , once uscis receives the input from raio and state , uscis finalizes its country conditions report and recommendation memo for the secretary of homeland security .

our review of documentation for the eight countries in our nongeneralizable sample of 26 tps decisions found variation in the time frames for uscis's recommendation memos and for state's recommendation letters .

for the 24 reviews of existing tps designations , uscis provided recommendation memos to the secretary of homeland security about 2 to 7 months before the end date of the prior designations .

most of state's 26 recommendation letters were dated about 2 days to 6 months before the uscis recommendation memos .

raio officials noted that they use an internal template as informal guidance for the draft country conditions reports that they compile for uscis's office of policy & strategy for reviews for initial or existing tps designations .

we reviewed the raio template and found , for example , that for reporting on a country being considered for a tps designation on the basis of an environmental disaster , the template includes sections ( eg , several paragraphs ) about the population harmed , damage to infrastructure , disruption in services , and status of disaster response and reconstruction .

officials added that country conditions reports may deviate from the template , because its use is not required ; instead , it serves as general , informal guidance .

raio officials also noted that information in the country conditions reports they compile is generally based on publicly available information or data related to country conditions .

according to the officials , sources for such information may include u.s. agencies , foreign governments , international organizations , nongovernmental organizations , and news articles .

according to state officials , after state initiates its internal process for compiling information for the secretary of homeland security's tps review , the bureau of population , refugees , and migration generally requests input internally from the relevant regional bureau and post before compiling information for the secretary of state's consideration .

see the text box for more details of state's internal process for developing country conditions reports and recommendation letters to inform the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews .

state department's internal process for compiling information for the secretary of homeland security's temporary protected status reviews the department of state's ( state ) internal process for developing input for the secretary of homeland security's temporary protected status ( tps ) reviews generally includes compiling information on country conditions as well as proposed recommendations from the relevant regional bureau and overseas post , according to documentation for selected tps decisions in fiscal years 2014 through 2018 and our interviews with dhs , uscis , and state officials .

state's bureau of population , refugees and migration ( prm ) facilitates and coordinates state's internal process for developing this input , according to informal guidance , which state officials said the bureau has used at the working level since 2012 , as well as our interviews with state officials .

after dhs initiates a tps review , prm generally directs the relevant regional bureau to reach out to overseas posts for information about country conditions , according to state officials .

state officials noted that in some cases , the regional bureau's country desk officer takes the lead in drafting the country conditions report , depending on the country context .

officials stated that the regional bureau generally uses a questionnaire on country conditions to request information from the post for a tps review and that the post generally also provides a recommendation , in addition to the questionnaire responses , via cable or email to the regional bureau .

for example , for a country that had an existing tps designation based on ongoing armed conflict in the country , a country conditions cable provided , among other things , information about the status of the armed conflict , an assessment of whether the return of foreign nationals would pose a serious threat to their personal safety and whether the country was unable to handle the return of nationals , and information about the impact of the conflict on economic and humanitarian conditions .

state and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) officials noted that other agencies represented at the overseas posts , such as usaid , may provide information for a post's input on country conditions , including information gathered “on the ground” as well as from publicly available sources .

once the regional bureau receives any input from post , the bureau desk officer prepares a draft country conditions report and recommendation , and the regional bureau works with prm to compile a joint action memo .

prm generally provides the joint action memo , which includes a country conditions report , to the secretary of state , according to state officials .

the memo may include a joint recommendation or varying recommendations ( eg , from prm and the regional bureau ) for the secretary's consideration .

after the secretary determines what the department will recommend , state provides a final country conditions report and recommendation letter to the secretary of homeland security as well as to u.s .

citizenship and immigration services' office of policy & strategy .

we found that the uscis and state country conditions reports and recommendation memos or letters that dhs and state provided for our nongeneralizable sample of 26 tps decisions included information such as background on the cause ( or reason for consideration ) of the initial tps designation and a summary of the country's recovery from , or the status of , the situation to date .

in addition , documentation provided to us for some of the tps decisions included other information , such as certain economic indicators or broader country context .

specifically: cause and recovery or status .

uscis and state documentation for each of the 26 tps decisions in our review generally included ( 1 ) information related to the cause ( or reason for consideration ) of the initial tps designation and ( 2 ) a summary of the country's recovery from , or the status of , the situation to date .

for example , documentation for a country designated on the basis of armed conflict described the status of the conflict and ceasefire agreements ; provided information about violence against civilians and recruitment of child soldiers ; provided an update on civilian casualties since the prior review ; and described humanitarian challenges stemming from the conflict , such as the risk of famine .

for a country designated on the basis of environmental disaster , documentation described the status of investments in recovery and efforts to rebuild after the disaster , including the number of houses and schools that had been rebuilt or repaired .

this documentation also included assessments of disruption in living conditions and the extent to which economic activity and basic services had been restored .

economic indicators .

uscis documentation for 16 tps decisions and state documentation for 12 tps decisions in our review included information about economic indicators .

examples of such information included an estimate of damages from an environmental disaster as a percentage of a country's gross domestic product , a summary of growth in a country's gross domestic product in recent years , and data on the increase in food prices as a result of armed conflict in a country .

broader country context .

uscis documentation for 23 tps decisions in our review and state documentation for 20 tps decisions provided information about broader country context .

for example , documentation for a country designated on the basis of armed conflict included broader context regarding topics such as recent natural disasters and the country's geography .

as another example , documentation for a country designated on the basis of environmental disaster provided information about subsequent natural disasters as well as violence , criminal activity , and corruption in the country .

in addition to uscis and state , other dhs offices and components and non - dhs entities may provide information to inform the secretary's decision .

dhs officials noted that such information varies , may be solicited or unsolicited , and may be provided directly to the secretary of homeland security or to uscis .

we reviewed examples of such information for several of the tps decisions in our nongeneralizable sample .

this information included items such as immigration data or intelligence analyses from other dhs offices and components — for example , the office of immigration statistics , u.s. customs and border protection , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ; updates from the department of defense on the security situation in a technical input from the centers for disease control and prevention regarding the status of an epidemic ; and input from other entities , including letters from members of congress , foreign government officials , and nongovernmental organizations .

in addition , dhs officials stated that the secretary of homeland security may hold briefings or meetings on tps reviews both internally and with external entities , such as white house officials , foreign government officials , and nongovernmental organizations or advocacy groups .

according to dhs officials , after uscis and state compile their country conditions reports and recommendations for the secretary of homeland security's consideration , other dhs components — including the office of strategy , policy , and plans ; the office of the general counsel ; and the management directorate — review the documents as part of the standard departmental clearance process before providing them to the secretary .

officials from these dhs components noted that the purpose of their review is generally to provide relevant technical comments and ensure that complete information has been gathered for the secretary's review .

according to uscis officials , after receiving the information and recommendations from uscis and state , as well as information from any other sources , the secretary of homeland security makes a decision regarding a country's initial or existing tps designation .

uscis officials indicated that the secretary's decisions may not always follow the recommendations of the uscis director or the secretary of state .

for example , among the 26 tps decisions from 2014 through 2018 that we reviewed , the secretary of homeland security's decision was the same as state's recommendation in 21 cases and differed from state's recommendation in five cases .

initial designation .

uscis officials stated that if the secretary of homeland security determines a country meets the statutory criteria for designation , the secretary may then exercise discretion in deciding whether to initially designate the country for tps .

existing designation .

according to uscis officials , the secretary of homeland security exercises discretion in determining whether the conditions in a country satisfy statutory conditions for retaining an existing designation .

however , the officials indicated that if the secretary determines that the conditions for tps designation continue to be met , the secretary is required under the ina to extend the designation .

additionally , uscis officials stated that if the secretary determines a country no longer meets conditions for tps designation , the secretary is required under the ina to terminate the designation .

finally , uscis officials stated that the secretary may exercise discretion in deciding to redesignate a country with an existing designation and that factors such as a significant deterioration in country conditions may weigh in favor of a redesignation .

once the secretary of homeland security decides whether to designate a country or to extend or terminate tps , the decision may be documented through a signed memorandum or communicated orally to uscis , according to uscis officials .

dhs provided memorandums or notices documenting the secretary's tps decisions for all 26 decisions in our nongeneralizable sample .

after the secretary makes a tps decision , dhs typically communicates the decision to state before announcing it to the general public .

either dhs or state then communicates the decision to the foreign embassy in washington , d.c. , and state may communicate it to the foreign government overseas .

finally , under ina provisions related to tps , the secretary's decision is published in the federal register ( see fig .

7 ) .

since 1990 , all tps decisions have been communicated to the public through statutorily required notices in the federal register .

dhs has also used other mechanisms , including press releases and its website , to help disseminate tps - related information to the public .

we found that a federal register notice was published for all tps decisions , as required under the ina , from november 1990 to september 2019 .

in addition , dhs frequently used federal register notices as a mechanism for communicating other related information , such as effective dates for tps designation periods , applicant registration periods , tps beneficiary eligibility requirements , and information about employment authorization for beneficiaries .

for example , the federal register notice extending the tps designation of el salvador , published on july 8 , 2016 , included the following: summary information about the extension , such as the period of extension and the start and end date of the extension ; procedures and eligibility information for beneficiaries to register or reregister for tps and to apply for renewal of employment authorization documents , including required forms and fees to register or reregister ; directions for obtaining additional information and help with questions by accessing the uscis website or by contacting an identified uscis official or a uscis customer contact center ; and general information about tps as well as information about el salvador's initial tps designation and about the secretary's authority and reason for extending tps for el salvador .

for a federal register notice of a tps decision , according to uscis officials , uscis generally takes about 2 weeks to draft the notice .

dhs then completes an internal review before submitting the notice to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for interagency review , according to officials .

omb's office of information and regulatory affairs coordinates the notice review process , including gathering comments or proposed revisions from relevant executive branch agencies .

for example , we reviewed examples of technical comments from the centers for disease control and prevention regarding draft notices of tps decisions for the ebola - affected countries that included information and data on the status of the epidemic and an assessment of health care infrastructure .

according to uscis officials , omb comments are returned to dhs without identifying the agency that made each comment , and additional interagency review and comment may occur before dhs publishes the notice in the federal register .

uscis officials also noted that , under regulation , omb can take up to 90 days to complete the interagency review , although the officials added that omb aims to complete the process in a timely manner for tps notices and generally takes about a month .

according to uscis officials , to help raise awareness of tps decisions , uscis has generally also issued press releases announcing all tps decisions and published them on its website in addition to publishing federal register notices .

table 2 summarizes information from dhs's publication of a press release and federal register notice for a 2016 tps decision .

uscis has also taken other steps to communicate tps decisions and related information to the public .

uscis has updated its tps country - specific webpages with alerts about the latest tps decisions and registration periods , among other information .

further , according to uscis officials , the office of public affairs hosted periodic national tps teleconferences for stakeholders and conducted outreach meetings to respond to questions and discuss tps information in communities where there might be a large number of tps beneficiaries .

for example , a teleconference invitation from uscis to stakeholders to discuss the extension of haiti's tps designation in may 2017 indicated that uscis officials would share information about the tps reregistration period and procedures for eligible haitian nationals and would respond to stakeholder questions .

officials from uscis's office of public affairs also stated that the office has drafted guidance for communicating most tps decisions .

we reviewed examples of the guidance , which included planned time lines for publishing the press releases and information to uscis's website as well as for conducting outreach to congress , stakeholder groups , and tps beneficiaries .

uscis officials noted that once the secretary of homeland security makes a tps decision , time frames for publishing the federal register notice may vary .

uscis officials stated that , in an effort to ensure public awareness of the decisions as soon as possible , uscis has in some cases published a press release before the federal register notice of a decision was finalized and published .

in reviewing tps decisions for existing designations ( i.e. , extensions , terminations , and redesignations ) in fiscal years 1990 through 2019 , we found the following: about two - thirds of federal register notices announcing tps decisions for these existing designations were published at least 30 days before the end date of the previous designation period ( 100 of 158 total notices ) .

in fiscal years 1990 through 2005 , 21 federal register notices announcing tps decisions for existing designations were published after the end of the previous designation period .

in fiscal years 2006 through 2019 , all 71 federal register notices announcing tps decisions for existing designations were published 4 to 159 days before the end date of the previous designation period .

see figure 8 for more details .

since 1990 , two mechanisms — federal register notices and individually mailed notifications , which tps beneficiaries may use as evidence of their eligibility for employment — have been used to communicate automatic extensions of employment authorization documents .

however , uscis's published guidance has not consistently identified each of these as official mechanisms to verify eligibility , resulting in confusion among employers about tps beneficiaries' employment eligibility .

the ina states that dhs shall provide tps beneficiaries with “an ‘employment authorized' endorsement or other appropriate work permit” but does not specify the mechanisms that dhs should use to communicate tps employment authorization .

to receive documentation of work authorization , tps beneficiaries generally apply for an employment authorization document after an initial tps designation and also after any subsequent extensions or redesignations of tps .

see the text box for a description of the process that tps beneficiaries and employers must follow to verify beneficiaries' employment eligibility .

according to uscis officials , uscis aims to adjudicate both initial employment authorization applications and renewal applications within 90 days after receiving an application .

when it is unable to process the adjudications in this time frame , uscis issues automatic extensions of expiring employment authorization documents for tps beneficiaries from a specific country , to allow time for uscis to process the volume of applications associated with a tps reregistration period .

in some instances , uscis may issue additional automatic extensions of employment authorization documents for specific countries if it has been unable to process all pending applications within the initial automatic extension period , according to uscis officials .

when employment authorization documents are automatically extended for eligible tps beneficiaries , the documents may appear to have expired even though they remain valid .

according to uscis officials , dhs has used the federal register notices announcing tps decisions to communicate most automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents .

for example , on january 17 , 2017 , dhs published a federal register notice extending the tps designation of somalia for 18 months and , in the same notice , automatically extended for 6 months the validity of employment authorization documents issued under somalia's tps designation .

dhs has also communicated automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents through federal register notices independent of a tps decision .

generally , federal register notices announcing automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents include instructions for employers for completing the form i - 9 , among other things .

additionally , some notices state that , to reduce employer confusion regarding automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents , beneficiaries should explain the extension to their employer and may also provide their employer with a copy of the relevant federal register notice .

in five cases , beginning in fiscal year 2018 , uscis mailed notifications of automatic extensions of employment authorization documents to thousands of tps beneficiaries from haiti , el salvador , syria , and honduras as an alternative or a supplement to posting the information in federal register notices .

uscis officials told us that in these cases , they mailed individual notifications of the automatic extensions to ensure that the beneficiaries would not experience any gaps in employment authorization .

according to the officials , they began this practice because of the large number of affected beneficiaries .

our examination of uscis documents found that in four of these five cases , uscis mailed individual notifications to the tps beneficiaries without also posting a federal register notice communicating the automatic extension .

in all five cases , uscis published guidance on its website to inform tps beneficiaries and employers about the use of individually mailed notifications to communicate employment authorization document extensions .

uscis's website states that tps beneficiaries may present the federal register notice or individually mailed notification to their employer along with their expired employment authorization documents to show proof of continued employment authorization .

the individual notifications also state that beneficiaries may show the notifications , along with the expired employment authorization document , to any u.s. employer as proof of continued employment authorization .

however , a uscis handbook for employers and related guidance do not specifically identify the individually mailed notifications as an official means of communicating these extensions .

uscis's handbook for employers: guidance for completing form i - 9 ( m - 274 ) provides guidance for employers on how to properly complete form i - 9 , which helps employers verify that individuals are authorized to work in the united states .

the handbook contains a section about automatic employment authorization document extensions for tps beneficiaries that references uscis's use of federal register notices to inform the public of these extensions .

however , the handbook for employers does not mention uscis's use of individually mailed notifications to communicate the automatic extensions .

uscis's instructions for form i - 9 , employment eligibility verification notes that certain employees , including tps beneficiaries , may present an expired employment authorization document , which may be considered unexpired if the document has been extended by uscis .

the guidance also notes that employees should enter the expiration date of an automatic extension on form i - 9 .

however , the instructions for form i - 9 do not detail uscis's mechanisms for communicating these extensions , including its use of individually mailed notifications .

some employers have reportedly refused to accept expired employment authorization documents as proof of work authorization when the documents had been automatically extended .

for example , the department of justice's civil rights division telephone interventions website indicates that on approximately 50 occasions from september 2017 through may 2019 , the immigrant and employee rights section intervened to deter employers or medical licensing boards from rejecting valid work authorization documents and , in some cases , from terminating employment for tps beneficiaries whose employment authorization documents had been automatically extended .

also , a letter to uscis signed by 70 law professors and scholars states that some legal service providers have reported instances of employers' terminating tps beneficiaries' employment because the employer did not understand or accept the individually mailed notifications .

further , uscis has received feedback from certain stakeholders concerned that beneficiaries might not be receiving the individual notifications in time to avoid any potential gaps in work authorization , according to uscis officials .

uscis officials told us that the federal register process may be beneficial for communicating employment authorization in some cases but that they may also continue to use the individually mailed notifications as a mechanism to communicate future extensions , depending on the circumstances .

uscis has acknowledged the potential benefits of updating external guidance regarding automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents .

however , as of december 2019 , uscis had not taken action to do so .

replying to a letter of concern from an advocacy group , uscis stated that it could consider updating the handbook for employers to add additional guidance regarding individually mailed notifications .

effective information and communication are vital for an entity to achieve its objectives .

according to standards for internal control in the federal government , management should document policies in the appropriate level of detail and externally communicate the necessary quality information to achieve an entity's objectives .

updating external guidance , such as the employer handbook , to clearly identify each of the official mechanisms that uscis may use to communicate automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents could help uscis ensure that employers understand and accept each of its official mechanisms for communicating these automatic extensions .

this , in turn , would help to reduce the risk of employers' terminating beneficiaries from their jobs as a result of confusion caused by unclear or inconsistent guidance .

the secretary of homeland security has granted tps , providing work authorization and protection from removal , to foreign nationals from 22 countries since tps was established in 1990 .

dhs has generally communicated information about employment authorization for tps beneficiaries in a federal register notice , although in some cases uscis used individually mailed notifications to communicate automatic extensions of employment authorization documents .

however , uscis's published guidance has not consistently identified individually mailed notifications as a mechanism that may be used , leading to confusion about beneficiaries' employment eligibility and reportedly resulting in termination of some beneficiaries' employment .

consistent published guidance that clearly identifies each of the mechanisms used to communicate automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents could help uscis ensure that employers understand and accept the evidence uscis provides for employment authorization , reducing the risk of erroneous termination of beneficiaries' employment .

the director of uscis should update published guidance , such as handbook for employers: guidance for completing form i - 9 ( m - 274 ) , to consistently identify each of the official mechanisms that uscis may use to communicate automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to dhs , state , the department of defense , the department of health and human services , and the u.s. agency for international development for review and comment .

in its written comments , reproduced in appendix iii , dhs agreed with our recommendation and noted planned actions to implement it , including updating guidance in dhs's m - 274 handbook .

dhs's planned actions will address the intent of our recommendation if they include updating guidance regarding each of the official mechanisms that uscis may use to communicate automatic extensions of tps employment authorization documents , including the use of individually mailed notifications .

the u.s. agency for international development also provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iv .

in addition , dhs and state provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .

the department of defense and the department of health and human services did not provide comments .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , and the acting secretary of homeland security and secretary of state , as well as the secretary of defense , the secretary of health and human services , the director of the centers for disease control and prevention , and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact chelsa gurkin at ( 202 ) 512-2964 or gurkinc@gao.gov , or rebecca gambler at ( 202 ) 512-6912 or gamblerr@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this reports are listed in appendix v .

our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe temporary protected status ( tps ) determinations and numbers of beneficiaries since tps was established in 1990 ; ( 2 ) describe the approach that the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , in consultation with the department of state ( state ) and other relevant agencies , takes to inform the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews ; and ( 3 ) examine dhs's public communication regarding tps decisions and related information , including work authorization .

to describe tps determinations since tps was established in 1990 , we reviewed information and data in federal register notices for all tps designations in fiscal years 1990 through 2019 .

specifically , we reviewed the designation time frames and bases ( i.e. , ongoing armed conflict , environmental disaster , or extraordinary and temporary conditions ) for each designation since tps was established .

we also analyzed u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) data on numbers of tps beneficiaries for fiscal years 1990 through 2018 .

in addition , we analyzed uscis data on tps beneficiaries' characteristics , such as numbers , location , age , and gender of foreign nationals granted tps , for fiscal year 2018 .

to assess the reliability of uscis data on tps beneficiaries , we reviewed documentation and interviewed uscis officials to identify and rectify any missing or erroneous data .

according to uscis officials , uscis removes from its data on tps beneficiaries any who become u.s. citizens or whose status is withdrawn , either because they no longer meet eligibility requirements or because they requested that uscis withdraw their status .

however , according to officials , the data may include foreign nationals who have since died , moved out of the country , or have an additional immigration status .

additionally , because the data comprise information provided by tps applicants , the data may include a small number of applicant errors , according to officials .

we determined that the data for fiscal years 2000 through 2018 were sufficiently reliable to provide general information about the size and characteristics of tps beneficiaries .

uscis was not able to provide reliable data on numbers of tps beneficiaries before fiscal year 2000 because , according to uscis officials , these data were not consistently entered electronically in uscis information systems .

to describe the approach that dhs , in consultation with state and other relevant agencies , takes to inform the secretary of homeland security's tps reviews , we reviewed provisions in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) related to tps as well as dhs and state documentation , such as informal guidance documents used since fiscal year 2014 or earlier regarding steps taken for a tps review .

we also conducted interviews with dhs and state officials related to the processes they have used to collect information for tps reviews since fiscal year 2014 .

specifically , we interviewed dhs officials from u.s. customs and border protection ; the u.s. coast guard ; u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ; the management directorate ; the office of the executive secretary ; the office of intelligence and analysis ; the office of legislative affairs ; the office of partnership and engagement ; the office of public affairs ; the office of strategy , policy , and plans , including the office of immigration statistics ; and uscis — in particular , uscis's office of policy and strategy and uscis's refugees , asylum , and international operations directorate .

we interviewed state officials from the bureau of population , refugees , and migration and several regional bureaus , including desk officers from the bureaus of african affairs , near eastern affairs , south and central asian affairs , and western hemisphere affairs .

we also interviewed state officials from overseas posts for countries that we selected for our review , including el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , sudan , and yemen .

we reviewed documentation that dhs and state provided for a judgmental , nongeneralizable sample of eight countries for which dhs rendered tps decisions in fiscal years 2014 through 2018 ( el salvador , haiti , honduras , nepal , nicaragua , sudan , syria , and yemen ) ; the tps decisions for these eight countries represented 26 of a total of 42 tps decisions for 13 countries in that period .

we selected this sample to represent a range of decision types and designation reasons , among other factors .

while this sample cannot be generalized to the countries or decisions we did not review , it provided valuable information about the approach that dhs uses for tps reviews .

the primary documents that we reviewed for each decision included information about country conditions that uscis and state had compiled and recommendations that uscis and state leadership had provided to the secretary of homeland security .

some of the documents that we received had been redacted because of ongoing litigation related to tps .

table 3 provides additional details of the decisions in our judgmental sample .

in addition , we reviewed examples of other information that may be provided for a tps review , including examples of input from other dhs components , other u.s. agencies , the white house , members of congress , foreign governments , and nongovernmental organizations .

specifically , we received examples of this type of information for each of the eight countries in our judgmental , nongeneralizable sample , representing 15 of the 26 tps decisions .

for example , this information included immigration data and internal intelligence analyses compiled by dhs's office of immigration statistics , u.s. customs and border protection , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , and office of intelligence and analysis .

we also reviewed examples of updates provided by senior department of defense officials for the secretary of homeland security regarding the security situation in a country ; technical input from the department of health and human services centers for disease control and prevention about the status of an epidemic in a country ; and information from the u.s. agency for international development about country conditions on the ground .

in addition , we interviewed officials from these three agencies regarding the types of information that they may provide for tps reviews .

further , we reviewed examples of letters from members of congress , foreign government officials , and nongovernmental organizations related to tps reviews .

moreover , we reviewed examples of briefing or meeting agendas and related materials for internal and external briefings , including external briefings with white house officials , foreign government officials , and nongovernmental organizations .

to examine dhs's public communication regarding tps decisions and related information , including work authorization , we reviewed dhs's public communications related to tps , including federal register notices , press releases , and uscis's website , among other information .

we analyzed information in federal register notices published from november 29 , 1990 , through october 1 , 2019 ( the most recent available at the time of our review ) , to determine the timing of notices for tps decisions and the types of information included in the notices .

we reviewed examples of uscis's office of public affairs guidance for public communication of tps decisions .

we also interviewed uscis officials regarding the mechanisms that dhs used to communicate tps decisions and related information , including dhs's process for drafting and publishing federal register notices .

further , we examined dhs's guidance and procedures as of fiscal year 2019 for communicating tps employment authorization , including automatic extensions of employment authorization .

we reviewed uscis's public communications related to automatic extensions of tps employment authorization for both beneficiaries and employers in federal register notices , individually mailed notifications , an employer handbook , and information published on uscis's website .

we interviewed uscis officials regarding uscis's approach to communicating tps employment authorization , including automatic extensions .

we also reviewed information from the department of justice civil rights division's website related to confusion over automatic extensions of employment authorization documents for tps beneficiaries .

additionally , we reviewed a letter to uscis signed by 70 law professors and scholars related to instances of employers terminating tps beneficiaries .

finally , we compared dhs's guidance and procedures with federal internal control standards related to documenting policies and externally communicating information .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2018 to march 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

table 4 lists the numbers of tps beneficiaries , by country of citizenship , in fiscal years 2000 through 2018 .

during this period , the country with the largest number of tps beneficiaries in any given fiscal year was el salvador , with 262,262 in fiscal year 2010 ; followed by honduras , with 85,759 in fiscal year 2007 ; and haiti , with 58,294 in fiscal year 2014 .

in contrast , during the same period , montserrat had the smallest maximum number of tps beneficiaries in any given fiscal year , with a maximum of 21 in fiscal year 2004 ; followed by angola , with a maximum of 47 in fiscal year 2002 ; and burundi , with a maximum of 50 in fiscal year 2007 .

in addition to the contacts named above , miriam carroll fenton and taylor matheson ( assistant directors ) , elisabeth helmer , cristina norland , ben deyoung , martin de alteriis , neil doherty , jenny grover , reid lowe , mary moutsos , jan montgomery , jon najmi , nicole willems , and bailey wong made key contributions to this report .

alana miller and danielle rudstein provided technical assistance .

