i am pleased to be here as you examine approaches to control the rising spending for prescription drugs within the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) .

as you know , the fehbp provides health coverage , including prescription drug coverage , to about 8 million federal employees , retirees , and their dependents .

as with other public and private employer - sponsored health plans , prescription drug spending has been a significant contributor to fehbp cost and premium growth .

projected increases in the costs of prescription drugs alone would have accounted for about a 3 to 5 percent annual increase in fehbp premiums from 2002 through 2007 .

the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the federal agency that administers the fehbp , predicted that prescription drugs would continue to be a primary driver of program costs in 2009 .

because of the importance of controlling prescription drug spending by the federal government , you asked us to describe prescription drug spending control approaches used by the fehbp and summarize the approaches used by other federal programs .

accordingly , my testimony today will describe the approach used by fehbp to control prescription drug spending and summarize approaches used under medicare , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the department of defense ( dod ) , and medicaid .

my remarks are based on prior work performed from 2003 to 2009 on federal programs that purchase or cover prescription drugs , with selected updates from relevant literature on drug spending controls prepared by other congressional and federal agencies .

we used various methodologies to complete our work ; please see the individual products for the details .

our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the fehbp is the largest employer - sponsored health insurance program in the country .

through it , about 8 million federal employees , retirees , and their dependents received health coverage — including for prescription drugs — in 2008 .

coverage is provided under competing plans offered by multiple private health insurers under contract with opm , which administers the program , subject to applicable requirements .

in 2009 , 269 health plan options were offered by participating insurers , 10 of which were offered nationally while the remaining health plan options were offered in certain geographic regions .

according to opm , plans must cover all medically necessary prescription drugs approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) , but plans may maintain formularies that encourage the use of certain drugs over others .

enrollees may obtain prescriptions from retail pharmacies that contract with the plans or from mail - order pharmacies offered by the plans .

in 2005 , fehbp prescription drug spending was an estimated $8.3 billion .

medicare — the federal health insurance program that serves about 45 million elderly and disabled individuals — offers an outpatient prescription drug benefit known as medicare part d. this benefit was established by the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) beginning january 1 , 2006 .

as of february 2009 , part d provided federally subsidized prescription drug coverage for nearly 27 million beneficiaries .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , part of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , manages and oversees part d. medicare beneficiaries may choose a part d plan from multiple competing plans offered nationally or in certain geographic areas by private sponsors , largely commercial insurers , under contract with cms .

part d plan sponsors offer drug coverage either through stand - alone prescription drug plans for beneficiaries in traditional fee - for - service medicare or through medicare managed care plans , known as medicare advantage .

in 2009 , there were over 3,700 prescription drug plans offered .

under medicare part d , plans can design their own formularies , but each formulary must include drugs within each therapeutic category and class of covered part d drugs .

enrollees may obtain prescriptions from retail pharmacies that contract with the plans or from mail - order pharmacies offered by the plans .

medicare part d spending is estimated to be about $51 billion in 2009 .

the va pharmacy benefit is provided to eligible veterans and certain others .

as of 2006 , about 8 million veterans were enrolled in the va system .

in general , medications must be prescribed by a va provider , filled at a va pharmacy , and listed on the va national drug formulary , which comprises 570 categories of drugs .

in addition to the va national formulary , va facilities can establish local formularies to cover additional drugs .

va may provide nonformulary drugs in cases of medical necessity .

in 2006 , va spent an estimated $3.4 billion on prescription drugs .

the dod pharmacy benefit is provided to tricare beneficiaries , including active duty personnel , certain reservists , retired uniformed service members , and dependents .

as of 2009 , there were about 9.4 million eligible tricare beneficiaries .

in addition to maintaining a formulary , dod provides options for obtaining nonformulary drugs .

beneficiaries can obtain prescription drugs through a network of retail pharmacies , nonnetwork retail pharmacies , dod military treatment facilities , and dod's tricare mail - order pharmacy .

in 2006 , dod spent $6.2 billion on prescription drugs .

medicaid , a joint federal - state program , finances medical services for certain low - income adults and children .

in fiscal year 2008 , approximately 63 million beneficiaries were enrolled in medicaid .

while some benefits are federally required , outpatient prescription drug coverage is an optional benefit that all states have elected to offer .

drug coverage depends on the manufacturer's participation in the federal medicaid drug rebate program , through which manufacturers pay rebates to state medicaid programs for covered drugs used by medicaid beneficiaries .

retail pharmacies distribute drugs to medicaid beneficiaries and then receive reimbursements from states for the acquisition cost of the drug and a dispensing fee .

medicaid outpatient drug spending has decreased since 2006 because medicare part d replaced medicaid as the primary source of drug coverage for low - income beneficiaries with coverage under both programs — referred to as dual eligible beneficiaries .

in fiscal year 2008 , medicaid outpatient drug spending was $9.3 billion — including $5.5 billion as the federal share — which was calculated after adjusting for manufacturer rebates to states under the medicaid drug rebate program .

fehbp uses competition among health plans as the primary measure to control prescription drug spending and other program costs .

under an annual “open season,” enrollees may remain enrolled in the same plan or select another competing plan based on benefits , services , premiums , and other such factors .

thus , plans have the incentive to try to retain or increase their market share by providing the benefits sought by enrollees along with competitive premiums .

in turn , the larger a plan's market share , the more leverage it has for obtaining favorable drug prices on behalf of its enrollees and controlling prescription drug spending .

similar to most private employer - sponsored or individually purchased health plans , most fehbp plans contract with pharmacy benefit managers ( pbms ) to help them administer the prescription drug benefit and control drug spending .

in a 2003 report reviewing the use of pbms by three plans representing about 55 percent of total fehbp enrollment , we found that the pbms used three key approaches to achieve savings for the health plans: negotiating rebates with drug manufacturers and passing some of the savings to the plans ; obtaining drug price discounts from retail pharmacies and dispensing drugs at lower costs through mail - order pharmacies operated by the pbms ; and using other intervention techniques that reduce utilization of certain drugs or substitute other , less costly drugs .

for example , under generic substitution pbms substituted less expensive , chemically equivalent generic drugs for brand - name drugs ; under therapeutic interchange pbms encouraged the substitution of less expensive formulary brand - name drugs for more expensive nonformulary drugs within the same drug class ; under prior authorization pbms required enrollees to receive approval from the plan or pbm before dispensing certain drugs that are high cost or meet other criteria ; and under drug utilization review pbms examined prescriptions at the time of purchase or retrospectively to assess safety considerations and compliance with clinical guidelines , including appropriate quantity and dosage .

the pbms were compensated by retaining some of the negotiated savings .

the pbms also collected fees from the plans for administrative and clinical services , kept a portion of the payments from fehbp plans for mail - order drugs in excess of the prices they paid manufacturers to acquire the drugs , and in some cases retained a share of the rebates that pbms negotiated with drug manufacturers .

while opm does not play a role in negotiating prescription drug prices or discounts , it does attempt to limit prescription drug spending through its leverage with participating health plans in annual premium and benefit negotiations .

each year , opm negotiates benefit and rate proposals with participating plans and announces key policy goals for the program , including those relating to spending control .

for example , in preparation for benefit and rate negotiations for the 2007 plan year , opm encouraged proposals from plans to continue to explore the appropriate substitution for higher cost drugs with lower cost therapeutic alternatives , such as generic drugs , and the use of tiered formularies or prescription drug lists .

opm also sought proposals from plans to pursue the advantages of specialty pharmacy programs aimed at reducing the high costs of infused and intravenously administered drugs .

in preparation for 2010 benefit and rate negotiations , opm reiterated its desire for proposals from plansto substitute lower cost for higher cost therapeutically equivalent drug s , adding emphasis to using evidence - based health outcome measures .

medicare part d uses a competitive model similar to fehbp , while other federal programs use other methods , such as statutorily mandated prices or direct negotiations with drug suppliers .

medicare part d follows a model similar to the fehbp by relying on competing prescription drug plans to control prescription drug spending .

as with the fehbp , during an annual open season part d enrollees may remain enrolled in the same plan or select from among other competing plans based on benefit design , premiums , and other plan features .

to attract enrollees , plans have the incentive to offer benefits that will meet beneficiaries' prescription drug needs at competitive premiums .

the larger a plan's market share , the more leverage it has for obtaining favorable drug prices on behalf of its enrollees and controlling prescription drug spending .

as a result , part d plans vary in their monthly premiums , the annual deductibles , and cost sharing for drugs .

plans also differ in the drugs they cover on their formulary and the pharmacies they use .

part d uses competing sponsors to generate prescription drug savings for beneficiaries , in part through their ability to negotiate prices with drug manufacturers and pharmacies .

to generate these savings , sponsors often contract with pbms to negotiate rebates with drug manufacturers , discounts with retail pharmacies , and other price concessions on behalf of the sponsor .

mma specifically states that the secretary of hhs may not interfere with negotiations between sponsors and drug manufacturers and pharmacies .

even though cms is not involved in price negotiations , it attempts to determine whether beneficiaries are receiving the benefit of negotiated drug prices and price concessions when it calculates the final plan payments .

sponsors must report the price concession amounts to cms and pass price concessions onto beneficiaries and the program through lower cost sharing , lower drug prices , or lower premiums .

similar to opm , cms also negotiates plan design with participating plans and announces key policy goals for the program , including those relating to spending control .

for example , in preparation for 2010 benefit and rate negotiations , cms noted that one of its goals is to establish a more transparent process so that beneficiaries will be able to better predict their out - of - pocket costs .

part d sponsors or their pbms also use other methods to help contain drug spending similar to fehbp plans .

for example , most plans assign covered drugs to distinct tiers , each of which carries a different level of cost sharing .

a plan may establish separate tiers for generic drugs and brand - name drugs — with the generic drug tier requiring a lower level of cost sharing than the brand - name drug tier .

plans may also require utilization management for certain drugs on their formulary .

common utilization management practices include requiring physicians to obtain authorization from the plan prior to prescribing a drug ; step therapy , which requires beneficiaries to first try a less costly drug to treat their condition ; and imposing quantity limits for dispensed drugs .

additionally , all part d plans must meet requirements with respect to the extent of their pharmacy networks and the categories of drugs they must cover .

plan formularies generally must cover at least two part d drugs in each therapeutic category and class , except when there is only one drug in the category or class or when cms has allowed the plan to cover only one drug .

cms has also designated six categories of drugs of clinical concern for which plans must cover all or substantially all of the drugs .

while fehbp and medicare part d use competition between health plans to control prescription drug spending , va and dod rely on statutorily mandated prices and discounts and further negotiations with drug suppliers to obtain lower prices for drugs covered on their formularies .

va and dod have access to a number of prices to consider when purchasing drugs , paying the lowest available .

federal supply schedule ( fss ) prices .

va's national acquisition center negotiates fss prices with drug manufacturers , and these prices are available to all direct federal purchasers .

fss prices are intended to be no more than the prices manufacturers charge their most - favored nonfederal customers under comparable terms and conditions .

under federal law , drug manufacturers must list their brand - name drugs on the fss to receive reimbursement for drugs covered by medicaid .

all fss prices include a fee of 0.5 percent of the price to fund va's national acquisition center .

blanket purchase agreements and other national contracts .

b purchase agreements and other national contracts with drug manufacturers allow va and dod — either separately or jointly — to negotiate prices below fss prices .

the lower prices may depend on the volume of specific drugs being purchased by particular facilities , such as va or military hospitals , or on being ass od's respective national formularies .

d igned preferred status on va's and in a few cases , individual va and dod medical centers have obtained lower prices through local agreements with suppliers than they could through the national contracts , fss prices , or federal ceiling prices .

in addition , va's and dod's use of formularies , pharmacies , and prime vendors can further affect drug prices and help control drug spending .

both va and dod use their own national , standard formulary to obtain more competitive prices from manufacturers that have their drugs listed on the formulary .

va and dod formularies also encourage the substitution of lower cost drugs determined to be as or more effective than hig drugs .

va and dod use prime vendors , which are preferred drug distributors , to purchase drugs from manufacturers and deliver the drugs to va or dod facilities .

va and dod receive discounts from their prime vendors that also reduce the prices that they pay for drugs .

for dod , the discounts vary among prime vendors and the areas they serve .

as of june 2004 , va's prime vendor discount was 5 percent , while dod's discounts averaged about 2.9 percent within the united states .

additionally , si to fehbp and medicare part d , dod uses utilization management methods to limit drug spending including prior authorization , dispensin limitations , and higher cost sharing for nonformulary drugs and drugs dispensed at retail pharmacies .

unlike va and dod , medicaid programs do not negotiate drug prices with il manufacturers to control prescription drug spending , but reimburse reta pharmacies for drugs dispensed to beneficiaries at set prices .

cms sets aggregate payment limits — known as the federal upper limit ( ful ) — for certain outpatient multiple - source prescription drugs .

cms also provides guidelines regarding drug payment .

states are to pay pharmacies the lower of the state's estimate of the drug's acquisition cost to the pharmacy , pl a dispensing fee , or the pharmacy's usual and customary charge to the general public ; for certain d costs may apply if lower .

rugs the ful or the state maximum allowable in addition to these retail pharmacy reimbursements , medicaid programs also control prescription drug spending through the medicaid drug rebate program .

under the drug rebate program , drug manufacturers are required to provide quarterly rebates for covered outpatient prescription drugs purchased by state medicaid programs .

under the rebate program , states take advantage of the prices manufacturers receive for drugs in the commercial market that reflect the results of negotiations by private payers such as discounts and rebates .

for brand - name drugs , the rebates are based on two price benchmarks per drug that manufacturers report to cms: best price and average manufacturer price ( amp ) .

the relationship between best price and amp determines the unit rebate amount and thus the overall size of the rebate that states receive .

the basic unit rebate amount is the greater of two values: the difference between best price and amp or 15.1 percent of amp .

if the brand - name drug's amp rises faster than inflation as measured by the change in the consumer price index , the manufacturer is required to provide an additional rebate to the state medicaid program .

in addition to brand - name drugs , states also receive rebates for generic drugs .

for generic drugs , the basic unit rebate amount is 11 percent of the amp .

a state's rebate for a drug is the product of the unit rebate amount plus any applicable additional rebate amount and the number of units of the drug paid for by the state's medicaid program .

in addition to the rebates mandated under the drug rebate program , states can also negotiate additional rebates with manufacturers .

like fehbp and medicare part d participating plans , medicaid programs also use other utilization management methods to control prescription drug spending including prior authorization and utilization review programs , dispensing limitations , and cost - sharing requirements .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact john e. dicken at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at dickenj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

randy dirosa , assistant director ; rashmi agarwal ; william a. crafton ; martha kelly ; and timothy walker made key contributions to this statement .

federal employees health benefits program: enrollee cost sharing for selected specialty prescription drugs .

gao - 09-517r .

washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2009 .

medicare part d prescription drug coverage: federal oversight of reported price concessions data .

gao - 08-1074r .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2008 .

dod pharmacy program: continued efforts needed to reduce growth in spending at retail pharmacies .

gao - 08-327 .

washington , d.c.: april 4 , 2008 .

dod pharmacy benefits program: reduced pharmacy costs resulting from the uniform formulary and manufacturer rebates .

gao - 08-172r .

washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2007 .

military health care: tricare cost - sharing proposals would help offset increasing health care spending , but projected savings are likely overestimated .

gao - 07-647 .

washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2007 .

federal employees health benefits program: premiums continue to rise , but rate of growth has recently slowed .

gao - 07-873t .

washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2007 .

prescription drugs: oversight of drug pricing in federal programs .

gao - 07-481t .

washington , d.c.: february 9 , 2007 .

prescription drugs: an overview of approaches to negotiate drug prices used by other countries and u.s .

private payers and federal programs .

gao - 07-358t .

washington , d.c.: january 11 , 2007 .

medicaid outpatient prescription drugs: estimated 2007 federal upper limits for reimbursement compared with retail pharmacy acquisition costs .

gao - 07-239r .

washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 .

federal employees health benefits program: premium growth has recently slowed , and varies among participating plans .

gao - 07-141 .

washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 .

medicaid: states' payments for outpatient prescription drugs .

gao - 06-69r .

washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2005 .

