the 1998 terrorist bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania , which killed more than 220 people and injured 4,000 , highlighted the compelling need for safe and secure overseas facilities .

in november 1999 , an independent advisory group , the overseas presence advisory panel , said that thousands of americans representing our nation abroad faced an unacceptable level of risk from terrorist attacks and other threats .

the panel called for accelerating the process of addressing security risks to provide overseas staff with the safest working environment , consistent with the nation's resources and the demands of their missions .

moreover , the panel concluded that many u.s. overseas facilities were insecure , decrepit , deteriorating , overcrowded , and “shockingly shabby,” and it recommended major capital improvements to redress these problems .

the state department has done much over the last 4 years to improve physical security at overseas posts .

for example , state has constructed perimeter walls , anti - ram barriers , and access controls at many facilities .

however , even with these improvements , most office facilities do not meet security standards .

as of december 2002 , the primary office building at 232 posts lacked desired security because it did not meet one or more of state's five key current security standards of ( 1 ) 100-foot setback between office facilities and uncontrolled areas ; 2 ) perimeter walls and / or fencing ; ( 3 ) anti - ram barriers ; ( 4 ) blast - resistant construction techniques and materials ; and ( 5 ) controlled access at the perimeter of the compound .

only 12 posts have a primary building that meets all 5 standards .

as a result , thousands of u.s. government and foreign national employees may be vulnerable to terrorist attacks .

moreover , many of the primary office buildings at embassies and consulates are in poor condition .

in fact , the primary office building at more than half of the posts does not meet certain fire / life safety standards .

state estimates that there is a backlog of about $730 million in maintenance at overseas facilities ; officials stated that maintenance costs would increase over time because of the age of many buildings .

at least 96 posts have reported serious overcrowding .

gao was asked to ( 1 ) assess the current conditions of overseas diplomatic facilities , including security , maintenance , office space , and information technology ; and ( 2 ) provide some preliminary observations regarding state's efforts to improve facility conditions by replacing existing buildings with new , secure embassy compounds .

while state continues to fund some security upgrades at embassies and consulates , state is shifting its resources from these upgrades toward constructing new buildings and substantially retrofitting existing , newly acquired , or leased buildings .

funding for these capital projects has increased from $9.5 million in fiscal year 1998 to a requested $890 million in fiscal year 2004 .

in addition to completing ongoing construction projects , state believes it needs to replace facilities at about 160 posts at an estimated cost of $16 billion .

at the proposed fiscal year 2004 rate of funding , it will take more than 20 years to fully fund and build replacement facilities .

while gao has not fully analyzed state's performance in the early stages of this large - scale building program , gao has observed that state has taken a number of positive steps to improve its program management .

because of the high costs and importance of this program , gao believes the program merits extensive oversight .

number of physical security standards met by primary facilities www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-557t .

to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above .

for more information , contact jess t. ford at ( 202 ) 512-4128 , or fordj@gao.gov .

mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here to discuss our work on the security and overall conditions of u.s. embassy and consulate facilities around the world .

the 1998 terrorist bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania , which killed more than 220 people and injured 4,000 , highlighted the compelling need for safe and secure overseas facilities .

following the bombings , three high - level independent groups cited physical security problems at numerous overseas facilities .

in november 1999 , one of these groups , the overseas presence advisory panel , said that thousands of americans representing our nation abroad faced an unacceptable level of risk from terrorist attacks and other threats .

the panel called for accelerating the process of addressing security risks to provide overseas staff with the safest working environment , consistent with the nation's resources and the demands of their missions .

moreover , the panel concluded that many u.s. overseas facilities were insecure , decrepit , deteriorating , overcrowded , and “shockingly shabby,” and it recommended major capital improvements to redress these problems .

you asked us to assess current facility conditions and what the state department is doing to improve them .

today i will focus my comments on the security conditions at u.s. embassies and consulates .

i will also discuss building maintenance , office space , and information technology conditions .

our observations are based on an analysis of data from the state department's bureaus of diplomatic security , overseas buildings operations ( obo ) , and information resources management , and our visits last month to four posts where we examined how facility conditions affect security risks and mission effectiveness .

for security reasons , i will not be identifying these posts .

finally , i will discuss some preliminary observations regarding state's efforts to improve facility conditions by replacing existing buildings with new , secure embassy compounds .

these observations are based on our ongoing review of state's multibillion - dollar embassy and consulate construction program on which we will report later this year .

the united states maintains more than 250 diplomatic posts , including embassies , consulates , and other diplomatic offices , located around the world .

more than 60,000 personnel — u.s .

and foreign service nationals — work at these locations .

about 50 government agencies and subagencies operate overseas , including the departments of state , defense , and justice ; and the u.s. agency for international development .

since the 1970s , u.s. diplomatic personnel overseas have been increasingly at risk from terrorist attacks and other acts of violence .

in response , the state department in 1986 began a substantial embassy construction program , known as the inman program , to protect u.s. personnel and facilities .

in 1991 , we reported that state was unable to complete as many projects as originally planned due to systemic weaknesses in program management , as well as subsequent funding limitations .

this construction program suffered from delays and cost increases due to , among other things , poor program planning , difficulties in acquiring sites , changes in security requirements , and inadequate contractor performance .

following the demise of the inman program in the early 1990s , the state department initiated very few new construction projects until the africa embassy bombings in august 1998 prompted additional funding .

in the 1998 bombings , terrorists attacked the u.s. embassies in nairobi , kenya , and dar es salaam , tanzania .

these large - scale truck bombings killed more than 220 people , including 12 american u.s. government employees and family members , 32 kenyan national u.s. government employees , and 8 tanzanian national u.s. government employees .

in addition , the bombings injured more than 4,000 kenyans , tanzanians , and americans .

figures 1 and 2 show pictures of the embassy in tanzania before and after the bombings .

since these embassy bombings , u.s. facilities and personnel have faced continued threats from terrorist and other attacks .

embassy and consulate employees are on the front lines , often serving in dangerous locations , and must rely heavily on the protection provided by the law enforcement and security measures of the foreign country in which they are located .

from 1998 through 2002 , there were 30 terrorist attacks against overseas posts , personnel , and diplomatic residences .

during that same period , overseas posts were forced to evacuate personnel or suspend operations 83 times in response to direct threats or unstable security situations in the host country .

 ( see table 1. ) .

during the first 2 months of 2003 , overseas posts authorized the departures of personnel and / or their families a total of 11 times due to security concerns .

before i discuss the results of our work , i want to explain some of state's security standards and why they are important .

state identified five key security standards for overseas diplomatic office facilities to protect them against terrorism and other dangers .

first , state believes that office facilities should be at least 100 feet from uncontrolled areas , such as a street where vehicles can pass without first being checked by security officials .

therefore , this distance helps to protect the buildings and occupants against bomb blasts , mob attacks , and other threats .

in establishing the setback standard , the state department determined that at 100 feet , the effects of a bomb blast have diminished to the point where the cost of site acquisition and construction to protect against the remaining blast effects are relatively affordable .

state notes that additional setback may not be practical at many locations .

exhibit 1 is a video clip from the state department showing a test blast from 100 feet away .

the second and third standards are strong perimeter walls and anti - ram barriers to ensure that vehicles cannot breach the facility perimeter to get close to the building prior to detonating a bomb .

exhibits 2 and 3 are video clips from the state department showing the effectiveness of these walls and barriers .

the fourth standard requires blast - resistant construction techniques and materials .

among other things , these materials include reinforced concrete and steel construction and blast - resistant windows .

diplomatic security officials state that flying glass is a primary cause of injuries and deaths in a blast .

coupled with a 100-foot setback , blast - resistant construction provides the best possible protection against a vehicle bomb attack , according to diplomatic security officials .

combined , these four standards mitigate the effect of a vehicle bomb attack and prevent the building from suffering catastrophic collapse and complete destruction .

state's fifth security standard is controlled access at the perimeter to the compound .

at this control access point , guards can screen personnel and visitors before they enter the embassy compound to verify that they have no weapons and that they should be allowed to enter , and can fully search vehicles before they are permitted to enter the compound .

over the last 4 years , state has accomplished much in improving posts' security through various security upgrades .

these upgrades include the installation of mylar shatter - resistant window film and forced entry / ballistic - resistant doors ; the construction of perimeter security walls and fences , jersey barriers , and compound access controls ; and the stationing of additional police and security guards .

in june 2002 , a bomb attack against the u.s. consulate in karachi demonstrated the effectiveness of recent security upgrades to the compound .

as shown in figure 3 , physical damage to the building was minimized by these upgrades .

as of september 30 , 2002 , state had completed security upgrades at 113 posts and had installed mylar window film barriers and forced entry / ballistic - resistant doors at 242 posts .

further , to address security concerns at some of the buildings without a 100-foot setback , state has secured host government cooperation in either closing adjacent streets and / or posting local police officers as guards to monitor and control surrounding streets .

state has also acquired adjacent land at 34 posts to increase setback since the 1998 embassy bombings .

for example , state purchased a gas station next to an office annex building in athens , greece , and closed the gas station , thus increasing setback and improving security .

at all four posts we visited , we observed that recent security upgrades have enhanced security .

at three of these posts , local authorities have permitted closing off streets to public traffic in order to protect u.s. facilities .

however , diplomatic security officials acknowledged that it is not feasible to increase setback by acquiring land and closing off nearby streets at many locations .

furthermore , these officials also told us that security upgrades were partial fixes that did not bring the buildings up to physical security standards .

as a result , many buildings and their occupants remain vulnerable to terrorist attacks .

exhibit 4 is a video clip from the state department that illustrates this vulnerability .

it shows the effect of a blast 100 feet away on an office that does not meet the standard for blast - resistant construction .

the windows have been treated with mylar sheeting , a standard upgrade that mitigates the effects of glass shattering in a blast .

although mylar provides some protection , the non - blast - resistant window construction may allow glass to be forced into the building at a high rate of speed .

to assess the security of embassy and consulate facilities , we analyzed state department data to determine if the primary facilities meet state's five key standards that i discussed earlier .

figure 4 shows the portion of posts where the primary office building meets or does not meet four of the five security standards: setback , perimeter wall or fence , anti - ram barrier , and compound access control .

at the request of diplomatic security officials , we will not discuss details on the remaining standard , blast - resistant construction , due to its sensitivity .

we can say , however , that facilities completed since the late 1980s are considered to be blast resistant .

figure 5 shows the number of primary facilities that meet one , two , three , four , or five of the physical security standards .

for example , it shows that the primary office facility at 81 posts met none of the five standards .

of these , 36 facilities are in locations that the state department has designated as posing a high or critical threat level .

as shown in figure 4 , only 28 , or 11 percent , of the primary buildings meet the 100-foot setback standard .

more than half of the primary buildings have less than 15 feet of setback — these buildings are virtually perched on the street .

figure 6 is an example of a post with limited setback .

at the four posts we visited , all of the primary office buildings have limited setback from the street and several annex buildings have no setback .

as shown in figure 7 , one of these buildings is adjacent to a public gas station , which could exacerbate the effects of a bomb attack .

another building , with little setback , is located next to a main thoroughfare .

consequently , public traffic , including trucks and buses , routinely travels within feet of u.s. government office space .

at three of the four posts we visited , the embassy had secured host government cooperation in closing at least one street surrounding the primary office building ; however , embassy officials at one location noted that these agreements were temporary and could be revoked at any time .

moreover , the embassies had not been able to close streets running next to all of their facilities , such as office annexes .

for example , figure 8 depicts the view from a senior official's office in an annex building where post officials were unable to close the main thoroughfare that runs directly in front of the building .

perimeter walls or fences and anti - ram barriers are two standards that work together to protect facilities .

we found that 120 primary facilities lack an adequate perimeter wall / fence , while 147 lack adequate anti - ram barriers .

diplomatic security officials explained that in many cases , posts are unable to install these upgrades due to host country limitations , such as their impact on traffic flow , parking , and the operation of adjoining residences and commercial buildings .

diplomatic security officials stated that perimeter upgrades have been installed at all posts that are able to accommodate them .

we also found that 108 posts either lack or have inadequate compound access control , a system of gates , barriers , and guard booths that is used to pre - screen personnel and vehicles before entering the embassy grounds .

at one embassy we visited , visa applicants could gain access to the embassy building prior to undergoing proper screening , which would be a serious concern in the case of a terrorist action .

figure 9 depicts an inadequate compound access control booth , which is located within the embassy compound .

the security officer acknowledged that this was a serious weakness and that visitors were not screened adequately before entering the embassy building .

construction of a new compound access control system is scheduled to begin in may 2003 .

figure 10 depicts a newly upgraded compound access control system that facilitates full screening of all vehicles and persons prior to their gaining access to the compound .

ambassadors and security officers at three of the four posts we visited emphasized that in addition to facilities not meeting standards , there were security difficulties associated with the number of office facilities at their post that were spread out around the city .

three of the four posts we visited had more than five locations , and post managers were concerned that this made it extraordinarily difficult and expensive to implement security measures .

officials also stated that dispersion of facilities complicates emergency action planning .

we note that frequent travel between dispersed facilities may also pose security risks to personnel because terrorists and criminals can target them while they are in transit .

in the construction of new embassy compounds , all u.s. government offices are required to be located on the compound .

state department data show that many buildings are in poor condition .

at 133 posts , the primary office building has certain fire / life safety deficiencies .

at one post we visited , the fire escape for the 6th floor of the chancery was a chain - link ladder strapped to a heating radiator ( fig .

11 ) .

obo fire officials explained that a number of posts were unable to meet fire standards , such as sprinkler systems and proper number of exits , due to the structural limitations of the building .

this underscores the department's position that many buildings are in a condition that will not allow a security and safety upgrade .

another safety problem is the seismic condition of buildings .

although the state department does not have data on seismic conditions at all facilities , it acknowledges that embassy and consular employees at some locations may be working in buildings that do not protect against earthquakes .

at one of the posts we visited , located in an earthquake region , the consular building has a very poor seismic rating .

the state department has been unable to locate a suitable temporary facility that can house the consular services while the landlord makes seismic improvements to the current building .

the landlord has absolved himself from any responsibility in the event of earthquake damage .

maintenance is a serious concern because “essential maintenance and repair requirements have long been unfunded,” according to obo documents .

in may 2002 , state estimated that its repair backlog to be about $736 million .

for the primary office buildings alone , maintenance needs exceed $316 million , with the primary building at more than one - third of all posts having more than $1 million in maintenance requirements .

obo projects that maintenance costs will increase over time because many of the facilities are so old and antiquated , some dating back to the late 19th and early 20th century .

our visits to four posts provided numerous examples of maintenance problems .

all of the posts we visited had buildings with serious maintenance concerns that are common to old and deteriorating buildings , such as sinking foundations , crumbling walls , bursting pipes , and electrical overloads .

although there are no specific criteria to measure the adequacy of office space , obo has provided posts a questionnaire to help them evaluate space needs .

based on post inputs , obo's long - range overseas buildings plan describes space conditions at posts where it plans a new facility or major rehabilitation .

we counted 96 posts mentioned in the plan where obo described the office space as being crowded or poorly configured .

during our post visits , we verified that crowded and poorly configured office space is a problem .

this was particularly true in the controlled access areas of the embassies where classified information is stored and processed .

because of the special requirements of these areas , it is generally not feasible to lease additional space as the embassies have done to expand office space for unclassified work .

one post had severe overcrowding in its chancery .

to cope , the post resorted to creating workspaces under a stairway and in storage areas .

one office stacked a printer on top of shelving that can only be accessed with a stepladder in order to make room for another small workstation .

this post used trailers located behind the chancery to augment office space .

in addition , all of the posts expressed concern that the crowded conditions would get worse because they anticipate staff increases to handle additional responsibilities , such as performing more rigorous screening of visa applicants .

several ambassadors told us that the dispersion of office space in multiple buildings hindered operational efficiency .

this is because personnel spend significant amounts of time going from one facility to another to conduct daily business .

i will now briefly discuss information technology capabilities at overseas posts , which , along with office facilities , are an important part of diplomatic readiness .

state has long been plagued by poor information technology capabilities .

in 1999 , the overseas presence advisory panel reported that many posts are equipped with obsolete systems that prevent effective interagency information sharing .

the secretary of state has made a major commitment to modernizing information technology .

according to state officials , the department invested $236 million in fiscal year 2002 on key modernization initiatives for overseas posts and plans to spend $262 million over fiscal years 2003 and 2004 .

state reports that its information technology is in the best shape it has ever been , and embassy personnel at the four posts we visited agreed , noting that they now have improved internet access and upgraded computer equipment .

state is now working to replace its antiquated cable system with the state messaging and archive retrieval toolset ( smart ) , a new integrated messaging and retrieval system .

we have raised a number of concerns regarding state's management of information technology programs , and believe that state's information technology modernization efforts warrant management attention and oversight to ensure that state is following effective management practices .

in 2001 , we reported that state was not following proven system acquisition and investment practices in attempting to deploy a common overseas knowledge management system .

state canceled this initiative because it could not get buy - in from other foreign affairs agencies .

in 2001 , we reported on state's information security problems , including weaknesses in access control that place information resources at risk of unauthorized access .

as state continues to modernize information technology at overseas posts , it is important that it employs rigorous and disciplined management processes on each of its projects and that it addresses its information security weaknesses .

this is particularly important on the smart system , which state acknowledges is an ambitious effort .

the office of management and budget recently reduced funding for the system because of concerns that state was not employing effective management processes .

state continues to make security upgrades at some posts , but it is shifting its resources toward replacing existing facilities with new , secure embassy compounds or substantially retrofitting existing , newly acquired , or leased buildings .

as shown in figure 12 , funding for state's capital projects has increased from $9.5 million in fiscal year 1998 to a requested $890 million in fiscal year 2004 .

state is still in the early phase of this multiyear , multibillion - dollar construction program .

i will discuss this program briefly and then make several preliminary observations regarding state's management of this program .

following the 1998 east africa bombings , state identified about 185 posts needing replacement facilities in order to meet security standards .

as of february 10 , 2003 , state had begun to replace 25 of these posts with new or retrofitted embassy and consulate compounds .

from fiscal year 1999 through fiscal year 2003 , state has received approximately $2.7 billion for its new construction program .

obo officials estimated that beginning in fiscal year 2004 , it will cost an additional $16 billion to replace facilities at the remaining 160 posts .

obo plans to construct these replacement facilities on embassy / consulate compounds that will contain the main office building , all support buildings , and , where necessary , a building for the u.s. agency for international development .

to help manage this large - scale construction program , obo developed the long - range overseas buildings plan , first published in july 2001 and most recently updated in april 2002 .

the latest version of the plan outlines and prioritizes proposed capital projects over 6 years , from fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2007 , based on input from state's bureau of diplomatic security , regional bureaus , and agencies with overseas presence .

according to the april 2002 plan , state plans to fund the replacement of facilities at 81 posts at an estimated cost of $7.9 billion from fiscal year 2002 through fiscal year 2007 .

as shown in figure 13 , the majority of these projects are planned for africa and europe .

obo plans to release the next update of the long - range overseas buildings plan by the end of march 2003 .

of state's 25 post replacement projects funded after the 1998 embassy bombings , state has completed the construction of 2 new embassy compounds and major retrofits of 2 newly acquired buildings that will serve as embassies .

the remaining 21 projects are currently in the construction process .

these consist of 18 new embassy and consulate compounds , 1 consulate compound renovation , and 2 newly acquired buildings undergoing major retrofitting for use as embassies ( see fig .

14 ) .

state plans to initiate another 7 post replacement projects in fiscal year 2003 and 8 post replacement projects in fiscal year 2004 .

these projects will be completed in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , respectively , if they adhere to state's planned 2-year construction schedule .

regarding the four posts we visited , a replacement facility is under construction at one post and fiscal year 2006 funding is scheduled for replacement facilities at two posts .

the replacement facility for the fourth post is not currently scheduled ; however , post officials told us that a replacement facility at their location would be included in obo's march 2003 update of the long - range overseas buildings plan .

assuming that funding were made available to replace facilities for the three posts in fiscal year 2006 , construction would not be completed until about 2009 .

ambassadors at two of these posts expressed concern that it would be difficult to wait that long for a solution to their facility needs and that interim measures were needed .

we are currently reviewing state's capacity and performance in implementing its large - scale construction program .

two important questions for program oversight by this and other committees are: ( 1 ) is the construction of embassies and consulates proceeding on time and on budget ? .

 ( 2 ) do obo and its contractors have the capacity to properly manage the program and ensure that funds are used wisely ? .

state is in the early stages of its expanded construction program and , therefore , has not yet established a clear track record that would provide complete answers to these questions .

however , we do have several observations based on our ongoing work .

first , obo has made a number of positive changes in its management of capital projects as the construction program has expanded over the past few years .

as mentioned earlier , obo developed the long - range overseas buildings plan in july 2001 , an action we had previously recommended .

this plan represents a major improvement in the management of embassy construction because it provides decision makers with an overall sense of proposed project scope and funding needs , and sets performance targets that can be compared with actual performance .

further , in february 2002 , obo leadership convened the industry advisory panel .

the panel consists of volunteer industry representatives who meet quarterly to discuss issues related to obo's construction program and advise obo management on industry's best practices .

moreover , senior obo management has increased its oversight of ongoing capital and other projects .

for example , each month , the obo director holds a 2-day project performance review meeting to review the progress and problems of all ongoing obo projects in detail .

in addition , obo is requiring contract administration training for all senior field staff who are to supervise new embassy and consulate construction .

second , state is taking steps to accelerate the construction process , reduce construction costs , and further enhance physical security conditions of new buildings .

for example , obo has developed a standard embassy design for use in most projects and has moved away from a “design - bid - build” method of contracting toward a “design - build” method .

use of a standard design and design - build contracting has the potential to reduce project costs and the time taken to implement projects .

table 2 provides details of the three standard designs that obo has developed for small , medium , and large posts .

obo has set a goal of a 2-year design and construction period for its standard embassy design buildings , which , if met , would reduce the amount of time spent in design and construction by almost a year .

in addition , obo and the bureau of diplomatic security are actively seeking to incorporate advanced technologies into the construction program .

exhibit 5 , a video clip from the state department showing the performance of new windows and building materials , indicates that these technologies show promise of providing an even greater level of physical security for personnel operating in new buildings .

while obo has taken positive steps , we do have concerns regarding requirements for staffing levels at locations where obo is planning to build a new embassy compound .

we believe that improvements are needed in how the state department and other agencies project staffing requirements for new embassies .

in april 2003 , we will report to the chairman of the house government reform committee's subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations that staffing projections for new embassy compounds are developed without a systematic approach or comprehensive assessments of the number and types of staff who would be needed in the future .

without adhering to a systematic process for developing future staffing needs at u.s. embassies and consulates , the u.s. government risks building the wrong - sized facilities , which could lead to security concerns , additional costs , and other work inefficiencies .

state's timeline for completing the replacement of all 160 remaining posts will depend on the amount of funding it receives for the construction program .

for fiscal year 2004 , state's long - range overseas buildings plan called for almost $2 billion to fund the design and / or construction of 19 capital projects ; in contrast , the president's proposed fiscal year 2004 budget requested $890 million for 8 new diplomatic posts .

as shown in figure 15 , at the proposed fiscal year 2004 rate of replacement , it would take about 20 years to fund and 22 years to complete construction of the estimated 160 remaining posts ( assuming a 2-year design and construction period ) .

figure 15 also shows that this timeline would be shortened if state receives more funds annually .

according to an obo projection , the program to replace the remaining 160 posts could be completed in 12 years if obo receives $1.4 billion annually for new capital projects .

