over the past 40 years , many countries have replaced lower - denomination notes with coins as a means to provide a financial benefit to their governments .

we have reported five times over the past 22 years that replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin would provide a net benefit to the federal government of hundreds of millions of dollars annually .

most recently , in march 2011 , we reported that such a replacement would result in a net benefit of about $5.5 billion over 30 years , or an average of about $184 million per year .

we found that this benefit was entirely attributable to an increase in seigniorage , which is the difference between the cost of producing coins or notes and their face value .

to determine the estimated net benefit , we developed a model based on a set of assumptions and noted that changing these assumptions could increase or decrease the estimated net benefit .

you asked us to provide additional details on our 2011 analysis and to conduct additional analyses changing two assumptions .

to answer your request , we first updated our 2011 estimate because of recent changes by the federal reserve and department of treasury in note processing and $1 coin production , the results of which are provided below .

we then used this updated 30-year estimate to address your request that we provide the specific benefit or loss to the government for each of the first 10 years for our 30-year analysis ; the net benefit or loss to the government over 10 years if the interest savings due to seigniorage is excluded from the analysis ; and the net benefit or loss to the government over 10 years if the replacement ratio is 1 coin to 1 note , rather than 1.5 coins for 1 note , as we assumed in our 30-year analysis .

to identify the benefit or loss of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin , we updated the economic model developed for our 2011 report , and varied the assumptions for seigniorage and the replacement ratio of coins to notes as requested .

briefly , our model estimated net benefit or net loss to the government by subtracting the benefit of a status quo scenario from a replacement scenario .

in the updated status quo scenario , notes remain the dominant form of currency at the $1 denomination , the united states mint ( the mint ) ceases production of $1 coins , the currently stored coins are gradually released into circulation to meet transactional demand , and production of $1 coins resumes after the stored coins are released.the replacement scenario , we assumed , among other things , that the production of $1 notes would stop immediately ; no notes would be withdrawn from circulation , but because of their shorter life span , they would naturally fall out of circulation within a few years ; the $1 coins in storage would immediately be released into circulation ; and the mint would produce a large number of $1 coins during the first 4 years of the transition .

using the updated economic model , we then varied the assumptions for seigniorage and the replacement ratio of coins to notes to determine the net benefits or losses over the first 10 years , as requested .

we conducted this performance audit from november 2011 through february 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the federal government realizes a financial gain when it issues notes or coins because both forms of currency usually cost less to produce than their face value .

this gain , which is known as seigniorage , equals the difference between the face value of currency and its costs of production .

seigniorage reduces the government's need to raise revenues through borrowing , and with less borrowing , the government pays less interest over time , resulting in a financial benefit .

replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin would provide a net benefit to the government of approximately $4.4 billion over 30 years , amounting to an average yearly discounted net benefit of about $146 million .

this benefit would occur because , based on differences in how notes and coins are used in the economy , more coins than notes would have to be circulated to meet demand , and therefore more seigniorage would be created .

this estimate assumes a 4-year transition period beginning in 2012 , during which the production of $1 notes would stop immediately .

on the basis of information provided by the mint , we assumed that during the first year the mint would convert existing equipment to increase its production capability for $1 coins .

we also assumed that it would take 4 years for the mint to produce enough coins to replace the currently outstanding $1 notes .

our assumptions cover a range of factors including a replacement ratio of 1.5 coins to 1 note to take into consideration the fact that coins circulate with less frequency than notes and therefore a larger number the expected rate of growth in the demand for are required in circulation,currency over 30 years , the costs of producing and processing both coins and notes , and the differential life spans of coins and notes .

our analyses are projected over 30 years to be consistent with previous gao analyses and because that period roughly coincides with the life expectancy of the $1 coin .

as shown in figure 1 , the annual benefit would vary over the 30 years — the government would incur a net loss in 6 of the first 7 years and then realize a net benefit in the remaining years .

the early net loss would be due in part to the up - front costs to the mint of increasing its coin production during the transition , together with the limited interest expense the government would avoid in the first few years after replacement began .

the large net benefit in 2016 would occur because we assume that the mint's production at maximum capacity during the 4-year transition period would lead to some overproduction and thus production would drop dramatically in 2016 .

because of the far lower coin production costs , the net benefit to the government would temporarily spike in that year .

we also found our net benefit estimate was due solely to increased seigniorage and not to reduced production costs .

like all estimates , this one is uncertain , particularly in the later years , and thus the benefit could be greater or smaller than estimated .

furthermore , inputs to our analysis , such as the costs to produce $1 notes and $1 coins , will change over time .

changes to the inputs and the assumptions used in the estimate could increase or decrease the estimated net benefit .

this estimate differs from our 2011 estimate , which found that replacement would result in a net benefit of about $5.5 billion over 30 years , or an average of about $184 million per year , because it takes into account two key actions that occurred since our 2011 report .

in april 2011 , the federal reserve began using new equipment to process notes , which has increased the expected life of the $1 note to an average of 56 months , according to the federal reserve , compared with the 40 months we used in our 2011 analysis .

the longer note life reduces the costs of the status quo scenario and thus reduces the expected net benefits of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin .

in december 2011 , the treasury department announced that it would take steps to eliminate the overproduction of dollar coins by relying on the approximately 1.4 billion $1 coins stored with the federal reserve as of september 30 , 2011 , to meet the relatively small transactional demand for dollar coins .

this new policy will reduce the cost of producing $1 coins that we estimated in the status quo scenario and thus reduces the expected net benefits of replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin .

in addition , our updated analysis used a start date of 2012 rather than 2011 and used the congressional budget office's most recent estimates for future government borrowing costs , which are lower than the figures used in our 2011 analysis .

the reduced borrowing costs reduced the net benefits of switching to a $1 coin .

for example , officials from the bureau of printing and engraving pointed out that replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin would also have environmental impacts relating to obtaining raw materials and carbon dioxide emissions , among others .

benefits of reduced interest expense due to increased seigniorage would occur more heavily in later years .

under a scenario that does not consider interest savings due to seigniorage , a net loss of approximately $1.8 billion would accrue during the 10-year period for an average cost of $179 million per year .

as shown in figure 3 , net losses would be incurred in 9 of the 10 years .

in particular , large costs would be incurred in each of the first 4 years because of the large number of coins that would need to be produced for the transition , as was the case in the scenario discussed above .

as in the previous analysis , in year 5 , there would be a temporary net benefit because coins would be overproduced during the previous 4 years and coin production would fall to zero in that year — and the cost is therefore less than the cost of producing $1 notes that would have been incurred had the transition not taken place .

after year 5 , net losses would continue to be incurred because , although the life of a $1 coin is longer than the life of a $1 note , coins cost more than notes to produce .

all of the scenarios assume that additional currency would need to be produced not only to replace worn out or lost currency , but also to support a growing economy .

thus , in this scenario , we found that even with the longer life of the $1 coin , the cost of producing coins for the growing economy after the transition would exceed the cost of producing $1 notes in each of those years that would have been incurred without the replacement .

while this scenario suggests that there would be no net benefits from switching to a $1 coin , we believe that not including the interest savings related to seigniorage omits a monetary benefit to the government .

under this scenario , we include the net benefits of interest savings related to seigniorage , but assume that a single $1 coin would be produced to replace each $1 note .

in total , across the 10 years the total net loss of switching to $1 coins would be $582 million , or just over $58 million per year .

as shown in figure 4 , net losses would be incurred in 9 of 10 years of this scenario .

the costs of producing coins for the transition are highest in the first 3 years , followed by benefits in the fourth year because of the overproduction of coins during the transition .

in this scenario , net losses would continue through year 10 .

in this scenario , far fewer coins would be produced because of the low replacement ratio , and thus the costs associated with their production would be much less than in the previous scenarios .

however , this scenario also involves no gains to the government because of seigniorage because only one coin would be produced to replace each note that will fall out of circulation .

in fact , the replacement case in this scenario results in reduced seigniorage relative to the status quo because the cost of producing a note is less than the cost of producing a coin , so each $1 coin has less seigniorage associated with its issuance than the $1 note it is replacing .

a caution concerning a 1-to - 1 replacement of coins to notes is that under this scenario , there would likely not be enough coins to meet demand .

a shortage of currency could have significant negative consequences for the economy , such as hampering cash transactions .

as we noted in our 2011 report , other countries that have switched from notes to coins have found that , because people use notes and coins differently , the number of coins needed for a replacement is greater than the number of notes to be replaced .

while the actual replacement ratio needed is not known ahead of any transition , our 2011 analysis of the transition to a $1 coin in canada and the £1 coin in the united kingdom led us to decide that a 1.5-to - 1 ratio was a reasonable level .

estimating whether the government would derive benefits from replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin requires an analysis with many assumptions .

as is clear from the findings in this report , not accounting for the benefits related to increased seigniorage can substantially affect the estimate .

while we identified and updated a few factors used in these analyses that changed since our 2011 report , other factors could also change over time , such as the cost of inputs for notes and coins or changes in the use of cash by the public , among other things .

as such , these analyses are highly affected by changing conditions as well as by conceptual views on certain key issues , such as seigniorage and replacement ratios .

we provided a draft of this report to the federal reserve and the department of the treasury for review and comment .

their written comments are reprinted in appendixes i and ii , respectively .

the federal reserve noted that it believes our 30-year estimate may overstate the net financial benefit to the government because it ( 1 ) does not adequately address the costs to the private sector , state and local government , and the federal reserve and ( 2 ) does not consider potential increases in the cost of raw material for coins or possible future changes in discount rates .

similarly , the treasury department noted that our analysis should consider the cost to the private sector and the impact on the environment .

we agree that the benefits and costs to the private sector and the impact on the environment are important considerations .

however , we found no quantitative estimates of the costs to the private sector or environmental impacts that could be evaluated or modeled .

we did not assess potential environmental impacts because these concerns were beyond the scope of our analysis and we did not identify quantitative estimates of such impacts .

we included all relevant costs to the federal reserve that the agency provided to us and found no data on the cost to state and local governments .

we used the best data available on coin production costs , which accounts for the cost of raw materials , and we used the most current discount rate .

furthermore , we recognize that our analyses are highly affected by changing conditions , such as changes in the cost of coins and notes , which may alter the total cost savings associated with replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin .

in addition , the federal reserve noted an increased risk of counterfeiting associated with replacing the $1 note with a $1 coin .

we reported in 2011 that counterfeiting of u.s. coins is currently minimal , according to the u.s. secret service .

the federal reserve also noted that we did not provide a sensitivity analysis that varies key assumptions such as possible increases in the public's use of electronic payments .

in 2011 , we reported the results of our sensitivity analyses , including one in which replacement leads to a decrease in the demand for currency as people switch to electronic payments .

the treasury also provided technical comments , which we addressed as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , and the chairman of the federal reserve .

the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at stjamesl@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff that made key contributions to this report include teresa spisak ( assistant director ) , amy abramowitz , lindsay bach , patrick dudley , bess eisenstadt , and david hooper .

