i am pleased to be here today to discuss gao's work on u.s. public diplomacy efforts , particularly in the muslim world .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , foreign public opinion polls have shown that negative attitudes toward the united states have generally grown worse in many countries around the world .

one particular concern has been a marked worsening of such attitudes in the muslim world — an audience of key strategic interest in the united states' war on terrorism .

u.s. public diplomacy activities — led by the state department ( state ) — are designed to counter such sentiments by explaining u.s. foreign policy actions , countering misinformation , and advancing mutual understanding among nations .

today , we are issuing a report on the state's public diplomacy efforts in the muslim world .

this follows our april 2005 report examining interagency coordination of public diplomacy activities and our september 2003 report on state's overall public diplomacy efforts .

these efforts include daily news operations , information programs , and various types of exchange programs .

mr. chairman , you asked us to discuss our findings from these reports and , where possible , to highlight ways of strengthening public diplomacy going forward .

today , i will talk about ( 1 ) changes in u.s. public diplomacy resources since september 11 , 2001 ; ( 2 ) strategic planning and coordination of public diplomacy efforts ; and ( 3 ) the challenges facing these efforts .

my comments will focus on state's activities , as state was the subject of our work .

while our most recent report focuses on activities in the muslim world , many of our findings apply to public diplomacy efforts worldwide .

as part of our reviews of public diplomacy , we met with officials from the departments of state and defense ( dod ) , u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) .

we traveled to egypt , morocco , nigeria , pakistan , and the united kingdom and met with a broad cross - section of u.s. embassy officials , british council and embassy staff , and local focus groups .

we also convened roundtables of experts on public relations , international opinion research , and the muslim world .

the reports used for this testimony were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the overall goal of u.s. public diplomacy is to understand , inform , engage , and influence the attitudes and behavior of foreign audiences in ways that support u.s. strategic interests .

the state department leads these efforts , which are guided by the under secretary for public diplomacy and public affairs and include academic and professional exchanges , english language teaching , information programs , and news management .

the department's regional and functional bureaus also contain public diplomacy offices , which report to the relevant assistant secretary .

the under secretary has direct authority over the three public diplomacy bureaus but does not have line authority over public diplomacy operations in other regional or functional bureaus .

in overseas missions , foreign service public diplomacy officers ( including public affairs , cultural affairs , information , information resources , and regional english language officers ) operate under the authority of the chief of mission and report to their regional bureau managers in washington , d.c .

in fiscal year 2005 , state dedicated $597 million to public diplomacy and public affairs .

according to the department's performance plan , its investment in public diplomacy continues to increase , particularly for efforts targeting audiences in the middle east .

exchange programs received $356 million , the majority of fiscal year 2005 funding and a 12.4 percent increase over fiscal year 2004 .

state's information programs received roughly $68 million in fiscal year 2005 to fund programs such as the u.s. speakers program , mission web sites , and american corners , which are centers that provide information about the united states , hosted in local institutions and staffed by local employees .

the remaining public diplomacy funds went to state's regional bureaus to pay the salaries of locally engaged staff overseas , among other purposes .

since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , state has expanded its public diplomacy efforts globally , focusing particularly on countries in the muslim world considered to be of strategic importance in the war on terrorism .

between 2004 and 2006 , total spending on overseas public diplomacy will increase 21 percent , from $519 million to an estimated $629 million .

much of this increase has gone to regions with significant muslim populations , including south asia ( 39 percent ) , east asia and the pacific ( 28 percent ) , and the near east ( 25 percent ) .

these increases continue the trend we reported in 2003 , when we found that the largest relative increases in overseas public diplomacy resources went to regions with large muslim populations .

however , the bureau of european and eurasian affairs continues to receive the largest overall share of overseas public diplomacy resources — roughly 36 percent of the total for all six regional bureaus .

in 2003 , we noted that authorized officer positions overseas had significantly expanded , with the most notable increases occurring in state's near east ( 27-percent increase ) and south asia ( 15-percent increase ) bureaus .

however , current data show that staff numbers have stayed largely the same over the past 3 years , with increases of 3 percent or less .

in january 2006 , secretary rice announced plans to reposition officers as part of her transformational diplomacy initiative .

state officials said that the department will initially reposition approximately 75 foreign service officers this year from posts in europe and washington , d.c. , to india , china , and latin america , as well as to the muslim world .

according to these officials , 28 of the positions to be relocated are public diplomacy positions .

since 2003 , we have reported on the lack of strategic elements to guide u.s. public diplomacy efforts .

despite several attempts , the united states still lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy .

while state has recently developed a strategic framework for its public diplomacy efforts , it has not issued guidance on how this framework is to be implemented in the field .

in addition , posts generally lack a strategic approach to public diplomacy .

in 2003 , we reported that the united states lacked a governmentwide , interagency public diplomacy strategy , defining the messages and means for communication efforts abroad .

we reported that the administration had made a number of aborted attempts to develop a strategy , but to date no public diplomacy strategy has been developed .

the lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages , which increases the risk of making damaging communication mistakes .

state officials said that the lack of such a strategy diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts , while several reports concluded that a strategy is needed to synchronize agencies' target audience assessments , messages , and capabilities .

on april 8 , 2006 , the president established a new policy coordination committee on public diplomacy and strategic communications .

this committee , to be led by the under secretary for public diplomacy and public affairs , is intended to coordinate interagency activities to ensure that: all agencies work together to disseminate the president's themes and all public diplomacy and strategic communications resources , programs , and activities are effectively coordinated to support those messages ; and every agency gives public diplomacy and strategic communications the same level of priority that the president does .

according to department officials , one of the committee's tasks will be to issue a formal interagency public diplomacy strategy .

it is not clear when this strategy will be developed .

in 2005 , the under secretary established a strategic framework for u.s. public diplomacy efforts , which includes three priority goals: ( 1 ) support the president's freedom agenda with a positive image of hope ; ( 2 ) isolate and marginalize extremists ; and ( 3 ) promote understanding regarding shared values and common interests between americans and peoples of different countries , cultures , and faiths .

the under secretary noted that she intends to achieve these goals using five tactics — engagement , exchanges , education , empowerment , and evaluation — and by using various public diplomacy programs and other means .

this framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that the department develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate all state's public diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives .

however , the department has not yet developed written guidance that provides details on how the under secretary's new strategic framework should be implemented in the field .

in 2005 , we noted that state's efforts to engage the private sector in pursuit of common public diplomacy objectives had met with mixed success and recommended that the secretary develop a strategy to guide these efforts .

state is currently establishing an office of private sector outreach and is partnering with individuals and the private sector on various projects .

the under secretary plans to institutionalize this function within the department surrounding key public diplomacy objectives , but it is unclear when this office will be established and whether it will develop a comprehensive strategy to engage the private sector .

gao and others have suggested that state adopt a strategic approach to public diplomacy by modeling and adapting private sector communication practices to suit its purposes ( see fig .

1 ) .

however , based on our review of mission performance plans and on fieldwork in nigeria , pakistan , and egypt , we found that the posts' public diplomacy programming generally lacked these important elements of strategic communications planning .

in particular , posts lacked a clear theme or message and did not identify specific target audiences .

according to a senior embassy official in pakistan , the united states has too many competing messages , and the post needs to do a better job of defining and clarifying its message .

posts also failed to develop detailed strategies and tactics to direct available public diplomacy programs and tools toward clear , measurable objectives in the most efficient manner possible .

finally , posts lack detailed , country - level communication plans to coordinate their various activities .

recently , state has begun to help posts improve their strategic communications planning .

for example , the department has issued guidance on preparing fiscal year 2008 mission performance plans that calls for more strategic thinking and planning than was required in the past , including identification of specific target audiences , key themes and messages , detailed strategies and tactics , and measurable performance outcomes that can clearly demonstrate the ultimate impact of u.s. public diplomacy efforts .

if fully implemented , this guidance should begin to address the shortcomings we found in mission performance plans ; however , it will not be implemented for another 2 years , raising significant concerns about what the department intends to do now to address strategic planning shortfalls .

moreover , it is unclear whether this guidance will include all the strategic elements from private sector communication practices .

in addition to this guidance , the department is currently developing a sample country - level communication plan and has asked 15 pilot posts to develop specific plans for their host countries .

these plans are intended to better focus u.s. efforts to counter ideological support for terrorism , according to state .

part of this process will include the development of a key influencers analysis to help identify target audiences in each country .

state officials said that they expect to have plans for these countries by fall or winter 2006 .

public diplomacy efforts in the field face several other challenges , many of which are heightened in the muslim world .

officials at posts we visited said they lacked sufficient staff and time to conduct public diplomacy tasks , and we found that many public diplomacy positions are filled by officers without the requisite language skills .

furthermore , public diplomacy officers struggle to balance security with public access and outreach to local populations .

while several recent reports on public diplomacy have recommended an increase in spending on u.s. public diplomacy programs , several embassy officials stated that , with current staffing levels , they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds .

according to state data , the department had established 834 public diplomacy positions overseas in 2005 , but 124 , or roughly 15 percent , were vacant .

compounding this challenge is the loss of public diplomacy officers to temporary duty in iraq , which , according to one state official , has drawn down field officers even further .

staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive .

according to the u.s .

advisory commission on public diplomacy , “the need to fill a post quickly often prevents public diplomacy officers from receiving their full training.” in addition , public diplomacy officers at post are burdened with administrative tasks and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than previously .

one senior state official said that administrative duties , such as budget , personnel , and internal reporting , compete with officers' public diplomacy responsibilities .

another official in egypt told us that there was rarely enough time to strategize , plan , or evaluate her programs .

these statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report .

surveyed officers told us that , while they manage to attend functions within their host country capitals , it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities .

this challenge is compounded at posts with short tours of duty , which include many in the muslim world .

according to data provided by state , the average tour length at posts in the muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere .

noting the prevalence of one - year tours in the muslim world , a senior official at state told us that public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours .

to address these challenges , we recommended in 2003 that the secretary of state designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections to reduce the administrative burden .

officials at state said that the management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts , including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore .

state is also repositioning several public diplomacy officers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative ; however , this represents a shift of existing public diplomacy officers and does not increase the overall number of officers in the department .

in 2005 , 24 percent of language - designated public diplomacy positions were filled by officers without the requisite language proficiency , similar to our findings in 2003 .

at posts in the muslim world , this shortfall is even greater , with 30 percent of public diplomacy positions filled by officers without sufficient language skills .

this figure is primarily composed of languages that are considered difficult to master , such as arabic and persian , but also includes languages considered easier to learn , such as french .

security concerns have limited embassy outreach efforts and public access , forcing public diplomacy officers to strike a balance between safety and mission .

shortly after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , then - secretary of state colin powell stated , “safety is one of our top priorities… but it can't be at the expense of the mission.” while posts around the world have faced increased threats , security concerns are particularly acute in countries with significant muslim populations , where the threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts ( see fig .

2 ) .

security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world , such as american centers and libraries .

in pakistan , for example , all of the american centers have closed for security reasons ; the last facility , in islamabad , closed in february 2005 .

these same concerns have prevented the establishment of a u.s. presence elsewhere .

as a result , embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs , and some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds , where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the united states is unapproachable and distrustful , according to state officials .

concrete barriers and armed escorts contribute to this perception , as do requirements restricting visitors' use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy .

according to one official in pakistan , visitors to the embassy's reference library have fallen to as few as one per day because many visitors feel humiliated by the embassy's rigorous security procedures .

other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target .

a recent joint usaid - state report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile' approach during events , programs or other situations , which , in happier times , would have been able to generate considerable good will for the united states.” this constraint is particularly acute in pakistan , where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs .

state has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives , including american corners , which are centers that provide information about the united states , hosted in local institutions and staffed by local employees .

according to state data , there are currently approximately 300 american corners throughout the world , including more than 90 in the muslim world , with another 75 planned ( more than 40 of which will be in the muslim world ) .

however , two of the posts we visited in october 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for american corners , as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for questions regarding this testimony , please contact jess t. ford at ( 202 ) 512-4128 or fordj@gao.gov .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include diana glod , assistant director ; michael ten kate ; robert ball ; and joe carney .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

