we are pleased to be here today to discuss veterans' use of long - term care services , which include nursing home care and noninstitutional services provided or paid for by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

concern with meeting veterans' long - term care needs is increasing as the number of veterans most in need of these services — those 85 years old and older — is expected to increase from about 870,000 this year to 1.3 million over the next decade .

many of these veterans will seek assistance from va to provide or pay for nursing home care or a range of noninstitutional services that may help them remain at home and , for some , delay or prevent the need for nursing home care .

to provide assistance to veterans with chronic illness or physical or mental disability , va provides a continuum of institutional and noninstitutional long - term care services .

va provides care that its own employees deliver and contracts with other health care providers to deliver care .

va operates its own nursing home care units in 132 locations and also pays for nursing home care under contract in non - va nursing homes — referred to as community nursing homes .

in addition , va pays part of the cost of care for veterans at state veterans' nursing homes and also pays a portion of the construction costs for some state veterans' nursing homes .

va also provides noninstitutional services to veterans in their own homes or in community settings using both its own employees and through contracts with other providers .

this committee has expressed concerns about recent trends in va long - term care service delivery and how va plans to meet the nursing home care needs and related long - term care needs of veterans as the elderly population most in need of long - term care increases .

to assist the committee in its oversight responsibilities in this area , you asked us to determine for fiscal years 1998 through 2003 ( 1 ) how va nursing home workload has changed and ( 2 ) how va noninstitutional long - term care workload has changed .

my testimony today is based on our ongoing review of long - term care workload for this committee .

for this review , we measured nursing home workload as defined by average daily census , which reflects the average number of veterans receiving nursing home care on any given day during the course of the year .

we also measured noninstitutional workload using average daily census ; however , the number of veterans receiving these services may be less than workload because a veteran may receive more than one service in a day .

we analyzed data on nursing home workload that va provided to determine how workload had changed from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 .

we also verified va's nursing home workload numbers based on contacts with officials from va's 21 health care networks and va headquarters .

to determine how noninstitutional long - term care workload has changed during this period , we analyzed data on visits for six noninstitutional services which va either provides directly or pays for others to provide: home - based primary care , adult day health care , homemaker / home health aide , skilled home health care , home respite care , and home hospice care .

we also interviewed va officials at headquarters and obtained information from the networks to better understand the reasons for changes in nursing home workload during this period .

in doing our work , we tested the reliability of the data and determined they were adequate for our purposes .

we did our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from january 2003 through january 2004 .

in summary , recent trends in va nursing home and noninstitutional service delivery raise important questions , particularly whether access to services is sufficient to meet the needs of a rapidly growing elderly veteran population .

va's overall nursing home workload — - average daily census — - was 33,214 in fiscal year 2003 , 1 percent below its fiscal year 1998 workload .

the workload was below the fiscal year 1998 level each year , decreasing by as much as 8 percent below the fiscal year 1998 level in fiscal year 2000 .

fourteen of 21 networks experienced declines in nursing home workload during this period .

moreover , va's use of the three nursing home settings changed over this 6-year period .

first , the percentage of workload met in state veterans' nursing homes increased from 43 to 50 percent as the number of state veterans' nursing homes receiving va payment increased .

the percentage of workload met in state veterans' nursing homes increased in 19 of va's 21 health care networks .

second , the percentage of workload in va's own nursing homes declined from 40 to 37 percent .

thirteen networks provided a smaller percentage of workload in va - operated homes during this period .

the percentage of workload provided in va - operated homes declined , in part , because va decreased the number of long - stay patients and increased the number of short - stay patients it treats in its own nursing homes .

this is consistent with va's policy to give priority to post - acute patients and certain other nursing home patients .

va generally provides long - term nursing home care as resources permit .

third , the percentage of workload in community nursing homes declined from 17 to 13 percent .

seventeen networks reduced the percentage of their nursing home workload provided in community nursing homes during this period .

va's noninstitutional long - term care workload — - average daily census — - increased by approximately 75 percent from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 .

workload increased by 4,655 during this period to 10,892 , reflecting a change in va's approach to care which includes meeting more long - term care need through noninstitutional services .

most of the growth in noninstitutional workload came from va's greater use of contract skilled home health care , which includes medical services provided to veterans at home , and homemaker / home health aide services such as grooming and meal preparation .

these services are most likely to help veterans prevent or delay the need for nursing home care .

meeting veterans' long - term care needs has become a more pressing issue as the veteran population ages .

the elderly veteran population most in need of long - term care — those 85 years and older — - grew dramatically from about 387,000 to about 764,000 , an increase of about 100 percent from fiscal years 1998 to 2003 .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

over the past two decades the provision of long - term care has been shifting away from institutions and nursing homes towards more noninstitutional long - term care services in va and in other programs .

in recognition of this change in approach to how long - term care is provided , the federal advisory committee on the future of va long - term care recommended , in 1998 , that va update its long - term care policy by meeting the growing demand for long - term care through significant expansion of its capacity to provide home and community - based services — also known as noninstitutional long - term care services — while maintaining its nursing home capacity at the 1998 level .

va provides a continuum of noninstitutional long - term care services to provide care to veterans needing assistance .

long - term care provided in noninstitutional settings — - including services provided in veterans' homes and community - based services such as adult day health care centers — - is preferred by many veterans .

noninstitutional care also includes respite care services that temporarily relieve a veteran's caregiver from the burden of caring for a chronically ill and disabled veteran in the home .

va offers noninstitutional long - term care services directly or through other providers with which va contracts .

 ( see table 1 for the noninstitutional long - term care services in our review. ) .

veterans can also receive nursing home care and noninstitutional services financed by sources other than va , including medicaid and medicare , private health or long - term care insurance , or self - financed .

states design and administer medicaid programs that include coverage for nursing home care and home and community - based services .

medicare primarily covers acute care health costs and therefore limits its nursing home coverage to short - term stays following hospitalization .

medicare also pays for home health care .

state medicaid programs are the principal funders of nursing home and home health care services , besides patients self - financing their care .

we have estimated that private insurance pays for about 11 percent of nursing home and home health care expenditures .

va's overall nursing home workload — - average daily census — - was 33,214 in fiscal year 2003 , slightly below its fiscal year 1998 workload .

however , the workload was below the fiscal year 1998 level each year , reaching its lowest level in fiscal year 2000 .

over the last 6 years , va's use of nursing homes by setting changed .

these changes in workload and use of different settings to provide nursing home care varied by network .

va's nursing home workload was 33,214 in fiscal year 2003 , 1 percent below its fiscal year 1998 workload .

 ( see table 2. ) .

nursing home workload varied over this period but was consistently below the fiscal year 1998 level , decreasing by as much as 8 percent in fiscal year 2000 from its fiscal year 1998 level .

the distribution of the nursing home workload among the three nursing home settings shifted during this period .

from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 , workload in the nursing homes va operates declined by 1,014 .

in addition , workload in community nursing homes declined by 1,434 .

in contrast , workload in state veterans' homes increased by 2,032 .

although va nursing home workload did not change greatly from fiscal years 1998 through fiscal year 2003 , some networks experienced significant increases or decreases .

fourteen of va's 21 networks had lower nursing home workloads in fiscal year 2003 than in fiscal year 1998 for all three settings combined .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

network 5 ( baltimore ) had the largest decline in workload — 19 percent .

seven networks' nursing home workloads grew during this period .

network 17 ( dallas ) had the largest increase in nursing home workload — 42 percent .

va's use of nursing home care among the three settings changed from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 .

the percentage of workload met in state veterans' nursing homes increased from 43 to 50 percent .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

this increase is attributable in large part to 18 more state veterans' nursing homes receiving payment from va to provide such care .

by fiscal year 2003 , 109 state veterans' nursing homes received va payment to provide this care .

va is authorized to pay for about two - thirds of the costs of construction of state veterans' nursing homes and pays about a third of the costs per day to provide care to veterans in these homes .

the percentage of workload provided in state veterans' nursing homes increased in 19 of va's 21 health care networks .

network 17 ( dallas ) had the largest increase in the percentage of workload provided by state veterans' nursing homes .

the percentage of nursing home care provided by state veterans' nursing homes in this network increased from 0 to 30 percent during this period after the opening of four state veterans' nursing homes in texas .

by contrast , the percentage of workload provided by state veterans' nursing homes declined in 2 networks: network 5 ( baltimore ) by 3 percent and network 21 ( san francisco ) by 2 percent .

the percentage of nursing home workload provided in va's own nursing homes declined from 40 to 37 percent during this period .

thirteen networks provided a smaller percentage of nursing home care in va - operated nursing homes in fiscal year 2003 than in fiscal year 1998 .

network 17 ( dallas ) had the largest decrease in the percentage of workload provided by va - operated nursing homes , declining from 68 percent to 49 percent during this period .

this resulted because the state veterans' nursing home workload increased substantially .

by contrast , the percentage of care provided in va - operated homes increased in 8 networks .

network 5 ( baltimore ) had the largest increase , growing from 50 percent in fiscal year 1998 to 64 percent in fiscal year 2003 .

in network 21 ( san francisco ) , the percentage of care in va - operated nursing homes increased by 7 percent and in the remaining 6 networks the percentage of care in va - operated nursing homes increased 3 percent or less .

our analysis of length - of stay trends in va - operated nursing homes shows that the decline in the number of veterans with long stays — 90 days or more — largely explains the decline in nursing home workload during this period .

the number of long - stay veterans declined from about 14,200 in fiscal year 1998 to about 12,700 in fiscal year 2002 , the most recent year for which data are available .

at the same time the number of short - stay veterans — - those with stays of less than 90 days — - increased from about 26,700 to about 32,200 .

however , the increase in short - stay patients was not large enough to offset the decline in workload resulting from the decrease in long - stay patients .

this results because multiple short - stay patients are required to generate the same workload as a single long - stay patient .

for example , a single long - stay patient in a nursing home for 12 months creates a workload of an average daily census of 1 over a year .

by contrast , 12 short - stay patients staying in a nursing home for one month each creates the same average daily census .

among va's networks , 16 had declines in the number of long - stay patients in va - operated homes during this period .

five networks , however , had increases in the number of long - stay patients: network 1 ( boston ) , network 5 ( baltimore ) , network 7 ( atlanta ) , network 12 ( chicago ) and network 21 ( san francisco ) .

va officials attribute some of the changes in nursing home workload in va - operated facilities to an increased emphasis on short - term , post - acute rehabilitation care .

va's policy is to provide nursing home care in its own nursing homes as a priority to post - acute patients , patients who cannot be adequately cared for in community nursing homes or in noninstitutional settings , and those patients who can be cared for more efficiently in va's own nursing homes .

in addition , va may provide nursing home care , to the extent resources are available , to other patients who need long - term care for chronic disabilities .

consistent with va's policy , the proportion of discharged veterans whose length of stays were less than 90 days in va - operated nursing homes increased from 74 to 81 percent from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 .

this is similar to lengths of stay provided in facilities certified by medicare — - but not medicaid — - that provide post - acute skilled nursing home care .

about 81 percent of discharged patients in these certified medicare facilities had length of stays of less than 90 days in fiscal year 1999 .

the percentage of workload in community nursing homes declined from 17 to 13 percent from fiscal year 1998 through fiscal year 2003 .

this decline occurred because va reduced the number of patients served and the number of days paid for under contract in this setting .

the number of patients in these settings declined from 28,893 to 14,032 during this period .

some va officials told us that in the past va used community nursing homes for more patients and for longer - term contracts than currently .

va officials told us that now shorter - term contracts are often used to transition veterans to nursing home care , which is paid by other payers such as medicaid .

for example , some network officials told us that contracts for community nursing home care are often 30 days or less .

of the 21 networks , 17 reduced the percentage of nursing home workload provided in community nursing homes during this period .

four networks reduced the percentage of nursing home care provided in community nursing homes by about 11 percent: network 4 ( pittsburgh ) , network 5 ( baltimore ) , network 6 ( durham ) , and network 17 ( dallas ) .

by contrast , the percentage of workload provided in community nursing homes increased in 4 networks .

the percentage of nursing home care provided in community nursing homes in network 19 ( denver ) increased by about 10 percent .

the percentage of nursing home care provided in community nursing homes among the other 3 networks — - network 23 ( minneapolis ) , network 20 ( portland ) , and network 18 ( phoenix ) — - increased 3 percent or less .

va's noninstitutional long - term care workload — - average daily census — - for the six services in our review increased by approximately 75 percent from fiscal years 1998 through 2003 .

workload increased by 4,655 during this period to 10,892 .

 ( see table 3. ) .

much of this growth came from increases in skilled home health and homemaker / home health aide care — services that are most likely to help veterans prevent or delay the need for nursing home care .

one of the services that grew most rapidly was skilled home health care which increased by 127 percent during this period .

although noninstitutional long - term care workload increased , all veterans may not have access to these services because there are limitations in the availability of these services .

we previously reported a number of limitations in access to noninstitutional services that veterans experienced in the fall of 2002 .

at that time some facilities did not offer some of these noninstitutional services at all , or offered them only in certain parts of the geographic area they served .

for example , more than half of va's 139 medical facilities did not provide home - based primary care or adult day health care in the fall of 2002 .

the noninstitutional workload numbers for home - based primary care in table 3 are different from those reported by va in its appropriations submissions to congress and in recent va testimony .

in its reports on noninstitutional workload , va has measured home - based primary care services using enrolled days — - the number of days a veteran is enrolled to receive a service — - rather than the number of home - based primary care visits a veteran receives .

however , va has measured use of the other noninstitutional services in visits .

therefore , to ensure comparability across services , we used visits as the workload measure for home - based primary care .

as a result , our workload total for home - based primary care is smaller than the number va reports because veterans do not typically receive a home - based primary care visit for each day in which they are enrolled in home - based primary care .

specifically , we report the 2002 home - based primary care workload as 903 while va has reported it as 8,081 .

our consistent measure of all services in visits results in a lower total noninstitutional workload than that reported by va .

over the last 6 years , the veteran population most in need of long - term care has grown dramatically .

during this period , va's use of nursing home care by setting has changed so that state veterans' nursing homes now provide one - half of all nursing home workload provided or paid for by va. at the same time , va decreased the workload it serves in its own nursing homes consistent with va's policy to emphasize short - stay , post - acute care in its own nursing homes .

va also used community nursing home care less as it transitioned more veterans who needed such care to care paid for by other payers such as medicaid .

in addition , va increased the long - term care workload provided in noninstitutional settings .

these trends over the last 6 years raise important questions for how va is meeting current long - term care need and what it may need to do to meet future long - term care need .

what does the significant variation in nursing home workload change among the networks over this 6-year period mean for meeting veterans' long - term care needs in different parts of the country ? .

what are the implications for access , quality , and costs of va's significant shift to using state veterans' nursing homes to provide one - half of its nursing home care ? .

how has va's increased emphasis on post - acute care in its own nursing homes affected its ability to continue providing long - term care in its nursing homes for veterans with chronic disabilities ? .

to what extent does total va long - term care workload — - composed of a fairly constant nursing home workload and a rapidly expanding but smaller noninstitutional workload — - meet the needs of a rapidly growing elderly veteran population ? .

the continuing rapid rise in the veteran population likely to be in greatest need of long - term care — - those 85 years and older — - poses a major challenge for va health care .

answers to these four questions can help policymakers , va , and its stakeholders better understand the best ways to meet va's long - term care challenge .

we look forward to continuing to work with you on these significant issues .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i will be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include james c. musselwhite , thomas a. walke , and pamela a. dooley .

va long - term care: veterans' access to noninstitutional care is limited by service gaps and facility restrictions .

gao - 03-815t .

washington , d.c.: may 22 , 2003 .

va long - term care: service gaps and facility restrictions limit veterans' access to noninstitutional care .

gao - 03-487 .

washington , d.c.: may 9 , 2003 .

department of veterans affairs: key management challenges in health and disability programs .

gao - 03-756t .

washington , d.c.: may 8 , 2003 .

long - term care: availability of medicaid home and community services for elderly individuals varies considerably .

gao - 02-1121 .

washington , d.c.: september 26 , 2002 .

medicare: utilization of home health care by state .

gao - 02-782r .

washington , d.c.: may 23 , 2002 .

va long - term care: the availability of noninstitutional services is uneven .

gao - 02-652t .

washington , d.c.: april 25 , 2002 .

va long - term care: implementation of certain millennium act provisions is incomplete , and availability of noninstitutional services is uneven .

gao - 02-510r .

washington , d.c.: march 29 , 2002 .

va long - term care: oversight of community nursing homes needs strengthening .

gao - 01-768 .

washington , d.c.: july 27 , 2001 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

