i am pleased to be here today to participate in this hearing on proposed legislation to address the u.s .

postal service's ( usps ) challenges to remain self - supporting while providing effective and efficient universal postal service to the nation .

my statement will discuss ( 1 ) updated information on usps's financial condition and outlook , ( 2 ) the need to modernize and restructure usps , and ( 3 ) key issues that need to be addressed by postal legislation .

this statement is based on our past and ongoing work , including our reviews of usps's business model , financial condition , networks , service , and postal reform issues .

we interviewed usps officials and reviewed the post act of 2010 ; usps's audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 2010 ; and other reports , testimonies , and communications on usps's financial condition , operations , and outlook .

we conducted this performance audit in november 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

usps's financial condition continued to decline over the past fiscal year and its financial outlook is poor for fiscal year 2011 and the foreseeable future .

key usps results for fiscal year 2010 included a $1.0 billion decline in total revenue to $67.1 billion , and a $3.7 billion increase in total expenses to $75.6 billion , resulting in a record loss of about $8.5 billion , a $1.8 billion increase in outstanding debt ( which left $1.2 billion of available borrowing authority ) , a total of $12 billion in outstanding debt due to the treasury , and a $1.2 billion cash balance at the end of the fiscal year .

usps has recently released its budget for fiscal year 2011 , projecting a $6.4 billion loss ( see fig .

1 ) — one of the largest in usps history — including the impact of a $5.5 billion payment due in 2011 to prefund retiree health benefits ; a $3 billion increase in outstanding debt due to the department of the treasury ( treasury ) , thereby reaching its $15 billion statutory limit ; and a $2.7 billion cash shortfall at the end of the fiscal year .

usps's revenue drop in fiscal year 2010 was driven by continuing declines in total mail volume .

in fiscal year 2010 , mail volume decreased about 6 billion pieces from the previous fiscal year to 171 billion pieces .

this volume was about 20 percent below the peak of 213 billion pieces delivered during fiscal year 2006 .

most of the volume declines were in profitable first - class mail — which were particularly significant because the average piece of first - class mail generated about three times the profitability of the average piece of standard mail .

usps currently projects mail volume to increase by about 2 billion pieces in fiscal year 2011 .

in this fiscal year , first - class mail is expected to decrease by 3 billion pieces , but standard mail is expected to increase by 5 billion pieces .

with these volume changes and expected small rate increases , usps projects revenues to increase $0.6 billion in fiscal year 2011 .

meanwhile , usps's expenses increased by $3.7 billion in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 for several reasons .

first , in fiscal year 2010 , usps made its statutorily required payment of $5.5 billion to prefund health benefits for its retirees , in contrast to fiscal year 2009 when congress deferred all but $1.4 billion of usps's scheduled payment of $5.4 billion .

second , usps's workers' compensation costs in fiscal year 2010 were $3.6 billion , up $1.3 billion from the previous fiscal year , primarily from the non - cash effect of changes in the discount rates used to estimate the liability .

third , results of usps cost savings efforts in fiscal year 2010 were insufficient to offset rising costs in other areas .

according to usps , it achieved a total of close to $13 billion in cost savings from fiscal years 2006 through 2010 ( see fig .

2 ) , primarily by reducing 280 million work hours and its workforce by 131,000 employees .

most savings resulted from attrition , reductions in overtime , and changes in postal operations .

usps reported saving $3 billion in fiscal year 2010 , primarily because of a reduction of 75 million work hours — half the savings achieved in fiscal year 2009 .

looking forward , usps projects cost savings of $2 billion in fiscal year 2011 , primarily from continued attrition and associated savings .

as its core product — first - class mail — continues to decline , usps must modernize and restructure to become more efficient , control costs , keep rates affordable , and meet changing customer needs .

to do so , usps will need to become much leaner and more flexible .

key challenges include the following: mail volume and changing use of the mail: usps projects mail volume to continue declining to about 150 billion pieces by fiscal year 2020 — about 30 percent below its 2006 peak .

most of the declines are projected to be in profitable first - class mail .

use of the mail is changing as communications and payments continue to shift to electronic alternatives — a shift that is being facilitated by rapid adoption of broadband .

these trends expose weaknesses in usps's business model , which has relied on volume growth to help cover costs .

postal revenues: usps expects revenue to stagnate in the next decade as continued declines in mail volume are offset by rate increases .

rate increases are generally limited by the inflationary price cap on market - dominant products that generate close to 90 percent of usps revenue .

compensation and benefit costs: compensation and benefits , including retiree health benefits and workers' compensation , totaled about $60 billion in fiscal year 2010 , or close to 80 percent of usps costs .

usps pays a higher share of employee health and life insurance premiums than other federal agencies .

difficulties achieving network realignment: realigning usps's mail processing and retail facilities will be crucial for it to achieve sustainable cost reductions and productivity improvements , but limited progress has been made in rightsizing these networks to eliminate costly excess capacity .

although usps is working to consolidate some mail processing operations , it has closed few large mail processing facilities since 2005 .

similarly , its network of post offices and postal retail facilities has remained largely static despite expanded use of retail alternatives and population shifts .

capital investment: continuing losses from operations have constrained funds for usps capital investment .

usps's purchases of capital property and equipment and building improvements have declined in recent years , from $1.8 billion in fiscal year 2009 to $1.4 billion in fiscal year 2010 .

the deferral of maintenance could impede modernization and efficiency gains from optimizing mail processing , retail , and delivery networks .

further , usps has delayed buying new delivery vehicles for lack of capital resources .

we have an ongoing review of usps's delivery fleet of about 185,000 vehicles , including about 140,000 long - life vehicles purchased in the late 1980s and early 1990s that are nearing the end of their 24-year expected operating time frame .

usps has estimated replacing its delivery fleet will cost about $5 billion .

lack of borrowing capacity: usps expects to increase its outstanding debt to treasury during fiscal year 2011 by $3 billion , thereby reaching its total statutory debt limit of $15 billion .

even with this debt increase , usps projects a cash shortfall at the end of this fiscal year .

its cash outlook is uncertain , as indicated by recent experience .

usps reported in august 2010 that it “would likely experience a cash shortfall if legislation similar to that passed in september 2009 is not passed.” usps ended fiscal year 2010 with cash of about $1.2 billion and remaining annual borrowing authority of an additional $1.2 billion , or slightly more than the funds needed for one biweekly payroll .

usps projects it will have insufficient cash at the end of fiscal year 2011 to meet all of its obligations .

large unfunded financial obligations and liabilities: usps's unfunded obligations and liabilities were roughly $100 billion at the end of fiscal year 2010 .

looking forward , usps will continue to be challenged by these financial obligations and liabilities , together with expected large financial losses and long - term declines in first - class mail volume .

proposed postal legislation , including s. 3831 , provides a starting point for considering key issues where congressional decisions are needed to help usps undertake needed reforms .

this bill is based on legislative proposals usps made this past spring .

resolving large usps funding requirements for pension and retiree health benefits is important .

it is equally important to usps's future to address constraints and legal restrictions , such as those related to closing facilities , so that usps can take more aggressive action to reduce costs .

urgent action is needed as some changes , such as rightsizing networks , will take time to implement and produce results .

in addition , including incentives and oversight mechanisms would make an important contribution to assuring an appropriate balance between providing usps with more flexibility and assuring sufficient transparency , oversight , and accountability .

congressional decisions may involve difficult trade - offs related to usps's role as a federal entity expected to provide universal mail delivery and ready access to postal retail service while being self - financing through businesslike operations .

future usps actions and other stakeholder actions are expected to be informed and guided based on congressional decisions related to public policy questions , such as: benefits: what changes , if any , should be made to usps pension and retiree health benefit obligations and payment schedules ? .

what would be the impact on the federal budget ? .

delivery: should the long - standing requirement for saturday delivery be dropped so usps can implement its proposal to reduce delivery frequency to 5 days a week ? .

what would be the specific effects on operations , costs , workforce mix , employees , service , competition , the value of mail , mail volume , and revenue ? .

how would shifting to 5-day delivery affect customers including business mailers and the public ? .

post office closings: should usps have greater flexibility to rightsize its retail networks and workforce , which may involve closing post offices and moving retail services to alternative commercial locations that are often open more days and longer hours than postal facilities ? .

or should usps retain its retail facilities and provide new nonpostal products and services ? .

nonpostal products: should usps be allowed to offer new nonpostal products and services that compete with private - sector firms ? .

if so , how should fair competition be assured ? .

would it need additional capital for such initiatives ? .

if so , how would they be financed ? .

processes for change: what role should congress , the prc , usps , employees , and customers , including business mailers and the public , have in decisions on postal policy issues ? .

what incentives and oversight mechanisms are needed as part of congressional actions to assure an appropriate balance between providing usps with more flexibility and assuring sufficient transparency , oversight , and accountability ? .

we have discussed several options that congress and usps could consider in a report we issued last april , and are currently conducting a congressionally requested review of usps's 5-day delivery proposal .

in this testimony , we will highlight some options related to three areas that are also addressed by s. 3831 — compensation and benefits , rightsizing networks and workforce , and expanding nonpostal activities .

s. 3831 addresses key retiree health and pension benefit issues .

specifically , it requires opm to recalculate usps's csrs pension obligation in a way expected to make the federal government responsible for a greater share of usps's csrs pension obligation .

the bill also authorizes the usps board of governors to transfer any part of a resulting pension surplus to the postal service retiree health benefits fund .

the sponsor of s. 3831 has estimated that these legislative changes could result in an increase in the government's pension obligations of approximately $50 billion .

such an increase could impact the federal budget deficit and require funding over time .

usps has said it cannot afford its required prefunding payments to the retiree health benefit fund on the basis of its significant volume and revenue declines , large losses , debt nearing its limit , and limited cost - cutting opportunities under its current authority .

we have reported that congress should consider providing financial relief to usps , including modifying its retiree health benefit cost structure in a fiscally responsible manner .

several legislative proposals have been made to defer costs by revising statutory requirements , including extending and revising prefunding payments to the retiree health benefits fund , with smaller payment amounts in the short term followed by larger amounts later .

deferring some prefunding of these benefits would serve as short - term fiscal relief .

however , deferrals also increase the risk that usps will not be able to make future benefit payments as its core business declines .

therefore , it is important that usps fund its retiree health benefit obligations — including prefunding these obligations — to the maximum extent that its finances permit .

in addition to considering what is affordable and a fair balance of payments between current and future ratepayers , congress would also have to address the impact of these proposals on the federal budget .

further , the congressional budget office has raised concerns about how aggressive usps's cost - cutting measures would be if prefunding payments for retiree health care were reduced .

congress could revisit other aspects of the postal compensation and benefits framework .

usps is required to maintain compensation and benefits comparable to the private sector , a requirement that has been a source of disagreement between usps and its unions in collective bargaining and binding arbitration .

if usps and its unions go to arbitration , there is no statutory requirement for arbitrators to consider usps's financial condition .

we continue to favor such an arbitration requirement .

the law also requires usps's fringe benefits to be at least as favorable as those in effect when the postal reorganization act of 1970 was enacted .

career employees participate in federal pension and benefit programs , and usps covers a higher proportion of its employees' health care and life insurance premiums than most other federal agencies .

usps is also required by law to participate in the federal workers' compensation program , and some benefits paid exceed those provided in the private sector .

furthermore , usps employees in this program can choose not to retire when they become eligible to retire , and they often decide to remain on the more generous workers' compensation rolls .

congressional action is needed to speed usps's progress in rightsizing its networks and workforce , and s. 3831 seeks to address these issues .

such progress is limited by both stakeholder resistance and statutory requirements .

usps has costly excess capacity and inadequate flexibility to quickly reduce costs in its processing and retail networks .

usps has faced formidable resistance to facility closures and consolidations because of concerns about possible effects on service , employees , and communities , particularly in small towns or rural areas .

we have suggested that congress consider establishing a panel similar to the military base realignment and closure commissions to facilitate action and progress .

such panels have successfully informed prior difficult restructuring decisions .

the panel could consider options for usps's networks including the following: mail processing: decisions to maintain or close facilities are best made in the context of a comprehensive , integrated approach for optimizing the processing network .

issues include how to inform congress and the public , address resistance , and ensure employees will be treated fairly .

related issues include whether to relax current delivery standards to enable additional facility closures and associated savings .

retail: usps has retained most of its retail facilities in recent years despite the growing use of less costly alternatives to traditional post offices , such as self - service kiosks and stamp sales in grocery stores , drug stores , and over the internet .

usps has called for statutory changes to facilitate modernizing its retail services .

usps has asked congress to change the law so it can diversify into nonpostal areas to find new opportunities for revenue growth , and s. 3831 would authorize such action .

this could involve usps entering into new business areas or earning revenues from partners selling nonpostal products at usps facilities .

about 10 years ago , we reported that usps incurred losses on early electronic commerce and other nonpostal initiatives , and its management of its electronic commerce initiatives was fragmented , with inconsistent implementation and incomplete financial information .

congress then restricted usps from engaging in new nonpostal activities in the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 .

allowing usps to expand into new nonpostal activities would raise issues about the areas in which it should be allowed to compete with the private sector , how to assure fair competition , how to mitigate risks associated with entering new lines of business , and how to finance such efforts .

related issues could include whether usps's mission and role as a government entity with a monopoly should be changed , what transparency and accountability would apply , whether usps would be subject to the same regulatory entities and regulations as its competitors , and whether losses would be borne by postal ratepayers or taxpayers .

a senior usps official told us that usps is studying various possibilities for introducing new products and services .

a continued issue is whether usps would make money if it was allowed to compete in new nonpostal areas .

usps has reported that if it could enter such areas , such as banking or sales of consumer goods , its opportunities would be limited by its high cost structure and the relatively light customer traffic of post offices compared with commercial retailers .

 ( there are 600 weekly counter customers at the average post office , compared to 20,000 at the average major supermarket , according to usps. ) .

usps has said that the possibility of building a sizable presence in logistics , banking , integrated marketing , and document management was currently not viable because of its net losses , high wage and benefit costs , and limited access to cash to support necessary investment .

usps concluded that building a sizable business in any of these areas would require “time , resources , new capabilities ( often with the support of acquisitions or partnerships ) and profound alterations to the postal business model.” in summary , the need for postal reform continues as business and consumer use of the mail continues to evolve .

congress and usps urgently need to reach agreement on a package of actions to restore usps's financial viability and enable it to begin making necessary changes .

mr. chairman , that concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information about this statement , please contact phillip herr at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or herrp@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this statement include joseph applebaum , chief actuary ; susan ragland , director , financial management and assurance ; amy abramowitz ; teresa anderson ; joshua bartzen ; kenneth john ; hannah laufe ; saraann moessbauer ; robert owens ; crystal wesco ; and jarrod west .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

