the air force is developing the f / a - 22 aircraft to be an air superiority and ground attack aircraft with advanced features to make it less detectable to adversaries , capable of high speeds for long ranges , and able to provide a pilot with improved awareness of the surrounding situation .

the ability to engage targets on the ground is being expanded to provide a robust capability not originally planned at the start of the program .

the air force plans to begin initial operational test and evaluation ( iot&e ) to demonstrate the aircraft's operational effectiveness and suitability in march 2004 and to seek full rate production approval in december 2004 .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 requires us to assess the air force's f / a - 22 development program annually and determine whether the air force is meeting key performance , schedule , and cost goals .

the chairman of the subcommittee on tactical air and land forces , house committee on armed services , asked us to continue monitoring the f / a - 22 development program during a hearing on april 2 , 2003 .

on april 23 , 2003 , the subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations , house committee on government reform , asked the department of defense ( dod ) to provide more detailed information on the business case that supports the estimated quantities and costs for an affordable f / a - 22 program .

in response to the concerns and directions of these various committees , we ( 1 ) identified changes in the f / a - 22 program since its inception , ( 2 ) reviewed the status of the development activities , and ( 3 ) examined the sufficiency of business case information provided for congressional oversight .

we performed our work from july 2003 through march 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the f / a - 22 is planned to be an air superiority and ground attack aircraft with advanced features to make it less detectable to adversaries ( stealth characteristics ) and capable of high speeds for long ranges .

it has integrated avionics that greatly improve pilots' awareness of the situation surrounding them .

the objectives of the f / a - 22 development program are to ( 1 ) design , fabricate , test , and deliver 9 f / a - 22 development test aircraft , 2 nonflying structural test aircraft , 6 production representative test aircraft , and 37 flight - qualified engines ; ( 2 ) design , fabricate , integrate , and test the avionics ; and ( 3 ) design , develop , and test the support and training systems .

the f / a - 22 is being developed under contracts with lockheed martin corporation , the prime contractor ( for the aircraft ) ,and pratt & whitney corporation ( for the engine ) .

following a history of increasing cost estimates to complete the development phase of the f / a - 22 program , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 established a cost limitation for both the development and the production .

subsequently , the national defense authorization act of 2002 eliminated the cost limitation for the development , but it left the cost limit for the production .

the production program is now limited to $36.8 billion .

the current cost estimate of the development program is $28.7 billion .

currently , the f / a - 22 program is both in development and production .

development is in its final stages , and production has been ongoing since fiscal year 1999 .

the aircraft's development problems and schedule delays in completing flight testing have led to congressional concerns .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 prohibited the obligation of $136 million in procurement funds until the under secretary of defense , acquisition , technology , and logistics , submitted to the congressional defense committees , among other things , a certification that the avionics software installed on test aircraft can operate at least 5 hours on average before certain types of avionics anomalies occur .

the under secretary of defense , acquisition , technology , and logistics , the final authority in making acquisition decisions in dod , has also included this criterion as a requirement for the f / a - 22 program before entering iot&e .

the f / a - 22 program has experienced several significant changes since it began development in 1986 .

first , the air force cannot afford to purchase the quantities of aircraft that were originally planned 18 years ago .

this reduction in buying power is attributed , in a large part , to increases in development time and cost due to the program's failure to employ a knowledge - based acquisition approach to developing the f / a - 22 .

second , in september 2002 , the air force decided to add a more robust air - to - ground attack capability than previously envisioned but now deemed needed to increase the utility of the aircraft .

this capability will add significant cost to the program over the next 10 years .

lastly , the air force has determined that new computer processors and architecture are needed to support some planned enhancements , which will further increase program costs and risk .

since the f / a - 22 acquisition program started in 1986 , cost and schedule estimates have grown significantly , thus contributing to a loss in buying power .

development costs are now estimated at $28.7 billion , a 127 percent increase over the 1986 estimates .

planned development cycle time has grown from 9 years to 19 years , and the initial operational capability date has slipped over 9 years , from march 1996 to december 2005 .

these schedule extensions , delays , and cost increases were major contributors to changes in the air force's initial plan to purchase 750 aircraft .

current air force budget estimates include plans to purchase 277 aircraft .

table 1 shows the changes in the f / a - 22 program since its start in 1986 based on information provided in selected acquisition reports over time .

in our 1988 report , the average unit procurement cost was estimated by the air force to be $69 million .

today , after schedule delays and development problems , the estimated average unit procurement costs have grown to $153 million — almost a 122 percent increase .

the air force does not expect the development program to be completed until 2005 and with iot&e still to be completed , the possibility of additional changes and costs is likely .

as we previously reported , the acquisition approach of the f / a - 22 program has contributed to cost increases and delays in schedule .

leading commercial firms that we studied employ an acquisition approach that evolves a product to its ultimate capabilities on the basis of mature technologies and available resources .

further , product enhancements are planned for subsequent development efforts only when technologies are proven to be mature and other resources are available .

our work has shown that commercial firms ensure that high levels of knowledge exist at three critical junctures in a development program .

first , a match must be made between a customer's needs and the available resources — technology , engineering knowledge , time , and funding — before a new development program is launched .

second , a product's design must demonstrate its ability to meet performance requirements and be stable about midway through development .

third , the developer must show that the product can be manufactured within cost , schedule , and quality targets and is demonstrated to be reliable before production begins .

in contrast , the f - 22 acquisition strategy from the outset was to achieve full capability in a “big bang” approach instead of evolving development in manageable increments of new capability .

by not using an evolutionary approach , the air force took on significant risk and onerous technology challenges .

the three critical technologies that were immature at the start of the program included low - observable materials , propulsion , and integrated avionics .

integrated avionics has been a source of major schedule delays and cost increases in the f / a - 22 program .

starting the program with these immature technologies prevented the program from knowing cost , schedule , and performance ramifications until late in the development program , after significant investments had already been made .

efforts to mature technology cascaded into development , delaying attainment of design and production maturity .

the overall result has been significant delays and substantially higher investments to buy over 60 percent fewer aircraft .

developing an expanded air - to - ground attack capability for the f / a - 22 will be costly and add risk to the program .

the air force began development of the f / a - 22 as a replacement for the f - 15 air superiority fighter with primary emphasis on the air - to - air role .

it was never intended to have robust air - to - ground capability .

its need was based on a projection that the soviet union would develop and produce large numbers of advanced fighter aircraft .

the f / a - 22 was intended to identify , track , and kill advanced fighters before it was targeted , giving it the edge and making it a more lethal and survivable aircraft than an f - 15 .

however , the original soviet threat never materialized .

to enhance the utility of the f / a - 22 , the air force plans to develop a robust air - to - ground attack capability to be able to engage a greater variety of ground targets , such as surface - to - air missile systems , that have posed a significant threat to u.s. aircraft in recent years .

the air force has a modernization program to improve the capabilities of the f / a - 22 focused largely on a new robust air - to - ground capability .

it has five developmental spirals planned over more than a 10-year period , with the initial spiral started in 2003 .

table 2 shows each spiral as currently planned .

in march 2003 , the office of secretary of defense's cost analysis improvement group ( caig ) estimated that the air force would need $11.7 billion for the planned modernization program .

the caig estimate included costs for development , production , and the retrofit of some aircraft .

as of march 2003 , the air force f / a - 22 approved program baseline did not include estimated costs for the full modernization effort .

instead , the air force estimate included $3.5 billion for modernization efforts planned through fiscal year 2009 .

to support the f / a - 22's expanded capability beyond global strike enhanced , the air force has determined that its baseline computer architecture and critical avionics processors will need to be replaced .

current processors are old and obsolete , cannot be supported , and do not have sufficient capacity to meet the increased processing demands required for planned new air - to - ground capabilities beyond global strike enhanced .

as a bridge to meet this expanded capability , the air force plans to modify some avionics processors and purchase sufficient quantities to support production of the first 155 f / a - 22 aircraft .

the f / a - 22 is dependent on its onboard computers and software to perform its mission .

unlike other fighter aircraft , it has a highly advanced , integrated avionics system capable of detecting , identifying , and engaging the enemy at ranges beyond a pilot's vision .

the key to the f / a - 22 avionics lies in its fully integrated core architecture and its two central , networked computers called common integrated processors ( cip ) .

cips use very high - speed integrated circuits to collect , process , and integrate data and signals from the aircraft's sensors .

cip serves as the “brains” for the f / a - 22's integrated avionics system and is unique to this aircraft .

the primary processor in cip is the intel i960mx microprocessor , which is used strictly for avionics processing .

this microprocessor is based on 1990's technology and has a 32-bit processor that operates at speeds of 25mhz .

by today's technology standards , the processor is considered obsolete and cannot support spiral developments beyond the global strike enhanced .

in mid - 2003 , the manufacturer of the microprocessor informed the air force that it planned to permanently shut down the i960mx production line by january 2004 because the microprocessor was no longer a viable product for the company .

as a result , the air force decided in november 2003 to replace its computer architecture and avionics processors to support the f / a - 22's expanded capabilities .

in december 2003 , the air force purchased its last i960mx microprocessors when it bought 820 of the microprocessors .

according to program officials , this quantity and previously purchased quantities are sufficient to support production of 155 f / a - 22 aircraft .

these officials believe that with some minor upgrades to improve processing capacity , these processors will be able to support the baseline aircraft and the developmental spirals — global strike basic and global strike enhanced .

however , the air force plans for the remaining production aircraft to include a new computer architecture and avionics processor needed to support the final two planned spirals — global strike full and enhanced intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance .

at the time of our review , the air force believed its best long - term solution to its avionics architecture and computer - processing shortfalls was a new , modern , open system architecture .

rather than start a new development program , the program office plans to leverage two other ongoing air force development or modification programs for this processing capability: the new architecture being developed for the f - 35 and the new commercial off - the - shelf general - purpose processors designed for newer versions of the f - 16 .

according to f / a - 22 program officials , this new architecture will be state - of - the - art and will have ample processing capacity to accommodate all future air - to - ground capabilities as currently planned .

these officials do not expect the new architecture to be fully developed and ready for installation in the f / a - 22 for at least 5 to 6 years .

f / a - 22 program officials acknowledge that this mass changeover of the f / a - 22 computer architecture and avionics processor will be a time - consuming and costly effort and will likely create additional program risks .

air force cost estimates are not yet available .

nevertheless , program officials estimate the nonrecurring engineering costs alone could be at least $300 million .

at the time of our review , the air force had not made a decision about retrofitting aircraft equipped with the i960mx microprocessor .

additional risks are likely because the new processor and architecture are being developed by other major aircraft programs and will require extensive integration and operational testing to ensure that the f / a - 22 program does not encounter similar problems that have delayed integration and testing of the f / a - 22's current avionics suite .

the f / a - 22 program did not meet key testing goals established for fiscal year 2003 and required for the aircraft to begin iot&e testing .

the air force's efforts to stabilize avionics software and improve its performance have not been sufficiently demonstrated , and entrance criterion previously set for starting iot&e testing has been changed .

in addition , the f / a - 22 program is not performing as expected in some other key performance areas , including reliability and maintenance support .

the ongoing problems have led to a revised test schedule , which has compressed the time to complete initial operational testing by 4 months , and have increased the potential for cost increases and delays in the full rate production decision .

the program has made progress in correcting several of the design problems we identified in our march 2003 report .

the air force changed the avionics stability metric planned as a criterion to enter iot&e from an average of 20 hours between avionics software failures to a broader measure of an average of 5 hours between avionics software or hardware failures .

current testing shows the program continues to have problems meeting the new and old avionics stability metrics .

because the f / a - 22 avionics encountered frequent shutdowns over the last few years , many test flights were delayed .

as a result , the air force operational test and evaluation center wanted assurances that the avionics would work before it was willing to start the iot&e program .

it established a requirement for a 20-hour performance metric that was to be demonstrated before iot&e would begin .

the metric was mean time between instability events ( mtbie ) and tracked two distinct types of avionics software failures: hard failures ( type 1 ) that were the most serious resulting in a complete avionics system shutdown requiring the need to restart the avionics system .

significant failures ( type 2 ) that were less serious failures but required the pilot to restart an individual subsystem that failed versus the complete avionics system .

using personal computers as an analogy , a type 1 failure would be equivalent to a failure of one's personal computer that requires it to be shut down and rebooted , except that the time to restart the f / a - 22 avionics system could take substantially longer .

a type 2 failure would be equivalent to a failure in a particular application , such as the word processing program shutting down .

even with such a failure , other software applications could still be operated while the word processing software was restarted .

likewise , in the case of the f / a - 22 , other applications would still be operable despite the failure of any single application , such as a shutdown in the communication , navigation , and identification system .

in july 2003 , the air force decided to switch to a different metric — mean time between avionics anomaly ( mtbaa ) — to measure the performance of the avionics software for the start of iot&e .

two main differences between the new metric and its predecessor are the new metric ( 1 ) includes hardware and some subsystem software failures not previously counted and ( 2 ) requires a failure rate based on an average of 5 hours without experiencing avionics anomalies , instead of 20 hours .

according to air force operational test officials , they adopted this new metric because they believe it is a better measure of the avionics operational performance needed to start iot&e , whereas the previous metric was more technically focused on software performance , excluding hardware failures .

they also said the 5-hour criterion would provide a minimum amount of effective operational test time to efficiently conduct iot&e .

in turn , congress included the new metric in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 .

testing as of january 2004 showed the program had achieved 2.7 hours — 54 percent of the requirement .

once this criterion is achieved , the avionics must still undergo rigorous operational testing to demonstrate its effectiveness and suitability in a realistic environment .

figure 1 shows the status of the mtbie and mtbaa metrics .

the figure shows that mtbie , the previous criterion , was demonstrated at about 67 percent of the requirement .

in addition , the type 1 failures , causing a complete shutdown of the avionics system , have significantly diminished .

they are occurring only about once every 25 hours on average .

this is the result of a substantial effort on the part of the air force and the contractor to identify and fix problems that led to the instability in the f / a - 22 avionics software .

type 2 failures are still occurring frequently .

while less serious when compared to the entire avionics suite shutting down , type 2 failures become serious if critical subsystem software shuts down when its function is needed for the success of the mission or survivability of the aircraft .

in september 2003 , the f / a - 22 contractor reported a high number of outstanding avionics common problem reports .

of the 231 reports of problems not resolved , about 25 ( or 11 percent ) were identified as stability - related problems .

the remaining 206 reports ( 89 percent ) were the result of avionics performance or functional problems .

for example , the communication , navigation , and identification subsystem accounted for nearly 36 percent of the total reports .

because the avionics system is essential to the success of the f / a - 22 , the integrated avionics still needs to be demonstrated to meet design specifications and operational requirements .

reductions in avionics performance could affect the ability of the f / a - 22 to effectively carry out its expected missions .

the f / a - 22 program is not meeting its requirements for a reliable aircraft and it is not using a best practice approach .

the air force established reliability requirements to be achieved at the completion of development and at system maturity .

as a measure of the system's overall reliability , the air force established a requirement for 1.95-hours mean time between maintenance by the completion of development , and 3-hours mean time between maintenance at system maturity .

this measure of reliability represents the average flight time between maintenance actions .

as of october 2003 , the air force had only been able to demonstrate a reliability of about 0.5 flying hours between maintenance actions or about 26 percent of the development requirement and 17 percent of system maturity requirement .

this has led to the development test aircraft spending more time than planned on the ground undergoing maintenance .

during 2003 , the air force identified 68 parts that had a high rate of failure causing them to be removed or replaced , affecting the f / a - 22 system reliability .

the contractor has initiated programs to eliminate the high failure rates experienced by these parts .

the canopy has also been experiencing failures during testing , allowing it to achieve only about 15 percent of its expected 1,600-hour life .

a second manufacturer for canopies is being developed , but until it has passed qualification testing , it cannot be used as an alternative source for the high failing canopies .

best commercial practices for new product development require reliability to be demonstrated by the start of production .

our work has shown that product development engineers from leading commercial firms expect to achieve reliability requirements before entering production .

they told us reliability is attained through an iterative process of design , test , analyze , and redesign .

commercial firms understand that once a system enters production , the costs to achieve reliability through this iterative design change process become significantly more expensive .

the f / a - 22 aircraft has been in production since fiscal year 1999 , and the air force has on contract 52 production aircraft , and an additional 22 aircraft on long lead contracts representing 27 percent of the planned buy quantity .

with 83 percent of the reliability requirement yet to be achieved through this iterative design change process , the air force can expect to incur additional development and design change costs .

if the air force fails to improve the f / a - 22's reliability before fielding the aircraft , the high failure rates will result in higher operational and support costs to keep the aircraft available for training or combat use .

the f / a - 22 is designed to have a computerized and paperless maintenance system that monitors , diagnoses , identifies , and reports failures to maintenance crews and that is intended to allow a faster maintenance turnaround to flight status .

the onboard diagnostics health and management system constantly monitors the aircraft's systems and the performance of both hardware and software .

it collects , analyzes , stores , and reports failures .

critical failures are reported to the pilot , and all failures are stored in a portable database for later use by ground maintenance crews .

at the completion of a flight , the database is removed from the aircraft and is downloaded into a system on the ground , the integrated management information system , which is a network of computers the maintainers use to process the maintenance and support information .

this system further analyzes the downloaded information to determine the problems and match failures with the appropriate digitized technical order data needed to make the repairs .

this information is then loaded into handheld portable computers that the technicians use to repair the aircraft .

according to dod and air force test officials , these systems have been generating false reports of failures , which have caused maintenance staff to spend more hours than planned replacing items unnecessarily and trying to identify the actual problems .

in addition , the maintenance systems are not providing all the technical data needed to repair the aircraft , thus making it more difficult to make repairs .

according to the test officials , they do not have precise data to quantify the extent of the problems , and they said it has disrupted maintenance activities .

a key indication has been the inability to fly aircraft as planned .

we found that between october 2003 and january 2004 the test force could only fly about 53 percent of the planned test flights and that the maintenance problems were a key contributor to this poor flying performance .

air force officials do not expect the maintenance systems to be fully matured until december 2005 .

consequently , the program office has had to provide additional funding to the contractor to purchase special test equipment that will be used to support maintenance requirements during operational testing .

moreover , because these systems will not be fully available during the operational testing , it may be difficult to assess the systems' real performance .

progress in f / a - 22 flight testing was slower than expected in 2003 , and start of iot&e was delayed an additional 7 months due to avionics and other problems .

realizing the air force would not be ready to enter initial operational testing as previously planned , the office of the secretary of defense requested the f / a - 22 program to establish a new operational test plan that included measures to ensure the aircraft and its avionics are ready before entering operational testing .

in response , the air force put in place a two - phase operational test program .

phase 1 , also called an operational assessment , is not the official start of operational testing .

it is intended to assess the f / a - 22's readiness for iot&e .

started in october 2003 , it calls for testing two f / a - 22 aircraft to conduct live air - to - air missile shots , fly one - ship and two - ship formation operational sorties , and assess the computerized maintenance system's maturity .

it will include some flight tests that are planned to be repeated in iot&e if the aircraft configuration changes .

phase 2 testing is considered the actual start of iot&e .

to begin this phase , the air force must meet a number of criteria .

perhaps most importantly , it must demonstrate that the f / a - 22 integrated avionics will be able to operate for sufficient lengths of time , without shutting down .

other criteria that must be met prior to iot&e include the availability of four fully configured f / a - 22 test aircraft and one spare aircraft , the completion of live missile shots , the completion of key aircraft flight envelope testing ( planned speed , altitude , and maneuver boundaries of the f / a - 22 ) , the completion of operational pilot and maintenance training , a useable system with technical data to fix problems , and the software upgrades to the maintenance system .

figure 2 compares the changes in the planned test program since our last report .

according to air force test officials , results of some phase 1 tests could be used to satisfy iot&e requirements if the aircraft and software configurations do not change for iot&e testing .

this could reduce the scope of the test effort planned during iot&e .

the defense acquisition board is scheduled to review the f / a - 22's readiness for iot&e in march 2004 .

at the present time , the air force expects to complete iot&e in october 2004 , before the full rate production decision , now expected in december 2004 .

the time allotted to complete iot&e under the new test plan , however , has been compressed by 4 months , assuming phase 1 testing results are not permitted to be used for iot&e .

this means the air force would have less time than previously planned to complete the same amount of testing .

if the air force continues to experience delays in testing prior to iot&e , then the full rate production decision would also have to be delayed until iot&e is complete and the beyond low rate initial production report is delivered to congress .

there is no consensus within dod on the air force's ability to meet this october 2004 milestone .

the director of operational test and evaluation , office of secretary of defense , believes the start of testing will slip , although the air force maintains it will meet its schedule .

the air force has corrected design problems discussed in our march 2003 report .

to correct the movement or buffeting of the vertical fins in the tail section of the aircraft , the air force designed and implemented modifications , which strengthen the fin and hinge assemblies .

because of this problem , the air force placed restrictions on flights below 10,000 feet .

testing was done above and below 10,000 feet , and the flight restrictions were removed .

likewise , the air force modified the aircraft to prevent overheating concerns in the rear portion of the aircraft by adding thermal protection and strengthened strategic areas in the aft tail sections .

the air force also plans to modify later production aircraft using a new venting approach to resolve the heat problems .

we reported that the air force had also experienced separations in the horizontal tail materials .

after additional testing , the air force deemed that the original tails met requirements established for the life of the airframe .

however , the air force redesigned the tail to reduce producibility costs .

tests will be performed on the redesigned tail in late 2004 .

dod has not provided congress with sufficient information to support the business case for buying and modernizing the f / a - 22 program .

in our testimony of april 11 , 2003 , before the subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations , house committee on government reform , we stressed that the issue was not whether the f / a - 22 should be produced , but rather in what quantities it is needed — as justified by a business case .

we discussed the current and future environments in which the f / a - 22 investment decision would have to be made , including the need to consider opportunity costs inside and outside dod .

dod has planned investments over the next several years , on average $150 billion a year , to keep legacy systems working while at the same time modernizing and transforming u.s. national defense capabilities for the future .

the f / a - 22 program represents a sizable investment and must compete with other demands within the defense budget .

this competition requires a knowledge - based approach to justify acquisition investment decisions and an efficient acquisition process to ensure programs are implemented within expectations set in associated business cases .

since the start of the f / a - 22 program , acquisition costs have increased , the aircraft's mission and key capabilities have expanded , fewer quantities are affordable , and delivery to the user has been delayed .

the air force currently estimates the total f / a - 22 acquisition program will cost about $72 billion , excluding all costs estimated to complete the spiral improvement effort .

including these costs brings the estimated total investment for the f / a - 22 program to about $80 billion .

through fiscal year 2004 , about one - half this investment has been funded .

in light of the changes in the program and investments that remain , the subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations , house committee on government reform , asked dod to provide a business case justifying the air force's planned number of f / a - 22s ( 276 at that time ) as well as how many f / a - 22s are affordable .

in its response , dod did not sufficiently address key business case questions such as how many f / a - 22s are needed , how many are affordable , and if alternatives to planned investments increasing the f / a - 22 air - to - ground capabilities exist .

instead , dod stated it planned to buy 277 f / a - 22s based on a “buy to budget” concept that determines quantities on the availability and efficient use of funds by the f / a - 22 program office .

furthermore , justification for expanding the capability , for an estimated $8 billion to $12 billion investment , was not addressed in dod's response .

while ground targets such as surface - to - air missile systems are acknowledged to be a significant threat today , the business case did not establish a justification for this investment or state what alternatives were considered .

for example , the f - 35 aircraft is also expected to have an air - to - ground role as are planned future unmanned combat air vehicles .

these could be viable alternatives to this additional investment in f / a - 22 capability .

while the business case information submitted to congress called for 277 aircraft , dod stated it could only afford to acquire between 216 and 218 aircraft within the congressionally imposed cap on production costs — currently at $36.8 billion .

dod expects improvements in manufacturing efficiencies and other areas will provide it with sufficient funds to buy additional f / a - 22 aircraft .

however , this seems to be an unlikely scenario given the program's history .

under the “buy to budget” approach , the previous $876 million increase in development costs was funded by taking funds mostly from production , thus reducing aircraft quantities by 49 .

with testing still incomplete and many important performance areas not yet demonstrated , the possibility for additional increases in development costs is likely .

while dod and the air force are focused on completing iot&e and making a decision to go into full rate production , a more basic issue needs to be addressed .

the conditions driving the business case that spurred the major investment decision to initially develop and buy 750 f - 22 aircraft have changed .

a revised and comprehensive business case assessment has not been completed and shared with congressional defense oversight committees .

at the present time , it is uncertain how many f / a - 22s are needed .

the program has been in development for about 18 years , and dod has invested over $40 billion .

this investment represents about one - half the estimated costs projected for the entire f / a - 22 program .

therefore , dod must still make investment decisions affecting another $40 billion to support this program through full rate production and implementation of the spiraled modernization effort .

based on current design problems and the development efforts that remain , the f / a - 22 program's affordability is uncertain .

current conditions suggest the air force cannot afford to buy much more than 218 aircraft within the cost limitation imposed by congress .

in light of the uncertainty concerning how many aircraft are needed in today's environment , the large investments that remain , and the unknown outcomes of planned initial operational testing , we continue to be concerned with dod's readiness to address a december 2004 decision to enter full rate production .

furthermore , iot&e , intended to demonstrate the f / a - 22 effectiveness and suitability , has not started and may not be completed as planned , which may delay the full rate production decision .

with this testing outstanding , the risk is high that additional development funding will be needed to resolve problems that could result .

given the sizable investment that remains in the f / a - 22 program , the uncertainties , and the ever changing financial demands of dod , congress and the secretary of defense would benefit from a comprehensive assessment of the number of f / a - 22 aircraft needed as well as assurance that problems identified in initial operational testing will be identified and resolved .

specifically , we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following two actions: complete a new business case analysis that determines the continued need for the f / a - 22 and that specifically ( a ) addresses the need for an expanded air - to - ground capability and an assessment of alternatives , to include the feasibility of using other assets like the f - 35 and unmanned aerial vehicles planned for the future ; ( b ) justifies the quantity of f / a - 22 aircraft needed to satisfy requirements for air - to - air and air - to - ground missions ; and ( c ) provides evidence that the planned quantity is affordable within current budgets and the congressional funding limitation .

the secretary should provide the results of the business case analysis to the defense committees before the decision to start full rate production .

before the full rate production decision is made and in conjunction with the beyond low - rate initial production report , provide the defense committees a plan that shows how the air force will correct and fund any major problems identified and still open after iot&e is completed .

in written comments on a draft of this report , dod stated that it partially concurred with our two recommendations .

regarding our first recommendation on completing a new business case for the f / a - 22 , dod stated that it evaluates the f / a - 22 business case elements as part of the annual budget process .

additionally , dod's response acknowledged that this year the department is undertaking a broader set of reviews under the joint capabilities review process ; the f / a - 22 will be a part of this review .

the president's budget submission to congress will reflect the results of these review efforts of the f / a - 22 business case .

we believe that the various reviews and assessments in the budget process along with the joint capabilities review process present excellent opportunities for dod to conduct a business case analysis .

other opportunities for completing the business case analysis include the independent and in - depth study requested by the office of management and budget for the comanche and f / a - 22 programs .

it is important , however , that the analysis sufficiently address the specific business case elements included in our recommendation — analysis of continued need , need for expanded air - to - ground capability , assessment of alternatives , justification of needed quantities , and evidence that planned quantities are affordable .

in addition , it is important that the outcomes of the business case analysis are provided to the congress prior to the full rate production decision .

regarding our second recommendation on providing congress the plans to resolve outstanding problems after the completion of iot&e , dod stated that the law already requires the director , operational test and evaluation , to submit to congress a beyond low rate initial production report that includes the results of operational testing .

since this report is an independent assessment of test results , the department did not believe it appropriate to include in it air force plans and costs for corrective actions stemming from operational testing .

however , dod will present these actions and costs to the defense acquisition board for decisions on the f / a - 22 program that will be included in the president's budget submission to congress .

we understand the legal requirements for submitting the beyond low rate initial production report .

we also recognize that this is an independent report submitted by the director , operational test and evaluation .

the intent of our recommendation is not to modify the report itself , but to ensure corrective actions and resultant costs are identified and reported in a timely fashion and before the full rate production decision is made .

because plans and costs could span over several years , such information may or may not be captured in annual budget submissions .

we have modified our recommendation to clarify our intent .

to determine changes in the f / a - 22 program since its inception , we analyzed cost information from selected acquisition reports and obtained information from the air force on its plans to modernize the f / a - 22 to include enhanced air - to - ground capabilities .

we compared prior cost information with the air force's current estimates to complete development and production of the f / a - 22 .

to determine the impact of development and testing on program outcomes , we examined the extent to which the development program is meeting planned flight test goals for 2003 and the air force's planned entry criterion for starting initial operational testing .

in examining sufficiency of the business case dod provided to a congressional oversight committee , we obtained a copy of the business plan and analyzed the various dod assumptions and approaches used to make the assessment conclusions .

in making these determinations , assessments , and identifications , we required access to current information about test results , performance estimates , schedule achievements and revisions , costs being incurred , aircraft modifications , and the program's plans for continued development and initial production .

the air force and the contractors gave us access to sufficient information to make informed judgments on the matters covered in this report .

in performing our work , we obtained information or interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , washington d.c. ; the f / a - 22 system program office , wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; lockheed - martin , marietta , georgia ; the defense contract management agency , marietta , georgia ; the air force operational test and evaluation center , kirkland air force base , new mexico ; and the combined flight test center , edwards air force base , california .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director , office of management and budget .

copies will also be made available to others on request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or michael j .

hazard at ( 937 ) 258-7917 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .

marvin e. bonner , edward browning , roger corrado , steve hunter , gary middleton , and robert ackley made key contributions to this report .

best practices: better acquisition outcomes are possible if dod can apply lessons from f / a - 22 program .

gao - 03-645t .

washington , d.c.: april 11 , 2003 .

tactical aircraft: status of the f / a - 22 program .

gao - 03-603t .

washington , d.c.: april 2 , 2003 .

tactical aircraft: dod should reconsider decision to increase f / a - 22 production rates while development risks continue .

gao - 03-431 .

washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2003 .

tactical aircraft: dod needs to better inform congress about implications of continuing cost growth .

gao - 03-280 .

washington , d.c.: february 28 , 2003 .

tactical aircraft: f - 22 delays indicate initial production rates should be lower to reduce risks .

gao - 02-298 .

washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2002 .

tactical aircraft: continuing difficulty keeping f - 22 production costs within the congressional limitation .

gao - 01-782 .

washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2001 .

tactical aircraft: f - 22 development and testing delays indicate need for limit on low - rate production .

gao - 01-310 .

washington , d.c.: march 15 , 2001 .

defense acquisitions: recent f - 22 production cost estimates exceeded congressional limitation .

gao / nsiad - 00-178 .

washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2000 .

defense acquisitions: use of cost reduction plans in estimating f - 22 total production costs .

gao / t - nsiad - 00-200 .

washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2000 .

budget issues: budgetary implications of selected gao work for fiscal year 2001 .

gao / ocg - 00-8 .

washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2000 .

f - 22 aircraft: development cost goal achievable if major problems are avoided .

gao / nsiad - 00-68 .

washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2000 .

defense acquisitions: progress in meeting f - 22 cost and schedule goals .

gao / t - nsiad - 00-58 .

washington , d.c.: december 7 , 1999 .

fiscal year 2000 budget: dod's production and rdt&e programs .

gao / nsiad - 99-233r .

washington , d.c.: september 23 , 1999 .

budget issues: budgetary implications of selected gao work for fiscal year 2000 .

gao / ocg - 99-26 .

washington , d.c.: april 16 , 1999 .

defense acquisitions: progress of the f - 22 and f / a - 18e / f engineering and manufacturing development programs .

gao / t - nsiad - 99-113 .

washington , d.c.: march 17 , 1999 .

