on july 7 , 2004 , the gao human capital reform act of 2004 , public law 108-271 , was enacted and provided gao with additional human capital flexibilities .

section 11 ( b ) of the act requires gao to submit a final report concerning the implementation of the act to congress not later than 6 years from july 7 , 2004 .

the report requires that we summarize our previous annual reports to congress regarding our use of the flexibilities authorized by section 2 , voluntary early retirement authority and voluntary separation incentive payments ; section 3 , annual pay adjustments ; section 4 , pay retention ; section 6 , increased annual leave for key employees ; section 7 , executive exchange program ; section 9 , performance management system ; and section 10 , consultation .

additionally , the report must contain any gao recommendations for legislative changes to the above noted sections and any assessment furnished by the gao personnel appeals board ( pab ) or any interested groups or associations representing officers and employees of gao .

the following report will provide you with the information required by section 11 ( b ) .

we have found that the additional flexibilities congress authorized in public law 108-271 have helped to ensure we have the right staff , with the right skills , in the right locations to better meet the needs of the congress and the american people .

to further assist us , on september 22 , 2008 , the congress passed the government accountability office act of 2008 , public law 110-323 , which provided additional authorities to gao .

therefore , at this time , we have no recommendations for any legislative changes to sections of the 2004 act .

regarding the requirement to include any assessment of the act from the pab or other interested groups , we solicited input from the pab , the gao employees association , international federation of professional and technical engineers ( ifpte ) local 1921 , the employee advisory council , and the diversity advisory council .

we only received a written reply from the pab which we have included .

however , ifpte local 1921 did indicate it will provide comments directly to congress .

if you or members of your staff have any questions or comments about matters discussed in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5600 or dodarog@gao.gov or ms. lynn gibson , acting general counsel , at ( 202 ) 512-5207 or gibsonl@gao.gov .

as required by section 11 of the gao human capital reform act of 2004 ( pub .

l. no .

108-271 ) , gao is providing its final report not later than 6 years after the date of the act's enactment .

this report provides , as required by the act , ( 1 ) a summary of the information included in gao's annual reports for the fiscal year 2005 through 2009 reporting cycle for sections 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , and 10 ; ( 2 ) recommendations for any legislative changes to sections 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , and 10 ; and ( 3 ) any assessment furnished by the gao personnel appeals board or any interested groups or associations representing officers and employees of gao .

table 1 provides a summary of the number of employees separated from the agency under both the agency - wide and exception provisions for voluntary early retirement in fiscal years 2005 through 2009 .

the voluntary separation incentive provision requires us to make the payment out of current appropriations and to pay an additional amount into the retirement fund , which at a minimum is equal to 45 percent of the basic pay of the employee who is receiving the payment .

thus , the cost of using this flexibility is considerable and , given the many demands on our resources , this provision was not used during the 5-year reporting period .

section 3 ( a ) of the act authorized the comptroller general to determine the amount of annual pay adjustments for its officers and employees and described the factors to be considered in making those determinations .

this provision amended 31 u.s.c .

732 ( c ) — which required employees' pay to be adjusted at the same time and to the same extent as the general schedule .

under section 3 ( b ) the comptroller general's authority to establish the annual pay adjustment is also applicable to employees in the senior executive service ( ses ) and in senior level ( sl ) positions .

under both sections 3 ( a ) and 3 ( b ) an employee must be performing at a satisfactory level in order to receive an annual pay adjustment in january 2006 , we issued regulations addressing the satisfactory performance requirement for gao's analysts and attorneys .

pursuant to the regulation , gao analysts and attorneys had to be performing at “meets expectations” in all competencies to be considered satisfactory .

in addition , most band iib and band iii analysts , had to have a performance appraisal that was in the top 50 percent or 80 percent , respectively , of their band and team .

in subsequent years this added condition was not required .

since the annual adjustment is a significant component of employees' annual compensation , limiting its applicability to satisfactory performers is critical to the integrity of gao's overall pay for performance system .

for calendar years 2006 through 2009 , consistent with section 31 u.s.c .

732 ( c ) ( 3 ) , the comptroller general considered various data to determine the amount of gao's annual adjustments , including salary planning data reported by the professional services , public administration , and general industry organizations ; the general schedule adjustment ; the amount of performance based compensation ( pbc ) and the appropriate distribution of funds between the annual adjustment and pbc .

and gao's funding levels .

the comptroller general provided an annual adjustment in 2006 and 2007 of 2.6 percent and 2.4 percent , respectively , to those who were performing at a satisfactory level and who were paid within applicable competitive compensation limits , except for wage - grade employees , and gao personnel appeals board employees .

in addition to the annual adjustment , gao employees were eligible for pbc based on their performance appraisal ratings .

pbc was calculated using a budget factor of 2.15 percent for both 2006 and 2007 .

under section 3 ( b ) , the comptroller general is required to consider the statutory criteria set out in section 3 ( a ) in determining an annual increase for members of the gao ses and sl employees .

the comptroller general considered these criteria and determined that each member performing at a satisfactory level would receive in 2006 and 2007 a 1.9 percent and 1.7 percent increase , respectively — the same increase that was provided to the executive schedule for calendar years 2006 and 2007 , respectively .

in 2007 , ses and sl members were also eligible for pbc using a budget factor of 2.25 percent .

in 2008 , after the comptroller general made preliminary determinations regarding pay adjustments as had been done in 2006 and 2007 , gao management negotiated with representatives of the newly established gao employees association , international federation of professional and technical engineers ( ifpte ) local 1921 to reach final agreement regarding salary adjustments .

in addition to the annual adjustment , gao employees were eligible for pbc based on their performance appraisal ratings .

pay adjustments for gao staff included an annual adjustment of 3.5 percent as well as performance based compensation using a budget factor of 2.75 percent .

in 2008 , for the first time , gao implemented a “floor guarantee.” the 2008 floor guarantee provided that if the total increase from the annual adjustment and pbc did not equal at least 4.49 percent of salary , the employee would receive an additional increase to base pay to equal this amount regardless of geographic location .

for example , in washington , d.c. , the floor guarantee ensured that all staff received a base pay increase of at least 4.49 percent and was provided without regard to pay range maximums limited only by the gs - 15 , step 10 , statutory maximum rate .

in providing the floor guarantee to staff , the additional amount required to bring the base pay adjustment to 4.49 percent of salary was deducted from any pbc bonus .

overall , the average total dollar amount resulting from employees' annual adjustments , pbc base pay increases and bonuses , and floor guarantees was approximately 6.12 percent of salary .

gao employees participating in one of gao's development programs ( professional development program , attorney development program , communication analysts pay process , program and technical development program , and administrative pay process ) received the 3.5 percent annual adjustment , not to exceed the maximum rate of their bands .

these employees were not eligible for the floor guarantee because they received additional performance - based salary increases every 6 months for the 2-year duration of the development program .

gao's ses and sl employees were provided the same 2.5 percent increase authorized for the executive branch .

ses and sl members were also eligible for pbc using a budget factor of 2.25 percent .

the pbc was provided to the ses and sl staff as a base pay increase not to exceed $169,300 .

employees of gao's personnel appeals board and student employees are paid according to gs rates , and gao's wage grade employees are paid according to the federal wage system ( fws ) salary rates .

these employees received the same percentage across - the - board adjustment on the same effective date as the increases authorized for gs and fws employees in the executive branch .

the pay ranges for these employees incorporated the changes made to the comparable executive branch pay ranges .

prior to the annual adjustment for 2009 , the government accountability office act of 2008 , public law 110-323 , september 22 , 2008 , was passed .

under section 2 of this act , the so called “floor guarantee” , as described above , was enacted into law as section 731 ( j ) of title 31 , united states code .

for year 2009 , following preliminary determinations by the acting comptroller general and negotiations between management and ifpte local 1921 , gao employees received an annual adjustment equal to the “floor guarantee,” which , for example , equaled 4.78 percent in washington , d.c .

in addition , employees were eligible for performance based compensation using a 2.65 percent budget factor .

gao's ses and sl employees rated “fully successful” were provided a 2.8 percent pay adjustment pursuant to 31 u.s.c .

§ 733 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( b ) effective january 4 , 2009 .

ses and sl members were also eligible for pbc using a budget factor of 2.65 percent .

pbc was provided to the ses and sl staff as a permanent base pay increase not to exceed $174,000 .

as in 2008 , employees of gao's personnel appeals board and student employees were paid according to gs rates , and gao's wage grade employees are paid according to the federal wage system ( fws ) salary rates .

these employees received the same percentage across - the - board adjustment on the same effective date as the increases authorized for gs and fws employees in the executive branch .

the pay ranges for these employees incorporated the changes made to the comparable executive branch pay ranges .

in fiscal years 2005 through 2009 , there were no extraordinary economic conditions or budgetary constraints that had a significant impact on the determination of the annual pay adjustments .

section 4 authorizes the comptroller general to establish pay retention regulations applicable to employees who are placed in lower grades or bands as a result of workforce restructuring , reclassification , or other appropriate circumstances .

table 2 summarizes these data for fiscal years 2005 through 2009 .

under section 6 , certain key employees with less than 3 years' service for purposes of leave accrual may be treated as if they had 3 years of federal service .

therefore , they would earn 160 hours on an annual basis instead of 104 hours .

these key employees must be occupying positions that are difficult to fill or have unique or unusually high qualifications and would be difficult to recruit without additional incentives .

table 3 shows the number of employees receiving this flexibility in fiscal years 2005 through 2009 .

section 7 authorized gao to establish an executive exchange program .

after soliciting and analyzing employees' comments on draft regulations , we issued the final regulations for gao's executive exchange program on may 20 , 2005 .

the authority was not used in fiscal years 2006 , 2008 , or 2009 .

however , during fiscal year 2007 , this authority was used to bring in two executives from private industry , each for a period of 4 months .

at gao , the executives worked on several special projects related to federal agency audits and agency financial statement issues .

in addition to helping revise the gao / pcie financial audit manual , they used their experience as auditors of agency financial statements to help develop protocols to help gao interact with the agency - level auditors ( inspectors general as well as public accounting firms ) during gao's audit of the u.s. government's consolidated financial statement .

this program was considered a success from gao's standpoint and it met the expectation of the private industry employer that was involved .

the authority expired on july 7 , 2009 .

section 9 relates to gao's performance management system and , among other things , requires a link between the performance management system and the agency's strategic plan , adequate training on the implementation and operation of the system , and a process for ensuring ongoing performance feedback .

even before the imposition of these requirements , gao's performance management system was in conformity with the statutory requirements of section 9 .

in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , we conducted annual reviews and assessments of our performance management policies and processes and made improvements , when appropriate .

during fiscal year 2007 , an evaluation of the fiscal year 2006 appraisal and pay cycle was deferred pending the outcome of the then - ongoing union election .

in fiscal year 2008 , gao undertook various initiatives to ensure the performance management system met its objectives and provided an even playing field for all employees .

in response to continuing differences between african american and caucasian analyst performance appraisal averages , the ivy planning group conducted an independent assessment of the factors that may influence these differences , and was also tasked with identifying what additional steps gao could take .

a final report was issued on april 25 , 2008 , which contained over 25 major recommendations .

gao is committed to implementing the ivy planning group's recommendations and has a number of efforts completed and underway to address the recommendations .

in fiscal year 2009 , the agency continued to pursue actions designed to ensure that the system met its objectives and was fair and equitable for all employees .

gao established its management improvement priorities action plan that includes five areas of concentration: recognizing and valuing diversity ; reassessing the performance appraisal system ; managing workload , sustaining quality , and streamlining processes ; enhancing staffing practices and developing the workforce ; and , finally , strengthening recruitment and retention incentives .

projects within these five areas originated from multiple sources , including the ivy planning group's recommendations , cg special projects , and suggestions received over time from gao staff at all levels throughout the agency .

these areas also reflect the ongoing efforts of the office of opportunity and inclusiveness , qci , the human capital office , and the chief administrative office .

gao completed one of the key management improvement projects — a full , systematic , and inclusive review of the performance appraisal system .

the objectives of the review were to examine what works , what does not , and what could be done better .

data collected included a comprehensive content analysis of existing data , the results of 28 focus groups of employees , and 53 semistructured interviews with managing directors and a random sample of ses / sl , band iii , and field office managers .

in addition , gao conducted an agencywide , web - based survey of employees , with an overall survey response rate of 67 percent .

data from all of these sources were synthesized into a final report issued in november 2009 with extensive findings and short - and long - term recommendations for improving gao's performance appraisal system .

planning for implementing the recommendations is in progress with over 50 percent of the short - term recommendations already under way .

gao has also established a steering committee composed of managers and employees including representatives from ifpte local 1921 to guide the direction of a more extensive contractor review of the current system to address the findings from the systematic review of the appraisal system .

gao continues to provide continuing training on the performance appraisal system and the roles and responsibilities of staff , supervisors , and managers .

to ensure that all designated performance managers are knowledgeable about appraisal policies , procedures , and practices , gao required all raters to take online training prior to preparing fiscal year 2008 ratings .

each subsequent year , all new designated performance managers must take online training .

gao also continues to expand staff , supervisory and managerial training and development to include offerings in how to give and receive feedback .

lastly , during this period , gao instituted consistent practices across the organization with regard to the review of ratings .

designated performance managers present their preliminary ratings of staff to all senior executive service reviewers .

this panel helps to ensure that all raters are consistently applying the rating criteria .

section 10 requires us to consult with any interested groups or associations representing officers and employees of gao when implementing changes brought about by this act .

typically , in implementing changes such as those in this act , we have consulted with interested groups and associations within gao , provided them with draft policies and regulations , and obtained input from them on suggested clarifications or changes to the policies and regulations .

we carefully considered this input and have incorporated it , when appropriate , before distributing policies and regulations for comment to all employees .

in 2007 , gao band i and band ii analysts , auditors , specialists , and investigators , and staff in the professional development program , elected to be represented by a union and established ifpte , local 1921 .

in 2008 , gao and ifpte , local 1921 , reached an interim collective bargaining agreement .

gao is committed to continuing to work constructively with ifpte , local 1921 , to finalize and implement a master term collective bargaining agreement .

gao management actively consults with ifpte local 1921 ; the employee advisory council - which is comprised of headquarters and field administrative , professional , and support staff ( apss ) , as well as assistant directors in analyst and analyst - related positions , and attorneys - and the diversity advisory council - comprised of diversity representatives of ifpte , local 1921 , and employee liaison groups for employees who are disabled , asian - american , african - american , hispanic , veterans of the armed forces , people over 40 , and advocates for nondiscrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity - to hear and consider employee needs , concerns , and suggestions as they arise .

ifpte , local 1921 ; the employee advisory council ; and the diversity advisory council ( dac ) are the primary mechanisms for fostering collaboration and open communication between gao management and staff .

gao provided all employees with the opportunity to comment on draft orders concerning proposed policies and regulations prior to publication in final form .

these steps were taken in regard to the promulgation of all policies and regulations implementing the provisions of the human capital reform act of 2004 .

the executive committee considered all input from employee advisory council and diversity advisory council members and other gao employees before implementing any changes .

although gao specifically solicited comments from the pab , ifpte local 1921 , the dac , and the eac , only the pab responded to this request with comments .

these are included in appendix i. ifpte local 1921 informed gao management that it will provide its input directly to congress .

the flexibilities provided in the gao human capital reform act of 2004 , along with the human capital flexibilities provided in the 2002 and 2008 acts , have provided gao with the ability to attract and retain high caliber employees so that gao can meet its responsibilities to the congress and the american people .

gao is making no recommendations for legislative change .

