thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on an important satellite acquisition program within the department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

in 2010 , noaa initiated the joint polar satellite system ( jpss ) program with assistance from the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) .

noaa launched the first satellite in the jpss program in october 2011 , and plans to launch the next satellite by march 2017 .

noaa also plans to launch other similar satellites in the future .

the jpss program is critical to the united states' ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting .

according to officials at noaa , a gap in polar satellite data would result in less accurate and timely weather forecasts and warnings of extreme events , such as hurricanes , storm surges , and floods .

such degradation in forecasts and warnings would place lives , property , and our nation's critical infrastructures in danger .

given the criticality of satellite data to weather forecasts , the possibility of a satellite data gap , and the potential impact of a gap , we added this area to our high - risk list in 2013 and it remained on the high - risk list in 2015 .

this statement summarizes a recently issued report and key findings from a draft report on ( 1 ) the status of the jpss program and plans for future satellites , ( 2 ) noaa's efforts to depict and update satellite timelines ; and ( 3 ) the jpss program's implementation of key information security protections .

specifically , this statement is based on a may 2016 report detailing noaa's progress on the jpss satellite program with respect to schedule and key risks , its efforts to plan and implement a follow - on polar satellite program , and the jpss program's implementation of key information security protections .

more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology can be found in the issued report .

this statement is also based on a draft report that includes the results of work we performed for the house committee on appropriations for information on noaa's efforts to depict and update polar satellite timeline information .

for our draft report , we reviewed noaa policies , procedures , and documentation on recent updates to its satellite timelines , compared the timeline updates to other agency documentation and support materials , and interviewed agency officials .

we reviewed information from the draft report with agency officials and made technical changes as appropriate .

this draft report is currently at the department of commerce for official comment .

we expect to issue the report by september 2016 .

the work upon which this statement was based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

since the 1960s , the united states has operated polar - orbiting satellite systems that obtain environmental data to support weather observations and forecasts .

these data are processed to provide graphical weather images and specialized weather products .

data from polar satellites are also the predominant input to numerical weather prediction models , which are a primary tool for forecasting weather days in advance — including forecasting the path and intensity of hurricanes .

these weather products and models are used to predict the potential impact of severe weather so that communities and emergency managers can help prevent and mitigate its effects .

polar - orbiting satellites circle the earth in a nearly north - south orbit , providing global observation of conditions that affect the weather and climate .

each satellite makes about 14 orbits a day .

as the earth rotates beneath it , each polar - orbiting satellite views the entire earth's surface twice a day .

currently , the polar - orbiting satellites that are considered primary satellites for providing input to weather forecasting models are a noaa / nasa satellite ( called suomi national polar - orbiting partnership , or s - npp ) , two department of defense ( dod ) satellites , and a series of european satellites .

these satellites cross the equator in early morning , mid - morning , and early afternoon orbits , with s - npp in the early afternoon orbit .

noaa , the air force , and a european weather satellite organization also maintain older satellites that provide limited backup to these operational satellites .

figure 1 illustrates the current operational polar satellite constellation .

according to noaa , 80 percent of the data assimilated into its national weather service numerical weather prediction models that are used to produce weather forecasts 3 days and beyond are provided by polar - orbiting satellites .

specifically , a single afternoon polar satellite provides noaa 45 percent of the global coverage it needs for its numerical weather models .

noaa obtains the rest of the polar satellite data it needs from other satellite programs , including dod's early morning satellites and the european mid - morning satellite .

noaa is currently executing a major satellite acquisition program to replace existing polar satellite systems that are nearing the end of their expected life spans .

noaa established the jpss program in 2010 after a prior tri - agency program was disbanded due to technical and management challenges , cost growth , and schedule delays .

the jpss program guided the development and launch of the s - npp satellite in 2011 and is responsible for two other planned jpss satellites , known as jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 .

the current anticipated launch dates for these two satellites are march 2017 and december 2021 , respectively .

more recently , noaa has also begun planning the polar follow - on ( pfo ) program , which is to include the development and launch of a third and fourth satellite in the series in july 2026 and july 2031 , respectively .

these are planned to be nearly identical to the jpss - 2 satellite .

noaa has organized the jpss program into flight and ground projects that have separate areas of responsibility .

the flight project includes a set of five instruments , the spacecraft , and launch services .

the ground project consists of ground - based systems that handle satellite communications and data processing .

the ground system's versions are numbered ; the version that is currently in use is called block 1.2 , and the new version that is under development is called block 2.0 .

among other things , block 2.0 is to enable the jpss ground system to support both the s - npp and all planned jpss satellites .

since 2012 , we have issued reports on the jpss program that highlighted technical issues , component cost growth , management challenges , and key risks .

in these reports , we made 15 recommendations to noaa to improve the management of the jpss program .

these recommendations included addressing key risks , establishing a comprehensive contingency plan consistent with best practices , and addressing weaknesses in information security practices .

as we reported in may 2016 , the agency had implemented 2 recommendations and was working to address the remainder .

in particular , noaa established contingency plans to mitigate the possibility of a polar satellite data gap and began tracking completion dates for its gap mitigation activities .

noaa has also taken steps such as performing a new schedule risk analysis , and adding information on the impact of space debris to its annual assessment of satellite availability .

we have ongoing work reviewing the agency's progress in implementing these open recommendations .

over the past year , the jpss program has made progress in developing the jpss - 1 satellite , but continues to face challenges as it approaches the early 2017 launch date .

the program completed all instruments on the jpss - 1 satellite and integrated them on the spacecraft by early 2016 .

as of december 2015 , the jpss program reported that it remained on track to meet its committed launch date of march 2017 .

however , as highlighted in our may 2016 report , the jpss program continues to face challenges as it approaches the early 2017 launch date .

specifically , the jpss program had experienced delays ranging from 3 to 10 months on key components since mid - 2014 , as well as technical challenges on both the flight and ground systems .

for example , the program recently experienced multiple issues in completing a component on the spacecraft , called a gimbal , which moved the component's planned completion date forward by almost a year before it was completed in march 2016 .

these issues in turn delayed the beginning of the jpss - 1 satellite's environmental testing .

the gimbal issue also was a factor in the program choosing to move back its launch readiness date — the date that the jpss - 1 satellite is planned to be ready for launch — from december 2016 to january 2017 .

regarding the jpss ground system , the program experienced an unexpectedly high number of program trouble reports in completing the upgrade to block 2.0 , which is needed for security and requirements improvements in tandem with the jpss - 1 satellite's launch .

a key milestone related to this upgrade was recently delayed from january to august 2016 .

while noaa satellite timelines show continuous coverage in the afternoon orbit , the jpss program still faces the potential for a near - term gap in satellite coverage .

as we reported in may 2016 , noaa had increased the estimated useful life for s - npp by up to 4 years .

under this new scenario , a near - term gap in satellite data would not be expected because s - npp would last longer than the expected start of operations for jpss - 1 .

however , subsequent noaa documentation showed this 4-year period as “fuel limited life.” noaa officials explained that this extended period is based on expected fuel availability , and does not take into account the likelihood that the instruments and spacecraft will fail before the satellite runs out of fuel .

in other words , the extended useful life depicts the satellite's maximum possible life , not its expected life .

as a result , the jpss program continues to face a potential gap of 8 months between the end of s - npp's expected life in october 2016 , and when the jpss - 1 satellite is launched and completes post - launch testing in june 2017 .

figure 2 shows the potential gap period .

the june 2017 completion date also assumes a 3 month period for the jpss - 1 satellite's on - orbit checkout .

however , based on on - orbit checkout periods from past polar satellites , it is likely that checkout could take longer than this , potentially lengthening the gap .

as a precedent , it took the jpss program about 2 years to fully validate the highest - priority data products from the s - npp satellite .

if s - npp unexpectedly fails sooner , or the jpss - 1 launch date is delayed , a longer gap could result .

in addition to its work in completing the jpss - 1 satellite , noaa has begun planning for new satellites to ensure the future continuity of polar satellite data .

in a new program , called the polar follow - on ( pfo ) , noaa plans to build two new satellites , jpss - 3 and jpss - 4 , that are copies of the jpss - 2 satellite .

like jpss - 2 , these satellites are to include all three key performance parameter instruments , as well as a fourth environmental sensor .

noaa plans to complete development of jpss - 3 and jpss - 4 several years ahead of their planned launch date .

in the nearer term , noaa plans to build a smaller satellite that can provide a replacement for some data produced by one of the most essential jpss instruments .

noaa's decisions on what pfo will include are based on what the agency calls a robust constellation , creating a situation where it would take two failures to create a gap on data from key instruments , and where the agency would be able to restore full coverage in a year in the event of a failure .

we reported in may 2016 that noaa has taken several steps in planning the pfo program , including establishing goal launch dates and high - level budget estimates .

however , it had not completed formulation documents such as high - level requirements , a project plan , or budget information for key components .

in addition , uncertainties remain about whether early development of jpss - 3 and jpss - 4 is necessary to achieve robustness .

for instance , in its initial calendar for pfo , noaa considered lifetimes of 10 years or more for the jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 satellites , while noaa charts used for budget justification continue to show only 7 year lifetimes .

if satellites are likely to last longer than expected , there could be unnecessary redundancy in coverage .

until noaa ensures that its plans for future polar satellite development are based on the full range of estimated lives of potential satellites , the agency may not be making the most efficient use of the nation's sizable investment in the polar satellite program .

as a result of this uncertainty , we recommended that noaa evaluate the costs and benefits of different launch scenarios for the jpss pfo program , based on updated satellite life expectancies , to ensure satellite continuity while minimizing program costs .

noaa concurred and noted that it had evaluated the costs and benefits of different launch scenarios using the latest estimates of satellite lives as part of its budget submission .

however , the agency did not provide sufficient supporting evidence or artifacts showing that it had evaluated costs and benefits of launch scenarios in this way .

noaa's national environmental satellite data and information service ( nesdis ) regularly publishes “flyout charts” for its satellites which depict timelines for the launch , on - orbit storage , and operational life of its satellites .

among other things , noaa uses these charts to support budget requests , alert users when new satellites will be operational , and keep the public informed on plans to maintain satellite continuity .

in a draft report currently at the department of commerce for comment , we reported that noaa has updated its polar flyout charts three times in the last 2-and - a - half years .

key changes that can result in an update include adding newly planned satellites ; removing a satellite that has reached the end of its life ; and adjusting planned dates for when satellites are to launch , begin operations , or reach the end of their useful lives .

among the data noaa uses in updating its charts are health status information of operational satellites , planned schedules for new satellites , and analysis from operational satellite experts .

however , while noaa regularly updates its charts and most of the data on them were aligned with other program documentation , the agency has not consistently ensured that its charts were accurate , supported by stringent analysis , and fully documented .

specifically: the charts were at times inconsistent with other program data .

for example , in one out of 10 available instances for comparison , flyout chart data did not match underlying program data .

jpss program data as of april 2015 listed the jpss - 2 satellite launch as november 2021 , but the flyout chart from that month showed it 4 months earlier , in july 2021 .

the flyout charts also inconsistently reflected data from annual satellite availability assessments performed by the jpss program .

in addition , weaknesses remained in the latest annual availability assessment from 2015 .

for example , noaa assumed that jpss - 1 data from key instruments will be available to users 3 months after launch .

however , based on on - orbit checkout periods from past polar satellites , it is likely that checkout could take much longer than this , potentially lengthening the gap .

noaa did not consistently document the justification for updates to its polar satellite flyout charts .

for example , the noaa department responsible for providing summary packages for each flyout chart update provided justification for the key changes in only one of three documentation packages .

furthermore , standard summary documents , such as a routing list and information on the disposition of comments , were included for only one of the three documentation packages for polar flyout charts .

noaa also does not consistently depict how long a satellite might last once it is beyond its design life .

for instance , nesdis , the noaa entity responsible for satellite operations , recently added a 4-year extension to the useful life of the s - npp satellite .

this extension was meant to depict maximum potential life , assuming all instruments and the spacecraft continue functioning .

however , the agency did not clearly define this term on its charts , thereby allowing readers to assume the agency expects the satellites to last through the end of the fuel - limited life period .

also , as stated above , in its justification for funding for the pfo program , noaa considered lifetimes for jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 to be longer by several years when compared to the lifetimes listed on its flyout charts .

program officials indicated that the estimates they develop prior to a satellite's launch are more conservative due to greater uncertainty at that stage .

however , inconsistencies such as these have the effect of implying that some satellites will reach their end - of - life sooner or later than the agency anticipates .

part of the reason for these process shortfalls is that noaa has not finalized a policy with standard steps to follow when making chart updates .

consequently , the information that noaa provides congress on the flyout charts is not as accurate as it needs to be , which could result in less - than - optimal decisions .

furthermore , lack of communication of the potential ambiguities inherent in changes to satellite lifetimes could have major effects on future decision - making .

to address these weaknesses , our draft report includes a series of recommendations to noaa , including requiring satellite programs to perform regular assessments of satellite availability , implementing a consistent approach to depicting satellites beyond their design lives , and revising and finalizing the policy for updating flyout charts .

safeguarding federal computer systems and systems supporting national infrastructure is essential to protecting public health and safety .

federal law and guidance specify requirements for protecting federal information and information systems .

in particular , the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) requires executive branch agencies to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program .

fisma also requires the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to develop standards and guidelines for agencies to use in categorizing their information systems and minimum requirements for each category .

accordingly , nist developed a risk management framework of standards and guidelines to follow in developing information security programs .

figure 3 shows an overview of the steps in this framework , including components of the risk management lifecycle as well as key activities and artifacts .

as we reported in may 2016 , noaa had established information security policies in key areas detailed by fisma and recommended by nist guidance and the jpss program had made progress in implementing these policies .

however , we found that the program had weaknesses in several areas related to its ground system which , if not addressed , could put the jpss ground system at high risk of compromise .

key controls not fully implemented .

the jpss program , using nist guidance on system categorization , identified its ground system as a high - impact system , meaning that a loss of confidentiality , integrity , or availability could be expected to have a catastrophic effect on operations , and identified needed security controls based on this classification .

however , the program had fully implemented only 53 percent of required security controls , and had fully implemented controls in only one area .

limitations in controls assessment .

the program developed an assessment plan to identify weaknesses in the controls established by the program , and implemented the assessment .

however , the assessment had significant limitations , including inconsistencies in maintaining a valid inventory , uncertainty about the physical locations for program components , and a discrepancy between the inventory used for testing and the actual live inventory of the program's systems .

delay in fixing critical weaknesses .

in accordance with noaa policy , the program established plans of action and milestones to address control weaknesses in both the current and future version of its ground system , and had made progress in addressing many of its security weaknesses through this process .

however , many vulnerabilities remain unaddressed because the program did not comply with department of commerce policy to remediate critical and high - risk vulnerabilities within 30 days .

as of its 2015 assessment of program controls , the jpss program had 146 critical and 951 high - risk vulnerabilities on the current iteration of the ground system , and 102 critical and 295 high - risk vulnerabilities on the next iteration of the ground system .

vulnerabilities remaining open include instances of outdated software , an obsolete web server , as well as more than 200 instances of use of outdated definitions used to scan and identify viruses .

figure 4 graphically shows the number of open vulnerabilities on the current jpss ground system over time .

without addressing these vulnerabilities in a timely manner , the program remains at increased risk of potential exploits .

security incidents reported but not consistently tracked .

in accordance with noaa policy , the jpss program established a continuous monitoring plan to track security incidents and intrusions and to ensure that information security controls are working .

specifically , noaa officials reported 10 medium and high - severity incidents related to the jpss ground system , including incidents involving unauthorized access to web servers and computers , between august 2014 and august 2015 .

of these , noaa closed 6 incidents involving hostile probes , improper usage , unauthorized access , password sharing , and other it - related security concerns .

however , the agency did not consistently track all incidents .

specifically , there were differences between what is being tracked by the jpss program , and what is closed by noaa's incident response team .

for example , 2 of the 4 incidents that were recommended for closure by the jpss program office are currently still open according to the incident report .

until noaa and the jpss program have a consistent understanding of the status of incidents , there is an increased risk that key vulnerabilities will not be identified or properly addressed .

to address these deficiencies , we recommended in our may 2016 report that the secretary of commerce direct the administrator of noaa to establish a plan to address the limitations in the program's efforts to test security controls , including ensuring that ( 1 ) any changes in the system's inventory do not materially affect test results ; ( 2 ) critical and high - risk vulnerabilities are addressed within 30 days , as required by agency policy ; and ( 3 ) the agency and program are tracking and closing a consistent set of incident response activities .

noaa concurred with our recommendations .

regarding critical and high - risk vulnerabilities , noaa noted that the jpss program would continue to follow agency policy allowing its authorizing official to accept risks when remediation cannot be performed as anticipated .

however , the program did not have documentation from the authorizing official accepting the risk of a delayed remediation schedule for critical and high - risk vulnerabilities .

in summary , noaa is making progress in developing and testing the jpss - 1 satellite as it moves toward a march 2017 launch date , but continues to experience issues in remaining ground system development , and faces a potential near - term data gap in the period before this satellite becomes operational .

in addition , noaa is planning to launch a future set of satellites to ensure continuity of future satellite data , but it is uncertain which launch timing will best meet the agency's criteria for a robust constellation .

without ensuring that its plans for future satellite development are based on the full range of estimated lives of potential satellites , the agency may not be making the most efficient use of the nation's sizable investment in the polar satellite program .

further , findings from a draft report show that noaa's efforts to depict and update key polar satellite information , such as timelines and operational life , need to be improved .

its flyout charts , used to inform users of potential gaps and support budget requests , did not always accurately reflect current program data or consistently present key information , such as a satellite's lifetime once beyond its original design life .

this is in part because noaa has not finalized a policy that includes standard steps for updating its charts .

until noaa addresses these shortfalls , it runs an increased risk that its flyout charts will mislead congress and may lead to less - than - optimal decisions .

as a part of jpss ground system development , noaa has established policies in key information security areas called for by guidance .

however , the program has not fully implemented the policy in several areas .

for example , the program fully implemented just over half of its required security controls , a recent security assessment itself had significant limitations , and the program has not remediated critical and high - risk vulnerabilities in a timely manner .

until noaa addresses these weaknesses , the jpss ground system remains at high risk of compromise .

chairman bridenstine , ranking member bonamici , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov .

other contributors include colleen phillips ( assistant director ) , shaun byrnes ( analyst - in - charge ) , christopher businsky , torrey hardee , lee mccracken , and umesh thakkar .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

