i am pleased to be here today as you discuss the medicare part d prescription drug benefit .

implementation of this new drug benefit has raised particular concerns for individuals eligible for both medicare and full medicaid benefits — known as dual - eligible beneficiaries .

these individuals account for about 15 percent of all medicare beneficiaries and 15 percent of all medicaid enrollees .

as a group , they are generally poorer and tend to have more extensive health care needs than other medicare beneficiaries .

under the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) , dual - eligible beneficiaries — who previously received drug benefits under medicaid — have had their prescription drug costs paid under medicare part d since january 1 , 2006 .

in addition , the mma requires the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) to assist dual - eligible beneficiaries by enrolling them in a private medicare prescription drug plan ( pdp ) if they do not select a plan on their own .

cms enrolled about 5.5 million dual - eligible beneficiaries in late 2005 for the initial implementation of part d and about 634,000 beneficiaries who became dual - eligible during 2006 .

my testimony today will summarize selected findings from the previously released gao report , medicare part d: challenges in enrolling new dual - eligible beneficiaries .

specifically , my remarks today will focus on ( 1 ) cms's process for enrolling new dual - eligible beneficiaries into pdps and its effect on beneficiary access to drugs and ( 2 ) how cms set the effective part d coverage date for certain dual - eligible beneficiaries and its implementation of this policy .

to address these issues , we conducted site visits in six states — california , maine , maryland , michigan , new jersey , and texas — to learn about dual - eligible beneficiaries' enrollment in part d from the perspective of state medicaid agencies , pharmacies , and long - term care providers .

we also interviewed officials from cms and representatives of pdps about issues that pertain to dual - eligible beneficiaries .

we conducted the work for our report from march 2006 through april 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in summary , we found that cms's process for enrolling new dual - eligible beneficiaries involves many parties , information systems , and administrative steps , and takes a minimum of 5 weeks to complete .

for the majority of these individuals — generally medicare beneficiaries not yet enrolled in part d who subsequently qualify for medicaid — this processing interval can create difficulties in obtaining part d - covered drugs at their pharmacies .

for other new dual - eligible beneficiaries — medicaid enrollees who become medicare eligible because of age or disability — cms took steps to eliminate the impact of the processing interval by enrolling them in pdps just prior to their attaining medicare eligibility .

in addition , for the medicare first , medicaid second group of new dual - eligible beneficiaries , cms set the effective date of part d coverage to coincide with the first date of their medicaid eligibility .

under this policy , which was designed to provide drug coverage for dual - eligible beneficiaries as soon as they attain dual - eligible status , the start of their part d coverage can be retroactively set to several months before the date of their actual pdp enrollment .

we found that cms did not fully implement or monitor the impact of this coverage date policy .

although beneficiaries are entitled to reimbursement for covered drug costs incurred during this retroactive period , cms and pdps did not begin informing them of this right until march 2007 .

also , cms did not track medicare payments made to pdps to provide retroactive coverage or monitor pdps' reimbursements to beneficiaries for that period .

we estimate that in 2006 , medicare paid pdps about $100 million for coverage during periods for which dual - eligible beneficiaries may not have sought reimbursement for their drug costs .

in the report , we recommend that cms require pdps to notify beneficiaries about their right to reimbursement , monitor implementation of its retroactive payment policy , and take other steps to improve the operational efficiency of the program .

dual - eligible beneficiaries are a particularly vulnerable population .

these individuals are typically poorer , tend to have far more extensive health care needs , have higher rates of cognitive impairments , and are more likely to be disabled than other medicare beneficiaries .

about three out of four dual - eligible beneficiaries live in the community and typically obtain drugs through retail pharmacies .

other dual - eligible beneficiaries reside in long - term care facilities and obtain drugs through pharmacies that specifically serve these facilities .

in general , individuals become dual - eligible beneficiaries in two ways .

one way is when medicare - eligible individuals subsequently become medicaid eligible .

this typically occurs when income and resources of beneficiaries fall below certain levels and they enroll in the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , or they incur medical costs that reduce their income below medicaid eligibility thresholds .

if these medicare beneficiaries did not sign up for a part d plan on their own , they have no drug coverage until they are enrolled in a pdp by cms .

cms data show that this group represented about two - thirds of new dual - eligible beneficiaries the agency enrolled in pdps in 2006 .

according to cms , it is not possible for it to predict which medicare beneficiaries will become medicaid eligible in any given month because medicaid eligibility determinations are a state function .

another way individuals become dually eligible is when medicaid beneficiaries subsequently become eligible for medicare by reaching 65 years of age or by completing the 24-month disability waiting period .

once they become dual - eligible beneficiaries , they can no longer receive coverage from state medicaid agencies for their part d - covered prescription drugs .

in 2006 , this group represented approximately one - third of the new dual - eligible beneficiaries enrolled in pdps by cms .

cms can generally learn from states when these individuals will become dually eligible .

for dual - eligible beneficiaries , medicare provides a low - income subsidy that covers most of their out - of - pocket costs for part d drug coverage .

this subsidy covers the full amount of the monthly premium that non - subsidy - eligible beneficiaries normally pay , up to the low - income benchmark premium .

the subsidy also covers most or all of a dual - eligible beneficiary's prescription copayments .

in 2007 , these beneficiaries are responsible for copayments that range from $1 to $5.35 per prescription , depending on their income and asset levels , with the exception of those in long - term care facilities , who pay no copayments .

given the number of entities , information systems , and administrative steps involved , it takes a minimum of 5 weeks for cms to identify and enroll a new dual - eligible beneficiary in a pdp .

as a result , two out of three new dual - eligible beneficiaries — generally those who are medicare eligible and then become medicaid eligible — may experience difficulties obtaining their prescription drugs under part d during this interval .

for other new dual - eligible beneficiaries — those switching from medicaid to medicare drug coverage — cms instituted a prospective enrollment process in late 2006 that enrolls these individuals before their date of medicare eligibility and offers a seamless transition to part d coverage .

multiple parties and information systems are involved in identifying and enrolling dual - eligible beneficiaries in pdps .

as shown in figure 1 , cms , the social security administration ( ssa ) , state medicaid agencies , and pdp sponsors play key roles in providing information needed to ensure that new dual - eligible beneficiaries are identified and enrolled properly .

ssa maintains information on medicare eligibility that is used by cms and some states .

state medicaid agencies are responsible for forwarding to cms lists of beneficiaries whom the state believes to be eligible for both medicare and medicaid .

cms is then responsible for making plan assignments and processing enrollments .

pdp sponsors maintain information systems that are responsible for exchanging enrollment and billing information with cms .

the process of enrolling dual - eligible beneficiaries requires several steps .

it begins when state medicaid agencies identify new dual - eligible beneficiaries and ends when pdps make billing information available to pharmacies and send enrollment information to dual - eligible beneficiaries .

we estimate that it takes at least 5 weeks to complete the process under current procedures .

during this interval , pharmacies may not have up - to - date pdp enrollment information on new dual - eligible individuals .

this may result in beneficiaries having difficulty obtaining part d - covered drugs at their pharmacies .

to illustrate why this occurs , we present the hypothetical example of mr. smith , who as a medicare beneficiary did not sign up for the part d drug benefit and , therefore , upon becoming medicaid eligible , was enrolled in a pdp by cms .

 ( fig .

2 shows the steps in mr. smith's enrollment process. ) .

from the time mr. smith applies for his state's medicaid program on august 11 , it takes about 1 month for him to receive notification from the state that he is eligible for medicaid , thus beginning the enrollment process .

from there , mr. smith's new status is submitted by his state to cms in a monthly file transmittal .

once cms receives the lists of dual - eligible beneficiaries from all of the states , it verifies eligibility for medicare and sets each beneficiary's cost - sharing level .

then , around october 8 , cms assigns mr. smith to a pdp randomly , based on the premium level and the geographic area served by the pdp .

cms next notifies the pdp sponsor , which then has to enroll him in its plan and assign the necessary billing information .

this billing information , such as a member identification number , is necessary for pharmacies to correctly bill the pdp for mr. smith's prescriptions .

the pdp also has to inform mr. smith of his enrollment information .

by the time this process is completed , it is the middle of october .

cms has developed some contingency measures to help individuals like mr. smith during the processing interval .

however , we found that these measures have not always worked effectively .

for instance , cms designed an enrollment contingency option to ensure that dual - eligible beneficiaries who were not yet enrolled in a pdp could get their medications covered under part d , while also providing assurance that the pharmacy would be reimbursed for those medications .

however , representatives of pharmacy associations we spoke with reported problems with reimbursements after using this option , which has led some pharmacies to stop using it .

to avoid a gap in coverage for beneficiaries transitioning from medicaid to medicare prescription drug coverage , cms has implemented a prospective enrollment process .

because states can predict and notify cms which medicaid beneficiaries will become new dual - eligible beneficiaries and when , cms begins the enrollment process for these individuals 2 months before the their anticipated dual - eligible status is attained .

by conducting the processing steps early , the prospective enrollment used for this group of new dual - eligible beneficiaries should ensure a seamless transition from medicaid drug coverage to medicare part d coverage .

fully implemented in november 2006 , prospective enrollment applies to about one - third of the new dual - eligible beneficiaries enrolled in pdps by cms .

for the majority of new dual - eligible beneficiaries , cms requires pdps to provide drug coverage retroactively , typically by several months .

during 2006 , medicare paid pdps millions of dollars to provide coverage to dual - eligible beneficiaries for drug costs that may have been incurred during the retroactive coverage period .

however , we found that cms did not fully implement or monitor the impact of this policy .

cms made the effective date of part d drug coverage for medicare beneficiaries who become medicaid eligible coincide with the effective date of their medicaid eligibility .

under this policy , part d coverage for these beneficiaries is effective the first day of the month that medicaid eligibility is effective , which generally occurs 3 months prior to the date an individual's medicaid application was submitted to the state , if the individual was eligible for medicaid during this time .

thus , the part d coverage period can extend retroactively back several months from when the actual pdp enrollment takes place .

medicare makes payments to the pdps for providing drug coverage retroactively .

specifically , pdps are paid approximately $90 per month for the retroactive coverage period .

pdps , in turn , are responsible for reimbursing their members ( or another payer ) for part d drug costs incurred during the retroactive months .

for instance , in the case of mr. smith , while he applied for medicaid in august and learned of his pdp assignment for part d in october , his coverage was effective may 1 .

if mr. smith incurred any costs for part d - covered prescription drugs from may — when he became eligible for medicaid — through october , he could submit his receipts to his assigned pdp and be reimbursed by the pdp , less the copayments he would pay as a dual - eligible beneficiary .

we found that cms's implementation of this policy in 2006 was incomplete .

while dual - eligible beneficiaries were entitled to reimbursement by their pdps in 2006 , neither cms nor pdps notified dual - eligible beneficiaries of this right .

the model letters used until march 2007 to inform dual - eligible beneficiaries of their pdp enrollment did not include any language concerning reimbursement of out - of - pocket costs incurred during retroactive coverage periods .

in response to a recommendation in our report , cms modified the model letters that the agency and pdps use to notify dual - eligible beneficiaries about their pdp enrollment .

the revised letters let beneficiaries know that they may be eligible for reimbursement of some prescription costs incurred during retroactive coverage periods .

given the vulnerability of this population , it seems unlikely that many dual - eligible beneficiaries would have contacted their pdps for reimbursement if they were not clearly informed of their right to do so and given information about how to file for reimbursement , neither would they likely have retained proof of their drug expenditures .

mr. smith , for example , would need receipts for drug purchases made during a 5-month period preceding the date he was notified of his pdp enrollment — at a time when he could not foresee the need for doing so .

further , cms did not monitor how many months of retroactive coverage pdps provided , nor did it monitor pdp reimbursements to beneficiaries for costs incurred during retroactive coverage periods .

based on data provided by cms , we estimate that medicare paid about $100 million to pdp sponsors in 2006 for retroactive coverage .

cms does not know what portion of this $100 million pdps paid to dual - eligible beneficiaries to reimburse them for drug costs .

if mr. smith's pdp did not reimburse mr. smith for any prescription drugs purchased during the retroactive coverage period , the pdp retained medicare's payments for that period .

given the time it takes to complete the enrollment process , cms has taken action to ensure ready access to part d for some new dual - eligible beneficiaries , but difficulties remain for others .

for the one - third of new dual - eligible beneficiaries whose eligibility can be predicted , cms's decision to implement prospective enrollment should eliminate the coverage gap in transitioning from medicaid to medicare drug coverage .

however , because of inherent processing lags , most new dual - eligible beneficiaries may continue to experience difficulties obtaining their drugs for at least 5 weeks after being notified of their dual - eligible status .

in addition , cms's incomplete implementation of its retroactive coverage policy in 2006 means that cms paid pdps millions of dollars for coverage during periods for which dual - eligible beneficiaries may not have sought reimbursement for their drug costs .

without routine monitoring of this policy , the agency remains unaware of what portion of these funds was subsequently reimbursed to beneficiaries and , therefore , cannot ensure the efficient use of program funds .

our report contains several recommendations .

we recommend that cms require pdps to notify beneficiaries of their right to reimbursement and monitor implementation of its retroactive payment policy .

we also recommend that cms take other steps to improve the operational efficiency of the program .

although the agency did not agree with all of them , it has already taken steps to implement some of our recommendations .

as of march 2007 , cms has modified its letters to dual - eligible beneficiaries to include language informing them of their right to reimbursement for drug costs incurred during retroactive coverage periods and required pdp sponsors to do the same .

in addition , cms officials told us that they plan to analyze data to determine the magnitude of payments made to pdps for retroactive coverage and the amounts pdps have paid to beneficiaries .

we hope that cms will use this information to evaluate the effectiveness of its retroactive coverage policy .

if , after conducting the analysis , cms determines that it is paying pdps substantial amounts of money and dual - eligible beneficiaries are not requesting reimbursements , the agency may want to rethink its policy in light of pursuing the most efficient use of medicare funds .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact kathleen king at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or kingk@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

contributors to this testimony include rosamond katz , assistant director ; lori achman ; and samantha poppe .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

