the access to the region's core ( arc ) project was a planned commuter rail project designed to help address the problem of increasing travel demand between new jersey and new york city .

current tunnel , bridge , and rail infrastructure serving this corridor is already at or near capacity ; this increase in travel demand , fueled by population growth in the region west of manhattan and employment within manhattan , could result in more congestion and greater delays for commuters .

the planned project was to connect existing rail lines , build two tunnels under the hudson river , and expand new york penn station .

however , on october 27 , 2010 , the governor of new jersey , citing potential cost growth and the state's financial condition , withdrew state support and cancelled the project .

the new jersey transit ( njt ) and other project sponsors began planning for the project in 1995 , and in 2003 , completed the first major planning study , which assessed numerous alternative solutions to the problem of constrained capacity and possible routes under and across the hudson river .

the project was further developed through the federal environmental impact review process , completed in 2009 .

in addition , both njt and local planning organizations conducted various studies of the expected transportation and economic impacts of the project .

cost estimates were developed throughout the planning process , but the final estimate and funding commitments were still under discussion between new jersey and the federal transit administration ( fta ) when the project was cancelled .

as requested , this report addresses the following questions: ( 1 ) what did major planning studies find would have been the estimated mobility , economic , and environmental impacts of the arc project ? .

 ( 2 ) what have been the arc project cost estimates over time , who developed those estimates , and what sources of funding were identified ? .

 ( 3 ) how , if at all , did documents prepared as part of fta's new starts funding process address potential cost growth for the arc project ? .

to address these questions , we reviewed all major planning studies we also prepared for the project and fta reports about the project.reviewed planning and economic analyses of the project done by njt and outside organizations .

we examined the methodologies used by the studies and determined that the studies were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our report .

we reviewed documents from njt and fta that provided or discussed various project cost estimates .

we interviewed officials from federal , state , and local agencies ; private planning organizations ; and academia ; specifically , fta , amtrak , office of the governor of new jersey , office of the attorney general of new jersey , njt , the port authority of new york and new jersey ( port authority ) , new york metropolitan transportation council , north jersey transportation planning authority , regional plan association , tri - state transportation campaign , and rutgers university .

in addition , to determine how potential cost growth was addressed , we reviewed various declarations submitted in connection with njt's response to fta's demand for repayment of expended project funds , the general project agreement between njt and the port authority , and fta's financial assessment of njt's financial plan that was submitted as part of the application to advance the project to its final design .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2011 through march 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

during our review , we suspended our work for about 6 weeks until the resolution of a dispute between the department of transportation and new jersey concerning the repayment of federal funds already spent on planning the project .

commuter demand and congestion between new jersey and new york city across the hudson river is projected to increase as the limited passenger rail infrastructure continues to age , highlighting the need for improvements to the trans - hudson commuter rail system into manhattan .

planning agencies have forecasted that , fueled by population growth in regions west of the hudson river and employment within manhattan , demand for mass transit service crossing the hudson river between new jersey and nearby counties in new york and midtown manhattan will grow by about 38 percent by 2030 .

this could result in more congestion and longer delays on existing roads , bridges , passenger rail , and other public transportation modes crossing the hudson river .

at the same time , the aging passenger rail infrastructure — comprising two single - track tunnels under the hudson river leading to new york penn station — limits commuter rail capacity into manhattan .

the 100-year - old tunnels cannot meet the access and mobility demands of the future , given the projected growth in the region .

in 1995 , the three major local transit agencies — njt , the port authority , and the metropolitan transportation authority — jointly conducted a major investment study to consider ways to improve access between midtown manhattan and the growing population west of the hudson river .

they evaluated more than 100 alternatives , including commuter railroad , bus , light rail , subway , automobile , and ferry .

the study , completed in 2003 , recommended three alternatives for advancement to the federal environment impact process .

while these alternatives would have provided more train capacity and were expected to meet projected demand , they did not share all of the elements of the final arc project .

in the draft environmental impact statement , published in 2007 , njt identified the alternative that became the final arc project .

project development and refinements continued until completion of the environmental review process and entry of the project into final design in 2009 .

figure 1 shows the new tracks , tunnel , and station that the project would have built .

in addition , the project would have added a yard in new jersey for storing trains that are not in service during the middle of the day , five station entrances at the new york penn station expansion , and three elevator entrances that met the americans with disabilities act requirements .

njt applied for federal funding for a portion of arc costs through fta's new starts program.agencies on a largely competitive basis primarily for the construction of new fixed - guideway transit systems and the expansion of existing fixed - guideway systems .

federal funding for the construction of new starts projects is committed in a full funding grant agreement , which is a under this program , funding is directed to public multiyear funding agreement between the federal government and a public agency .

although the arc project was cancelled prior to obtaining a full funding grant agreement , fta provided some federal funding for preliminary engineering , final design , and a portion of construction costs for the project .

the construction funding was provided through an early system work agreement .

appendix i provides an overview of the new starts process .

while njt sponsored the project and would have been the prime operator of services on the completed project , state and local funding for arc would have come from the new jersey turnpike authority and the port authority .

as part of the federal planning process for transportation , the region's two metropolitan planning organizations — the north jersey transportation planning authority and the new york metropolitan transportation council — adopted the project into their metropolitan transportation improvement plans , as required for federal funding .

while the new jersey governor had affirmed support for the arc project in an april 6 , 2010 , letter to the secretary of transportation , on october 27 , 2010 , the governor announced the cancellation of the project , citing potential cost growth and the state's fiscal condition .

at the time of cancellation , njt had completed most of the requirements needed to obtain additional federal funding .

in particular , njt had completed an in - depth environmental review and received fta's commitment of $601 million in new starts funds to pay for initial construction activities .

at the time of cancellation , njt was negotiating the final cost estimate of the project with fta in order to obtain the full funding grant agreement .

this agreement would have provided the commitment for the full federal share of funds for the project .

according to the studies we reviewed , the arc project would have provided a significant increase in rail capacity for moving commuters between new jersey and new york .

njt and other planning organization officials said that increases in capacity were a key mobility benefit of the project .

the tunnel would have added two train tracks under the hudson river , and as a result: the number of trans - hudson peak hour trains ( from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. ) would have more than doubled — from 23 to 48 trains per hour .

the peak hour use of passenger capacity would have decreased from a near - capacity 95 percent to 60 percent at completion , providing additional capacity to accommodate future passenger growth .

the benefits of other planned njt rail expansions would have been enhanced .

with this increase in capacity , projections made as part of the project's environmental study showed an anticipated increase in transit ridership as follows: daily trips between new jersey and new york penn station would have increased from about 174,000 without the project to about 254,000 ( a 46 percent increase ) with the project by 2030 .

considering the effects on other transit facilities , the project would have generated about 32,500 new daily transit trips across the hudson by 2030 .

the arc project would have reduced the need for passengers to transfer between trains , meaning many riders could commute on only one train .

passenger transfers lengthen commuting times and avoiding transfers provides a benefit to riders .

as a result of the arc project , it was estimated that: five existing njt lines would have no longer required passengers to transfer trains to get to manhattan .

daily passenger transfers would have declined from about 32,100 without the project to 1,000 with the project , a 97 percent reduction , as estimated in the environmental study .

riders travelling between new jersey and manhattan would have experienced an average of 23 minutes of travel time savings per trip .

by building a second rail tunnel between new jersey and manhattan , the arc project would have increased the overall reliability of rail service and added flexibility during service disruptions .

a disruption of service in the existing njt tunnel for any reason can result in major delays .

currently , one 15-minute train disruption in the existing tunnel can delay as many as 15 other njt and amtrak trains .

the arc project would have provided: flexibility to reroute trains from one tunnel to the other , if necessary .

continuous weekend service as new tunnels could remain open during tunnel maintenance .

 ( currently , with only one tunnel , traffic must be limited to perform necessary maintenance. ) .

better reliability , allowing for faster transit .

average scheduled time from newark , new jersey , to manhattan would decrease by 5 minutes during peak times and 3.5 minutes off - peak .

even with the added trans - hudson commuters , the environmental study found that the new station would have reduced crowding at the adjacent new york penn station: average passenger egress time from new york penn station would have decreased from 80 to 60 seconds ( a 25 percent decrease ) .

the new station would have resulted in a projected decrease in peak hour ridership at new york penn station of 37 percent — from about 27,800 passengers without the project to 17,200 with the project in 2030 — thus alleviating crowding .

additionally , the environmental study estimated that , in general , the increased rail capacity across the hudson river would have reduced the amount of travel by automobile that would otherwise occur .

port authority officials told us that this increased rail capacity would help ease road congestion for trans - hudson commutes .

specifically , the study projected that by 2030: daily trans - hudson automobile trips would be reduced by about 22,100 trips , or 4.9 percent , compared to the number of automobile trips without the project .

daily automobile vehicle miles traveled would have been reduced by about 590,000 miles compared to vehicle miles traveled without the project .

daily automobile vehicle hours traveled would have been reduced by about 22,000 hours compared to vehicle hours traveled without the project .

according to the environmental study , mobility may further deteriorate without the arc project .

the new york city region faces serious mobility issues and , as we have mentioned previously in this report , travel demand is projected to increase significantly .

environmental study forecasts estimated that trans - hudson transit travel demand would rise from about 550,000 riders in 2005 to about 760,000 in 2030 , an increase of about 38 percent .

without the tunnel , the environmental study projected that demand would not be met , and congestion and delays would increase .

all the major trans - hudson crossings — njt , the port authority trans - hudson ( path ) , and vehicular tunnels and bridges — are at or near capacity .

according to the environmental study , the increased demand would stress the entire transportation network , including roadway , bus , ferry , and commuter rail systems .

however , it is difficult to precisely determine the long - term effects of not building the tunnel because various other agencies are building , planning , or exploring the possibility of transportation improvements that could affect overall mobility in the region .

local transportation officials cited a number of projects that could affect congestion and commutes in the region , although some are at the conceptual phase , and may or may not be built .

possible projects include the extension of a subway line from new york city to new jersey , amtrak's proposal to add a train line from new jersey into new york city , bridge and transit tunnel improvements , a new bus terminal , and improvements to help freight flows into new york .

thus , the overall effect of canceling the arc project must be understood in the regional context , and the effect is dependent on what transpires with these other projects .

studies estimated the arc project would have generated economic activity in the region that would have affected jobs and personal income , business activity , and home values , among other things .

most of the economic effects were expected during the building phase of the project .

the studies we reviewed used regional economic models to measure the economic effects .

however , the results of these models depend on larger economic conditions , such as the level of unemployment .

the results cannot be regarded as certain in all economic conditions .

the studies addressed several aspects of economic activity as follows: jobs and personal income .

the environmental study estimated that during construction the arc project would have provided about 59,900 jobs directly onsite and total additional employment in the region of about 98,300 jobs .

the environmental study also suggested that over the longer term , the rail line would have required an estimated 410 jobs directly in transportation .

another study estimated that the project would generate about 5,700 construction - related jobs each year during the 9-year construction.years after completion of the project , the same study estimated the region would gain 44,000 new jobs as a result of improved access , which would make the region more competitive compared to other in addition , 10 the same study estimated that 10 years after completion , regions.the project would have added almost $4 billion in personal income to the region , in 2006 dollars .

business activity .

the arc environmental study estimated the project would have produced an additional $9 billion in business activity during construction and $120 million per year in business activity over the long term .

home values .

another study estimated that houses in new jersey communities served by the arc project would see an average increase in home value of $19,000 , or 4.2 percent , resulting from more efficient local travel and improved access to high paying jobs in new york city .

tax revenues .

studies also indicated that increased tax revenues would have resulted from the increases in economic activity from the arc project .

the environmental study estimated that during construction , $1.5 billion in federal , state , and local taxes would have been generated , as well as an additional $16 million annually after the project was completed .

another study estimated that the project would result in an additional $375 million each year in property taxes generated by local governments .

ibid .

growth may simply shift to another part of the region or nation .

third , the project's economic impact also depends on how it was financed .

deficit financing — borrowing — provides an increase in the total amount of spending , which will have economic effects .

in contrast , financing the project through taxes means that existing government and household spending to some extent is simply directed a certain way , rather than increasing the total amount of such spending .

analyzing the impact of the project in the context of these variables — the unemployment rate when the project is being built and project financing — was beyond the scope of the studies we reviewed .

the net impact on housing prices is also difficult to assess .

first , the analyses — done several years ago — may not fully capture the effects of recent declines in the housing market .

second , impacts on the housing market throughout the metropolitan area would , to some extent , reflect population shifts — some house prices may go up as a consequence of improved access to transit , while prices in other less desirable locations may go down .

however , shifting the location of households and business activity does not necessarily expand the overall economy .

also , benefits to homeowners and commuters from the project would significantly overlap , since they are to some extent the same people ; that is , the change in a homeowner's real estate value is the result of the improvement in travel time .

finally , even though the project was cancelled , all of the anticipated economic activity was not necessarily lost .

for example , according to port authority officials , the port authority redirected funds it had allocated to the arc project to other projects in the region , which could increase employment and economic activity tied to those projects .

likewise , funds that new jersey planned to allocate to the arc project were reallocated to the state's highway trust fund , which would then support economic activity related to highway projects .

however , these highway projects would not necessarily be in the new york city region .

the arc environmental study estimated the project would have created limited , but mostly positive environmental effects .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

the primary positive effect would have been a long - term reduction in air pollution , although it is difficult to predict how much this reduction in pollutants would affect the entire new york city region .

air quality effects are of particular relevance in the development of transit projects .

fta , pursuant to law , includes whether a project is in an area that has not attained air quality standards required by the clean air act as a factor in selecting projects for the new starts program .

according to the environmental protection agency , the entire new york city region is out of compliance with certain ambient air quality standards that are designed to protect public health .

the project would reduce automobile trips and thereby decrease emissions that contribute to existing air quality problems in the region and related public health problems .

according to the environmental protection agency , adverse health effects associated with air pollutants include increased respiratory symptoms , hospitalization for heart or lung disease , and premature death .

local transportation agency officials told us that air quality factors were important when considering the potential environmental effects of the arc project .

over the long term , air quality would have been positively affected due to an estimated overall daily decrease of about 590,000 in vehicle miles traveled in the region and about 22,100 fewer trans - hudson vehicle trips .

while longterm air quality effects were generally positive in nature , the results of these changes would be dispersed over the entire metropolitan area , and were too difficult to estimate for the new york region , as noted in the environmental study .

according to the environmental study , other adverse environmental effects would have been short term and mitigated .

among the environmental effects were negative effects on air quality , mainly related to dust created by excavation and construction and exhaust emissions from equipment , noise , potential storm water runoff , vibration , potential soil erosion , and potential disturbance of various contaminated sites .

fta determined that these short - term negative effects were adequately addressed by mitigation plans .

in 2003 , the first cost estimates for the concept of a new commuter rail tunnel between new jersey and new york — developed by njt and other local agencies in the major investment study — ranged from $2.9 billion to $3.6 billion ( in year 2000 dollars ) .

these estimates were for a project that was largely conceptual and did not rely on significant engineering design work .

further , not all project costs and elements were included in these estimates .

in 2006 , after the sponsoring agencies selected a locally preferred alternative , fta accepted $7.4 billion as the first cost estimate for the project .

this estimate included an expanded new york penn station as well as construction , engineering , oversight , and management costs ; operational systems ; rolling stock ; real estate ; startup cost ; and environmental mitigation .

arc project cost estimates increased over time as shown in table 1 .

in general , changes in cost estimates throughout the process of planning and designing a transportation project are normal and may happen for a number of reasons.paper to final design and construction , a more accurate understanding of what a project entails may evolve .

the change in cost estimates may reflect a more accurate understanding of what actually constitutes the first , as a project progresses from a concept on project .

for example , according to port authority officials , early in the project they learned that there were no existing surveys of new york penn station , and they had to survey the station before detailed designs could be developed .

as shown in figure 3 , cost estimates are more uncertain at the beginning of a project ( the range is wide ) , because less is known about its detailed design and construction requirements , and therefore the opportunity for change is greater .

second , costs can appear to change if they are not expressed in a consistent manner , that is , in constant year dollars ( to eliminate any inflationary effects ) versus year of expenditure dollars ( that may mask any changes in real terms because of inflation ) .

third , project cost estimates are sensitive to factors such as changes to the scope of the project .

in some cases , a sponsor may reduce the scope or add more features to the project as the design progresses .

uncertainty of the costs is reduced , as the project scope is better defined , but costs also may increase .

fourth , cost estimates can change as risks are assessed and reassessed throughout project development , resulting in the amount fta requires project sponsors to set aside for project contingency to increase or decrease .

for example , fta officials said risk factors could include changes in real estate costs , new information involving surface or subsurface ground conditions and materials , or the degree of competition among contractors .

according to fta officials , risks like these can affect the cost of a project , and sponsors may never adequately address all of them , but at a minimum both the sponsor and fta must be aware of what those risks are .

the arc project cost estimates increased from the $7.4 billion estimate in 2006 for a number of reasons: in 2008 , fta's cost estimates ranged from $9.5 billion to $12.4 billion , based on potential scenarios in its 2008 risk assessment , which not only assumed different levels of risk but also included $1.7 billion set aside for contingency .

after discussions , fta and njt agreed upon a baseline cost estimate of $8.7 billion in 2009 .

fta's 2010 risk assessment contained the next estimated cost — as high as $13.7 billion — as the engineers developed a more accurate understanding of what the project entailed .

however , njt did not see costs rising to this level and projected a lower expected cost range , including a maximum $10 billion final cost .

after considering comments from njt , fta revised the cost range to $9.8 billion to $12.4 billion .

this estimate included a more refined cost estimate of potentially higher construction and other work costs .

in addition , the contingency amount was increased due to reassessment of risks related to delays in awarding project contracts .

federal , state , and local sources would have funded the arc project , as shown in table 2 .

as of april 2010 , about half the estimated cost of about $8.7 billion would have come from federal sources with the remainder divided at the local and state levels between the port authority and the new jersey turnpike authority .

in addition to new starts funds , new jersey was planning to use certain federal highway funds that may be used for transit capital purposes .

new jersey planned to use part of its federal congestion mitigation and air quality improvement and national highway system funding for the arc project .

state and local funds included $3 billion from the port authority , which formally approved this funding commitment .

the state of new jersey planned to add $1.25 billion that was to have come from increased tolls on the new jersey turnpike .

in august 2009 , fta entered into an early system work agreement with njt .

this agreement , which fta and njt amended in 2010 , made available about $910.3 million for certain project activities , such as tunnel construction contracts , property and easement acquisitions in new york , professional services related to the project's final design , construction permits , insurance , and a contingency reserve.expended about $271 million of the $910.3 million .

when the project was cancelled , the department of transportation claimed that the $271 million in expended federal funds should be recovered by the federal government , and new jersey disputed this claim .

on september 30 , as of 2010 , njt 2011 , the department of transportation and new jersey agreed that new jersey would return $95 million , which included $51 million in new starts funds and $44 million in american recovery and reinvestment act funds .

in addition , new jersey agreed to spend about $128 million in congestion mitigation and air quality improvement funds on transit projects approved by the department of transportation .

because the project was terminated before fta and njt entered into a full funding grant agreement , there was no final commitment by all the parties to fully fund the project .

the general project agreement , which was a document prepared as part of the new starts process and signed by njt and the port authority in 2009 , addressed potential cost growth .

according to the agreement , if costs exceeded $8.766 billion ( or if less than $3 billion was provided by fta ) , both parties agreed to work together to obtain additional funding sources .

according to port authority officials , although both parties signed the agreement , there was no commitment of assistance from the port authority in the event that the project experienced cost increases .

port authority officials told us that the agency's existing $3 billion commitment was the maximum the agency could provide to the project , given the constraints of their overall capital program .

in the weeks preceding the project's cancellation , the secretary of transportation and the governor of new jersey held discussions on additional funding sources for the arc project or a reduction in project scope .

the additional funding options discussed included increased funding by the federal government , new jersey , and the port authority ; a federal railroad loan ; or a public - private because the project was terminated before a partnership contribution.full funding grant agreement was entered into between fta and njt , there was no final agreement by all the parties on the issue of responsibility for arc cost growth .

the department of transportation reviewed a draft of this report and provided technical comments , which we incorporated in the report .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of transportation , and the administrator of the federal transit administration .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions or would like to discuss this work , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

individuals making key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

the federal transit administration ( fta ) provided federal funding for a portion of the access to the region's core costs through its new starts program .

under this program , funding is directed to public agencies on a largely competitive basis primarily for the construction of new fixed - guideway transit systems and the expansion of existing fixed - guideway systems .

federal funding for construction of new starts projects is committed in a document that is called a full funding grant agreement — a multi - year agreement between the federal government and a public agency that is subject to the availability of appropriations .

the agreement establishes the terms and conditions for federal financial participation , including the maximum amount of new starts funding being committed .

to obtain this grant agreement , a project must be approved by fta for final design and construction and have gone through a series of steps that make up the new starts approval process .

among the phases of the new starts planning and development process are: systems planning , alternatives analysis , preliminary engineering , and final design .

systems planning .

systems planning involves the continuing regional transportation planning process carried out by metropolitan planning organizations in urban areas throughout the united states .

this process produces long - range transportation plans and shorter - range transportation improvement programs , along with environmental and other analyses .

alternatives analysis .

the analysis of alternatives examines the benefits and costs of different options , such as light rail or bus rapid transit , in a specific transportation corridor or in a regional sub - area .

it concludes with the selection of a locally preferred alternative and adoption of that alternative into a fiscally constrained long - range transportation plan .

the project sponsor submits the proposed project to fta for evaluation so as to gain approval to enter preliminary engineering , the next phase of development .

fta evaluation does not include a full cost - benefit analysis , but does consider cost - effectiveness and other benefits of the proposed project .

preliminary engineering .

preliminary engineering involves the project sponsor refining the project by examining the costs , benefits , and impacts of different design alternatives , and completing an analysis of environmental impacts as required by the national environmental policy act of 1969 .

once preliminary engineering is complete , fta evaluates and rates the project to determine whether it can be approved into final design .

final design .

in the project's final design phase , the project sponsor prepares final construction plans and cost estimates , and , if needed , includes right - of - way acquisition and relocation of utilities .

after final design is complete , fta may approve the project for a full funding grant agreement , at which point the project may move into the construction phase .

in some cases , fta may obligate some of the funding expected to be provided in the full funding grant agreement through an early system work agreement .

although not a guarantee of full funding , an early system work agreement provides funding so that work can begin before full funding is awarded .

in addition to the contact named above , teresa spisak ( assistant director ) , robert ciszewski , alexander lawrence , david hooper , hannah laufe , joshua ormond , amy rosewarne , and max sawicky made key contributions to this report .

