about 80 means - tested federal programs assisted low - income people at a cost of nearly $400 billion in federal , state , and local funds in fiscal year 1998 .

these programs provide cash and noncash benefits and are restricted to families or individuals whose income falls below defined levels and who meet certain other eligibility criteria established for each program .

numerous federal departments and agencies , state and local offices , community - based organizations , and other entities are responsible for administering these programs .

authorized by different congressional committees at different points in time , these programs were created to meet the various needs of different groups of low - income people .

however , when viewed as a whole , they have given rise to longstanding concerns that the nation's assistance programs for low - income families are too difficult and costly to administer and too complicated for families to navigate .

as you requested , we determined ( 1 ) the extent and sources of variation in financial eligibility rules among selected means - tested programs , ( 2 ) how the variation in these rules and other factors affect the administrative processes for determining eligibility , and ( 3 ) how federal , state , and local agencies have sought to simplify or coordinate eligibility determination processes .

our review focused on 11 programs that help meet families' and individuals' basic needs such as income , food , medical assistance , and housing .

low - income families and individuals often participate in several of these programs at the same time .

specifically , the 11 programs covered in our review are temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) ; food stamps ; medicaid ; child care and development fund ( child care ) ; state children's health insurance program ( schip ) ; low - income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) ; special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; school meals ; housing choice voucher ; low rent public housing ; and supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

these 11 programs represented over 70 percent of the $400 billion total expenditures for means - tested federal programs in fiscal year 1998 .

to address the first objective , we analyzed the statutory and regulatory rules related to financial eligibility in each of the 11 programs .

to address the second and third objectives , we interviewed federal agency officials and conducted site visits in five states: california , delaware , kentucky , nebraska , and utah .

in selecting states , we sought to include those with a range of experiences related to welfare simplification or service integration initiatives and also include states with both state - supervised and county - administered welfare systems .

appendix i contains a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology .

over time , the congress has established about 80 separate programs to provide cash and noncash assistance to low - income individuals and families .

means - tested programs are restricted to families or individuals who meet specified financial requirements and certain other eligibility criteria established for each program .

the financial requirements restrict eligibility to families and individuals whose income falls below defined levels , and in some cases , whose assets — such as bank accounts and the value of automobiles — also fall below defined levels .

nonfinancial requirements restrict eligibility to specified categories of beneficiaries , such as pregnant women , children , or individuals with disabilities .

federal , state , and local governments expended a combined total of nearly $400 billion on the approximately 80 means - tested programs in fiscal year 1998 .

medicaid accounted for 45 percent of the expenditures .

twenty - seven of the 80 programs , representing 97 percent of the total expenditures , had expenditures of over a billion dollars each ( see table 1 ) .

means - tested programs provide assistance in eight areas of need: ( 1 ) cash assistance ; ( 2 ) medical benefits ; ( 3 ) food and nutrition ; ( 4 ) housing ; ( 5 ) education ; ( 6 ) other services , such as child care ; ( 7 ) jobs and training ; and ( 8 ) energy aid .

ten of the 11 programs on which our review focuses accounted for 74 percent of the total expenditures for means - tested federal programs in fiscal year 1998 ( see table 2 ) .

table 3 provides an overview of the populations targeted by these programs and the types of assistance that they provide .

the 11 means - tested programs that we included in our review were enacted over time to serve various populations and achieve various objectives .

for example , in 1937 , the public housing program was created to provide adequate temporary shelter to families who could not afford housing ; medicaid , in 1965 , to provide medical assistance for low - income families with children and aged , blind , and disabled individuals ; and schip , in 1997 , to provide health insurance coverage to uninsured low - income children from families who do not qualify for medicaid .

in some cases , the unique financial rules that apply to a particular program may be related to the purpose of that program and reflect its goals or objectives .

for other programs , this may not be the case and the differences in eligibility standards across programs may stem from decisions made at different times by different congressional committees or federal agencies .

in addition to offering a wide variety of benefits and services , means - tested programs vary in the extent to which they guarantee that funds for services will be available .

for some programs such as food stamps and ssi , federal funds are available to provide benefits to all eligible applicants .

other programs such as tanf and schip have a fixed amount of federal funds available .

moreover , some of the programs require state and other nonfederal matching money ( eg , medicaid and schip ) , while others are fully funded with federal dollars ( eg , liheap and wic ) .

an individual low - income family is likely to be eligible for and participate in several means - tested programs .

for example , as shown in figure 1 , families receiving tanf generally also receive medicaid , food stamps , and school meals .

smaller percentages of these families receive assisted housing , wic , and liheap .

the need for welfare simplification has been voiced recurrently over a period of many years .

while this concept covers a broad range of potential objectives , a key aspect has been the need to simplify financial eligibility rules .

means - tested programs have been established over time to meet the needs of various target populations .

however , policy experts and researchers have concluded that the complexity and variations in programs' financial eligibility rules have had unanticipated but detrimental consequences for both program administration and family access to assistance .

on the administrative side , they have argued that the financial eligibility rules have increased substantially the staff resources needed to determine eligibility and benefit levels , and thereby increased the costs of administering programs .

with regard to families' access to programs , they maintained that the rules have often resulted in confusing families about their eligibility for programs and contributed to the creation of a service delivery system with many separate entry points that is often difficult and burdensome for families to navigate .

numerous studies and reports since the late 1960s have called for the overhaul or repair of the nation's assistance programs that serve low - income families and individuals .

for example , a presidential committee recommended in 1977 that a total effort to reform welfare was needed because of the inequities and administrative “chaos” created by a plethora of inconsistent and confusing programs .

during the1980s , we issued several reports on welfare simplification .

one of these reports surveyed the states to identify what they viewed as the major obstacles to their efforts to achieve service integration .

of the 25 obstacles identified , the one cited most frequently ( 42 states ) was that different programs use different financial eligibility requirements .

in 1991 , the national commission for employment policy recommended that agencies administering public assistance programs should develop a common framework for streamlining eligibility requirements , formulating standard definitions , and easing administrative and documentation requirements .

in 1990 , the congress authorized the creation of the welfare simplification and coordination advisory committee to examine four major assistance programs: food stamps , aid to families with dependent children , medicaid , and housing assistance programs .

the congress mandated the committee to identify barriers to participation in assistance programs and the reasons for those barriers .

in june 1993 , the committee recommended that the numerous programs that currently serve needy families be replaced with a single family - focused , client - oriented , comprehensive program .

recognizing that it would take time to implement its primary recommendation , the commission made 14 interim recommendations to the congress , including the following: form a work group of the chairs of the relevant congressional committees to ensure that all legislative and oversight activities involving public assistance programs are coordinated .

establish uniform rules and definitions to be used by all needs - based programs in making their eligibility determinations .

streamline the verification process .

permit the sharing of client information among agencies to streamline eligibility determination processes and reduce duplication of related activities .

in 1995 , the institute for educational leadership , based on its examination of the executive and legislative structures that federal means - tested programs are built upon , urged the administration to create a family council .

one of the stated goals of such a council was to have been proposing changes to eligibility requirements , definitions , financing and administrative requirements , data collection and reporting requirements , and performance standards that were inconsistent , incoherent , and confusing .

moreover , in a 1995 report to the congress , we concluded , in part , that the inefficient welfare system is increasingly cumbersome for program administrators to manage and difficult for eligible clients to access .

just as the need for simplification of financial eligibility rules has been acknowledged , there has also been a general recognition that achieving substantial improvements in this area is exceptionally difficult .

for example , implementing systematic changes to the federal rules for human service programs can be challenging because jurisdiction for these programs is spread among numerous congressional committees and federal agencies .

substantial variations exist in the financial eligibility rules across selected means - tested federal programs .

the primary sources of these variations are generally at the federal level , although for several programs such as tanf and medicaid states and localities have some flexibility in setting financial eligibility rules .

variations exist among the programs in the financial rules regarding the types and amounts of income limits .

differences also exist among these programs with regard to whose income is counted , what income is counted or excluded , and whether certain expenses — such as child care costs — are deducted in calculating income .

in addition to income tests , programs impose different limits on the assets that an individual or family may hold in order to receive benefits .

asset tests are further complicated because of the differences in how the equity in vehicles is treated when determining assets .

the first and most basic difference among programs is the variation in type of income limits used for determining program eligibility .

income limits for most of the 11 programs reviewed used a percentage of the federal poverty guideline or an area's median income .

for example , the school meals program uses a percentage of the poverty guideline to set benefit eligibility while the housing programs use percentage of area median income to determine eligibility .

the programs not only differed in the type of income limit but also in the actual level of income .

for example , the maximum allowable gross monthly income for food stamps for a family of three is $1,585 nationwide , whereas , the maximum allowable gross monthly income for subsidized child care — which is based on state median income — is $4,494 in the state of connecticut ( the state with the highest median income ) .

for all 11 programs except tanf , federal laws and regulations have set some income limit .

the most common type of income limit used among these programs is some percentage multiple of the federal poverty guideline , updated annually in the federal register by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

however , the percentage of the guideline used varies among programs .

 ( see table 4 for a comparison of the type of limits used among the 11 programs. ) .

programs also vary in setting the income limits that are used to determine eligibility .

while some of the programs provide states with options in setting income limits others do not .

for example , liheap and wic provide states the option of choosing between two types of income limits .

in the case of tanf , states are given full discretion in how they establish eligibility , including choosing both the type and level for their income limit .

for medicaid , while the federal government requires that states provide medicaid to individuals who fall into certain categories and whose income and resources fall below certain limits , states may , in some circumstances , set more generous income limits and create different categories so that additional individuals may receive coverage .

in addition , in some instances , states are given options to set income limits by the federal statute or regulation .

for example , while the law sets the maximum income limit for child care funds at 85 percent of a state's median income , several states have set their limits far below the allowable federal limit .

whose income is counted and whether any exclusions or deductions are made can affect a family's income eligibility for the different programs .

in general , the programs varied in whose income is counted in determining eligibility .

there is no single definition of “family” or “household” used by means - tested federal programs .

federal rules generally govern whose income should be used to determine eligibility .

in some programs , the definition of the household unit reflects the program's service focus , and in these instances the income of people with whom the applicant shares certain expenses are included in the calculation .

the liheap program , for example , defines household as members purchasing energy together .

similarly , the food stamp statute identifies the household as the income unit and defines a household as people who purchase food and prepare meals together .

certain programs provide states with some discretion in defining a family .

for example , the schip regulation identifies the family as the income unit but allows the states to decide how that should be defined .

regulations for the low - rent public housing and housing choice voucher programs set forth some examples of families but allow public housing agencies to determine if any other group of persons qualify as an eligible family .

table 5 summarizes household unit definitions for each of the 11 programs .

programs also differ in how they treat earned income for the purposes of eligibility determination .

those programs that emphasize a transition to economic self - sufficiency sometimes treat earned income favorably for program eligibility purposes to provide an incentive for clients to continue to work .

in tanf , for example , almost all states disregard some income ; that is , they allow tanf recipients to earn a given amount of their earned income either as a percentage of earnings ( between 20 and 50 percent ) , or a set dollar amount ( between $90 and $250 ) or both , without any reduction in their benefits .

in medicaid , while some states have the same disregards used in tanf , other states have more generous disregards .

see table 6 for the earned income disregards used by various programs .

in calculating applicants' income levels to determine eligibility , some programs also have provisions to deduct certain types of expenses .

these deductions include allowances for certain medical , shelter , or child care expenses of applicants .

in other programs , no deductions or exclusions may apply .

some states have the same child care deductions in their tanf and medicaid programs .

housing choice voucher and low - rent public housing programs share many but not all of the same rules and regulations .

both programs have a child care deduction for children under 13 and an adult dependent care deduction for expenses over 3 percent of a family's income .

table 7 illustrates programs' different handling of payments for child care as a deduction from income .

while several programs have specific rules regarding assets and set limits on the amount of certain assets that clients can hold , most programs have no restrictions on assets at all .

assets are generally defined to include cash held in checking and savings accounts , individual retirement accounts , 401ks , and other accounts that can be readily transferred into cash .

federal rules and regulations set assets limits for several programs , but states do have discretion in certain cases .

vehicle asset rules exist in some of the 11 programs and these rules vary , not only across programs , but across states as well .

in some programs , a vehicle used to access work may be disregarded ; in other programs , a certain portion of the value of the vehicle may be disregarded .

for example , in the ssi program , the first $4,500 in current market value is excluded .

if it is used for employment or daily activities , used to obtain medical treatment , or has been modified for use by or for transportation of a handicapped person , the vehicle's value is completely excluded .

the vehicle asset test for food stamps is set at $4,650 .

however , a recent change allows states to apply their tanf vehicle asset test for food stamp eligibility and benefit determination , as long it is at least as generous as the food stamp rule .

for tanf , many states exclude the entire value of one vehicle ; one state excludes the value of all vehicles , and one state has no asset test at all .

in states that impose a vehicle asset test for tanf , three states ( louisiana , oregon , and wisconsin ) allow up to $10,000 in equity value and one state ( wyoming ) disregards up to $12,000 in trade - in value .

table 8 displays the general assets limits as well as the vehicle asset rules , if any .

variations in financial eligibility rules and the multiplicity of agencies that administer programs at the state and local level have contributed to the formation of administrative processes that involve substantial complexity and duplication of staff efforts .

in spite of the variations in financial eligibility rules , the states we reviewed have established joint eligibility determination processes for certain programs .

while the processes for determining eligibility were coordinated for selected programs , state and local staff reported that the variations and complexities of certain financial rules in these programs created considerable difficulties in determining eligibility and calculating benefit levels .

with regard to the other programs in these states , eligibility is determined separately for each program .

as a result , applicants must visit multiple offices and repeatedly provide much of the same information to apply for assistance from these other programs .

while data generally are not available on the specific costs of determining eligibility and calculating benefit levels for the 11 programs we reviewed , evidence suggests that these costs are substantial .

in all five states we visited , joint application processes have been established for some programs , ranging from three programs in kentucky to six programs in nebraska .

these processes enable an applicant to complete a single application for multiple programs .

a single caseworker can determine for which programs the client is eligible and then calculate benefit amounts .

the caseworker uses one or more automated systems to perform these tasks and generally needs to input application information only once into the automated systems .

as shown in table 9 , all five states have joint eligibility determination processes for tanf , food stamps , and medicaid .

in nebraska , applicants can complete a joint application for these three programs and child care , schip , and liheap .

 ( how these states have used computer systems to establish joint application processes is discussed later in the report. ) .

even though the determination of eligibility in these programs has been coordinated , state and local officials told us that variations in these programs' financial eligibility rules , as well as the sheer complexity of the rules in certain programs , create substantial difficulties or added work for caseworkers in determining eligibility and benefit levels .

with regard to variations in rules , the aspects most commonly cited as troublesome for caseworkers include differences in rules about household units , income limits , countable and excludable income , and asset limits .

for example , differences in the definition of a household unit affect eligibility decisions because family members are treated differently across programs .

in the food stamp program , a household generally consists of all the persons who purchase food and prepare meals together .

in tanf , the family is the household unit ( which states define ) but generally includes only dependent children , their siblings , and the parents or other caretaker relatives .

consequently , a family member may be a part of a household in one program , treated as a separate family in another program , and ineligible for benefits in another program .

if caseworkers do not establish the correct household for a program , errors in eligibility or benefit levels can result .

state and local officials believed that establishing a uniform definition of household unit would reduce both the work required of caseworkers and the possibility of errors .

the problems encountered by caseworkers were attributed primarily to the complexity of the financial eligibility rules for certain programs , especially food stamps and medicaid .

state and local officials identified the following areas as especially difficult and error - prone in the food stamp program: ( 1 ) determining household composition , ( 2 ) determining whether the value of a household's assets is less than the maximum allowable , and ( 3 ) calculating the amount of a household's earned and unearned income and deductible expenses .

for example , with regard to the last of these areas , food stamp rules require that net monthly income be calculated by allowing up to six possible deductions from gross monthly income .

the six allowable deductions are a standard deduction , an earned income deduction , a dependent care deduction , a medical deduction , a child support deduction , and an excess shelter cost deduction .

errors in calculating any one of these complicated deductions has resulted in inaccurate eligibility determinations or food stamp benefit levels .

such errors can lead to overpayments or underpayments to clients , and delays in processing of applications and disbursement of benefits .

moreover , states with high error rates can receive federal sanctions or be required to take steps to improve program administration .

our prior work identified the complexity of food stamp eligibility rules as a problem and recommended that usda develop and analyze options for simplifying the rules for determining eligibility and benefit levels .

state officials also pointed to various complexities associated with determining eligibility for medicaid .

unlike the tanf and food stamp programs , medicaid eligibility encompasses many categories of individuals .

among the states we visited , the number of eligibility categories varied from approximately 30 in nebraska to about 100 in california .

the rules and methodologies used to determine eligibility vary for many of these categories .

medicaid eligibility rules often include different income thresholds for children of different ages in the same family , and different rules for determining the eligibility of parents .

consequently , multiple tests may be used in determining eligibility for each member of a family , resulting in different outcomes for members of the same family .

state and local officials told us that because of the complex financial rules in medicaid , caseworkers are often frustrated ; it is also more difficult for caseworkers to learn their jobs and perform them well .

while joint eligibility processes have been established for some programs in the states we reviewed , eligibility for other programs is generally determined separately .

for example , as shown in table 10 , public housing agencies administer housing programs and ssa administers ssi in each state .

in addition , in general , health departments determine eligibility for wic and schip ; school districts administer school meals ; and community - based organizations administer liheap .

in some instances , caseworkers from different programs have been co - located at one location such as a one - stop center , but eligibility for these programs continues to be determined separately .

for example , in san mateo county , california , caseworkers for the human services agency determine eligibility for the food stamp , medicaid , tanf , child care , low - rent public housing , and the housing choice voucher programs .

while one caseworker can assist clients in applying for tanf , medicaid , and food stamps , these clients must meet separately with different caseworkers to apply for any of the other programs .

the separate eligibility processes in the states we reviewed involve a substantial duplication of administrative functions and impose demands on the time and resources of applicants .

for example , a family in these states that wanted to apply for all 11 programs would need to complete anywhere from 6 to 8 applications and visit up to six offices .

these applications require applicants to repeatedly provide much of the same information .

our analysis of the application forms in utah showed that at least 90 percent of the information collected by the applications for each of the following programs — schip , liheap , wic , and school meals — was collected on the joint application for tanf , food stamps , medicaid , and child care .

in fact , no new information was obtained on the schip and liheap applications .

these separate applications generally ask for similar information collected on the joint application , such as household composition , employment status , and earned and unearned income .

the annual costs to the federal government for administering means - tested programs are significant and eligibility determination activities make up a substantial portion of these costs .

the federal government provides funds to states and localities for administering most of the means - tested programs and the percentage of the administrative costs borne by the federal government varies by program .

the programs vary in the types of activities included in the administrative cost category .

for example , in some cases these activities include outreach to potential program participants and service providers , preparation of program plans and budgets , travel , and quality assurance .

as shown in table 11 , in fiscal year 1998 , the estimated federal costs for program administration in the 11 programs totaled over $12.4 billion .

this constitutes about 4 percent of total expenditures for benefits in these programs .

federal agencies generally do not require states to report the costs for specific activities related to eligibility determinations .

while data are not generally available on the specific costs of determining eligibility and calculating benefit levels for all of the 11 programs we reviewed , evidence suggests that these costs are substantial .

in the food stamp program , for example , federal costs for eligibility determinations are in excess of $1 billion annually and account for over half of overall administrative costs .

moreover , while the states we visited did not routinely collect data on the costs associated with determining eligibility , we obtained some information on these costs for certain programs in california .

for one calendar quarter — the fourth - quarter of 2000 — california was able to provide data on expenditures for eligibility determination activities: $183 million in staff costs for medicaid eligibility determinations , $106 million for food stamps , and $71 million for tanf , according to state officials .

these figures include both federal and state costs .

overall , federal , state , and local entities have made limited progress in simplifying or coordinating eligibility determination processes .

several of the states we visited realigned some of the financial rules , yet this approach has been used to a limited extent .

another approach is to take advantage of the capabilities of computer systems .

the state and localities we reviewed used computer systems both to establish joint eligibility determination processes for some programs and in a few cases to share data across agencies to coordinate eligibility determination processes .

however , state and local officials in all five states said that much more should be done to simplify the financial eligibility rules and eligibility determination processes across programs but cited various obstacles to achieving further progress .

in some cases , states have used the flexibility allowed under federal law to simplify or realign their financial eligibility rules .

this has occurred in at least three ways .

first , some states have used options established in federal law to extend eligibility automatically for one program based on an applicant's participation in another means - tested program — a provision referred to as “categorical eligibility.” second , at least one state has attempted to use a federally established option to create a simplified food stamp program that aligns the financial eligibility rules for food stamps and tanf .

third , the states we visited have used the flexibility allowed under tanf to change provisions of their tanf financial eligibility rules to realign them with those of other programs .

provisions allowing categorical eligibility have been implemented by states in several programs .

for example , the 1972 amendments to the social security act gave states the authority to make ssi recipients automatically eligible for medicaid .

states that use this authority pay ssa to incorporate medicaid - required questions in the ssi application process and establish an automated linkage between the ssi and medicaid programs .

as a result , clients who are approved for ssi are automatically enrolled in medicaid and are not required to apply for medicaid benefits .

as of february 2001 , 32 states — including three states we visited ( california , delaware , and kentucky ) — and the district of columbia have linked their medicaid programs with ssi .

federal law also gives states the option of establishing categorical eligibility to liheap applicants who are receiving ssi , tanf , or food stamps .

however , according to one agency official , while one of the states we visited ( nebraska ) uses this option , most states do not .

many of the potential beneficiaries of the liheap program are elderly or others who are not using public assistance programs .

to avoid the perception that liheap is a public assistance program , states are required to offer liheap services through an alternative approach ; most of the states we visited used community - based organizations to administer the program .

school districts may also use direct certification to enroll school - aged children into the school meals program .

direct certification is a method of eligibility determination that does not require families to complete school meals applications .

instead , school officials use documentation obtained directly from the local or state human services agency that indicates that a household participates in tanf or food stamps as the basis for certifying students for free school meals .

while all of the states we visited used direct certification as a means to identify and enroll children in the school meals program , not all school districts or schools within the states used the process .

according to a recent usda study , approximately 35 percent of students approved for free meals are certified through direct certification .

the simplified food stamp program , an option created by the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , was another effort to streamline program administration .

the simplified program option was to be a vehicle for creating conformity between tanf and the food stamp program by merging the programs' rules into a single set of requirements for individuals receiving both types of assistance .

specifically , the program allows states to establish eligibility and benefit levels on the basis of household size and income , work requirements , and other criteria established under tanf , food stamps , or a combination of both programs — as long as federal costs are not increased in doing so .

as of february 2001 , while several states had used some features of the simplified food stamp program , only one state had attempted to implement a more extensive version of the program .

in our january 1999 report , we found that the two most frequent reasons given by states for not implementing the simplified program were as follows: ( 1 ) it would result in increased caseworker burden and ( 2 ) the cost neutrality provision restricted the states' options for simplifying the program .

states have also sought to realign their financial eligibility rules by taking advantage of their flexibility under tanf .

for example , nebraska changed its tanf ( 1 ) assets limits to mirror those for medicaid , ( 2 ) earned income disregards to mirror those for food stamps , and ( 3 ) client reporting requirements to mirror those for food stamps .

a nebraska state official told us that these changes resulted in simplifying the financial rules to ease eligibility determination processes for caseworkers and reduce complexities for clients being served .

delaware broadened eligibility for food stamps by creating categorical eligibility for food stamps through the tanf program .

during the application process , clients are asked if they are interested in two specific tanf program components , pregnancy prevention and family planning services .

some clients who may have been determined financially ineligible for food stamps , but indicated an interest in either tanf service , received categorical eligibility for food stamps .

however , in the near future , states will not have the authority to more broadly confer categorical eligibility to tanf clients .

with recent changes in food stamp regulations , effective september 30 , 2001 , states will be restricted to conferring categorical eligibility to tanf clients with incomes at 200 percent of the federal poverty level or below .

states have considerable flexibility to streamline eligibility processes in their medicaid for children and schip programs .

according to a recent survey , many states have taken steps to streamline and simplify their child health coverage programs .

these activities have been driven , to a large extent , by the emphasis on designing easy , family - friendly application systems for new schip programs , coupled with the federal requirement to coordinate these new programs with medicaid .

the survey found that most states have taken steps to simplify the application process for child health coverage .

for example , of the 32 states that implemented separate schip programs , 28 states use joint applications for medicaid and schip .

moreover , 39 states and the district of columbia have eliminated face - to - face interviews and 10 states allow self - declaration of income in both their medicaid for children and schip programs .

in addition , most states have made efforts to expand income - eligibility for children and simplify eligibility rules .

for example , between november 1998 and july 2000 , the number of states that covered children under age 19 in families with income at or below 200 percent of fpl increased from 22 to 36 .

finally , 41 states and the district of columbia have dropped the asset test in both their medicaid for children and schip programs .

states are increasingly relying on computer systems to establish joint processes for determining eligibility or to share data across agencies to facilitate the verification of data needed to determine client eligibility .

however , in some cases states have encountered difficulties in expanding joint eligibility processes due to factors such as limitations in the abilities of caseworkers to master the eligibility rules for so many programs .

the federal government has played a key role in facilitating the automation of means - tested programs .

three of the federal government's major programs for needy families — tanf , food stamps , and medicaid — have historically relied on state - run automated systems to help determine applicants' eligibility and the amount of assistance each client should receive .

in the past , the congress authorized several agencies to reimburse states for a significant proportion of their total costs to develop and operate automated eligibility determination systems for these programs .

for example , in 1980 , the congress authorized usda's food and nutrition service , which oversees the food stamp program , to reimburse states for 75 percent of their costs for planning , designing , developing , and installing automated eligibility systems and 50 percent of the costs to operate these systems .

to obtain enhanced funding for afdc automated systems , states had to meet the requirements for a family assistance management information system ( famis ) , a general system design developed by hhs to improve state administration of the afdc program .

because eligibility for medicaid and food stamps was linked to eligibility for afdc , most of the afdc systems also covered medicaid and food stamps .

while the federal government generally no longer provides for enhanced levels of matching funds for systems development , the federal government continues to be a major funder of new computer systems for human services .

for example , texas has budgeted more than $289 million over a 6-year period to develop a new automated system for its human services department that would support the determination of eligibility for approximately 50 programs .

the federal share ( obtained from hhs and usda ) is projected to be about 51 percent of the total amount .

some of the states we reviewed have developed computer systems that have enabled them to expand the number of programs for which eligibility can be jointly determined .

for example , nebraska developed the nebraska - family on - line client user system ( n - focus ) , which contains the eligibility rules for tanf , food stamps , medicaid , schip , and child care .

a separate computer system is used to determine eligibility for liheap .

these computer systems enable a single worker to jointly determine eligibility and calculate benefit levels for all of these programs .

however , since these computer systems are not completely interfaced , caseworkers must sometimes enter client information more than once .

in delaware , caseworkers use the delaware client information system ii ( dcis ii ) to determine eligibility and benefit levels for tanf , food stamps , medicaid , and schip .

caseworkers use a separate computer system to determine eligibility and benefit levels for child care .

these computer systems enable a single caseworker to determine eligibility jointly for five programs .

in contrast to nebraska , the different computer systems in delaware are interfaced , which allows caseworkers to switch between systems and transfer data from one system to another , thereby eliminating the need to re - enter the same information in multiple systems .

while their computer systems have resulted in streamlining the eligibility determination processes for clients , no data were available to determine whether these initiatives had generated any administrative cost savings .

in addition to supporting joint eligibility determination processes , computer systems are being used to share client data across certain agencies to obtain information needed for determining eligibility .

for example , when families in delaware apply for tanf cash assistance , they are informed on their applications that the state department of health and social services may contact other persons or organizations to obtain the proof necessary in determining eligibility and benefit levels .

the department of health and social services has automated links to share client information with other state agencies , including the department of labor , the divisions of public health and motor vehicles , and the child support enforcement agency .

while computer systems can facilitate efforts to coordinate eligibility determination processes , states encountered limitations in system capabilities .

for example , nebraska officials told us that because of the variations in programs and financial rules , “workarounds” had been developed to help caseworkers overcome some systems - related problems .

workarounds are instructions to staff for specific situations in which a worker has to intervene manually in the eligibility determination process .

while nebraska's n - focus system provided automated support for 26 programs and the policies and rules built into the system to support all these programs , slow processing times had resulted .

in addition , caseworkers were frustrated because the system was inflexible and did not cover all possible client household situations , which sometimes resulted in inaccurate eligibility determinations .

later , when the n - focus automated system was modified by reducing technical complexities , it resulted in quicker processing times of client data , more flexibility for caseworkers in using the automated system , and greater responsibilities for caseworkers to know their programs .

caseworkers told us that the changes were helpful improvements .

nonetheless , some caseworkers expressed concern that program complexities , high caseloads , and time constraints made it difficult to learn the eligibility rules with their varying criteria and financial rules .

through discussions with federal , state , and local officials , and a review of literature in the area , we identified a number of obstacles that hinder efforts to make further progress in streamlining or coordinating processes for determining eligibility .

in general , these have been longstanding obstacles .

key obstacles to efforts to simplify or realign financial eligibility rules include program cost implications , restrictive federal laws and regulations , the need for collaboration of multiple executive branch agencies and legislative committees , and differences in goals and purposes of some federal programs .

program cost implications is a major obstacle to efforts to simplify or realign financial eligibility rules .

financial eligibility rules serve to target and limit benefits to those considered in need and also to ration federal and nonfederal dollars .

yet , modifying financial eligibility rules for purposes of simplifying them or making them more consistent across programs can result in changes to the number of people who are eligible for assistance or the benefit levels they receive .

for example , if such rule changes have the effect of raising income eligibility limits , more people will be eligible for assistance and program costs will tend to increase .

on the other hand , if such rule changes have the effect of lowering income eligibility levels , some people will no longer be eligible for assistance from certain programs .

among means - tested programs , pressures in recent years have generally been to increase coverage , such as by loosening financial eligibility standards .

as we have seen , much of the variation in financial rules derives from federal statutes and regulations .

for the 11 programs we reviewed , most program requirements were set in statute .

agency regulations also provide annual guidance such as income thresholds used to establish eligibility and benefit amounts .

state officials believe that because of federal statutes and regulations they had very little flexibility in aligning financial eligibility rules across programs .

such alignment can involve standardizing various types of rules , including those pertaining to income limits , whose income is counted , what income is counted , and deductions from income .

while states have aligned some financial rules to simplify their tanf , food stamp , and medicaid rules , most of these changes were modest and officials were frustrated by federal barriers that prevented better aligning the financial rules across programs .

for example , officials in two states told us that they believed the federally established income limits in the food stamp program ( 130 percent of federal poverty guidelines ) were set too low .

they explained that although their states had the flexibility to lower their tanf and medicaid income limits to match the limit for food stamps , this option was not appealing because it would result in decreased participation in tanf and medicaid .

the division of legislative and executive responsibility , while allowing multiple points of access for members of congress , interest groups , and the affected public , can be an obstacle to states' ability to pursue system integration .

making systematic changes to programs' financial eligibility rules can be very difficult , because it would generally require the collaborative efforts of multiple congressional committees ( in the case of laws ) or multiple federal agencies ( in the case of regulations ) .

several reviews of the legislative and executive governance mechanisms that affect program direction at the federal level have been conducted in recent years .

one study found that primary responsibility for most of the approximately 80 major programs that assist low - income families and individuals resides in 19 congressional committees and 33 subcommittees .

for the 11 programs in our review , we identified 9 committees and 6 appropriations subcommittees with legislative responsibility for the programs .

in addition , the 11 programs spanned 3 executive branch departments and 1 independent agency .

the different purposes of the various means - tested programs and the lack of overarching goals also create a barrier to administrative streamlining .

for example , state and local officials frequently cited the food stamp program rules as overly complex and rigid , with too much emphasis on quality control .

the officials were concerned that quality control in the program focused , to a great extent , on detailed financial matters such as small amounts of overpayments and underpayments , timeliness of changes in income , and recalculation of benefit levels .

the officials believe that while a focus on financial integrity through process and payment accuracy was important , too much attention on quality control has contributed to increased program complexities , decreased program participation , and high administrative costs .

in comparison , the states receive block grants from the federal government to operate tanf programs and have significant autonomy in these programs .

in the states we visited , officials told us that the flexibility in tanf provided them the opportunity to develop more effective cash assistance programs than existed prior to welfare reform .

the officials believed that having greater flexibility in other means - tested programs such as food stamps would further their efforts to streamline eligibility determination processes .

over a period of more than 60 years , a large number of means - tested programs have been established to meet diverse goals and serve the needs of different populations of low - income families and individuals .

however , when viewed from a service provider's or client's perspective , the existing processes for determining eligibility and calculating benefit levels in the 11 means - tested programs we reviewed are often cumbersome to administer and burdensome for families who apply for assistance .

the variations and complexity of these programs' financial eligibility rules , as well as the fact that numerous agencies administer the programs , have contributed to the formation of these cumbersome processes .

there has been a long history of calls for the need to simplify eligibility rules and processes for means - tested programs .

while there have been some efforts to make such improvements , little progress has been achieved overall .

this limited progress reflects the broad scope and complex intricacy of the obstacles that confront any efforts to make large - scale improvements in this area , including the difficulty of grappling with the cost implications of changing financial eligibility rules .

for example , the simplified food stamp program was designed to allow states to align the tanf and food stamp programs' rules but few states have implemented this option .

most states have not used the simplified food stamp program , in large part , because they viewed the program's requirement for cost neutrality within any fiscal year as being too restrictive .

many federal , state , and local officials recognize that additional efforts to simplify or coordinate eligibility determination processes are needed .

however , a lack of information on the likely consequences of such efforts hinders further steps to improve the administration of means - tested federal programs .

while many of these officials believe that administrative cost savings could be achieved from improved coordination or simplification , data are not available to evaluate the potential savings from such actions .

given the paucity of data on the costs of determining eligibility and calculating benefit levels in the existing system , it is difficult to quantify the costs of the variations and complexity of financial eligibility rules .

yet these costs appear to be substantial and even increases in efficiencies of the processes of 10 to 20 percent could potentially save billions of dollars .

moreover , the simplification of eligibility rules and processes offers the prospect of reducing burdens on caseworkers and applicants .

on the other hand , simplifying financial eligibility rules could potentially result in increased program costs .

to facilitate further progress in this area , information is needed about the effects of changes in financial eligibility rules and procedures on program and administrative costs , and access to programs by families and individuals .

this information could be instrumental in designing a system for administering means - tested programs that is less costly to taxpayers , less onerous for workers , less frustrating for applicants , and that potentially reduces improper payments in federal programs .

the congress should consider authorizing state and local demonstration projects designed to simplify and coordinate eligibility determination processes for means - tested federal programs .

such projects would provide states and localities with opportunities to test changes designed to simplify or align the financial eligibility rules for programs , increase the number of programs for which eligibility can be determined jointly , and expand data sharing across agencies to facilitate eligibility determinations .

once authorized , states and / or localities could submit proposals for demonstration projects and relevant federal agencies working in a coordinated manner could review them , suggest modifications as needed , and make final approval decisions .

demonstration projects would include waivers of federal statutes and regulations as needed and deemed appropriate .

while our review covered 11 means - tested federal programs , we are not suggesting that the demonstration projects must include all of these programs or exclude others .

consistent with a focus on citizen - centered government , states should be given the opportunity to try various approaches aimed at streamlining or simplifying eligibility determination processes that consider all feasible programs .

projects must be given sufficient time to be fully implemented and must include an evaluation component .

cost neutrality would be most desirable for federal approval of these projects .

however , projects should not be rejected solely because they are unable to guarantee cost neutrality over the short run .

it would be expected that , over a period of time , state and federal efforts to streamline eligibility determination processes would create administrative cost savings that could help offset any increased program costs .

the office of management and budget and the departments of agriculture , health and human services , and housing and urban development provided written comments on a draft of this report .

these comments are presented and evaluated below and are reprinted in appendix ii through appendix v. the agencies generally agreed with the report's findings .

the draft version of the report contained a recommendation to the director of omb to develop legislative proposals that would authorize state and local demonstration projects designed to simplify and coordinate eligibility determination processes for means - tested federal programs .

in its comments , omb indicated its support for program simplification but did not indicate that it would implement the recommendation .

omb agreed with our assessment of the longstanding obstacles to program simplification .

however , omb said that legislative authority for demonstration projects may not be necessary for states to pursue many simplification strategies because many programs , such as food stamps , already have significant waiver authority , and many states have not fully utilized the flexibility they have in programs such as tanf , medicaid , and schip .

we agree that states have substantial flexibility in some programs ; our report provides examples of how some states have used this flexibility to coordinate financial rules or processes .

our proposal for the authorization of demonstration projects is motivated primarily by the need to obtain more detailed and systematic information about the effects of various simplification strategies on key factors such as program and administrative costs .

these demonstration projects would provide states with whatever additional waiver authority is needed and appropriate .

omb acknowledged that demonstration projects could be helpful in achieving sweeping standardization across programs , particularly if current waiver authority in certain programs , such as hud's rental assistance programs , is not designed to achieve such sweeping standardization .

omb added that program reauthorization also presents an opportunity to propose changes to program rules that may more immediately and effectively address simplification .

we agree that program reauthorization presents a good opportunity to address simplification , especially on a program - specific basis .

however , demonstration projects would provide the ability to make comprehensive changes in a multiplicity of programs to coordinate eligibility rules and processes , and to obtain information about the effects of these changes .

omb also expressed concern about the implications of program simplification on program costs and argued that simplification should not be a license to expand eligibility and increase spending beyond current levels .

omb questioned whether we potentially overestimate the administrative cost savings that would result from program simplification , which may underestimate the significance of program cost implications .

we agree that there is a lot of uncertainty about the cost implications of program simplification .

we believe that demonstration projects could provide useful empirical evidence about the potential for administrative cost savings and the ability to limit program cost increases .

finally , omb maintained that if demonstration projects are authorized , the review of state proposals for such projects would most appropriately be lead by a federal agency such as hhs , in collaboration with other federal agencies , rather than by omb as we had originally recommended .

we believe that whatever federal agency or agencies were to be designated as the lead , the critical factor would be to establish a coordinated federal review process that facilitates efficient state and local interactions with the federal government .

usda commented that the report has made a noteworthy effort to compare the key variations in financial eligibility rules among the eleven federal programs reviewed .

with regard to food stamps , usda stated that making legislative changes during reauthorization would be a better approach to streamlining and simplifying food stamp program rules than mounting a series of demonstration projects .

we agree that reauthorization presents an opportunity for simplifying food stamp rules and have recommended this in an earlier gao report .

usda also provided additional information about the use of direct certification in the school meals program and categorical eligibility for wic , which we added to the report .

hhs said in its comments that this is a very important report that verifies the lack of standardization and complexity of applying for means - tested programs .

however , hhs added that in recommending demonstration projects , the report does not offer any suggestions on how to build upon or make this new initiative more productive than past efforts .

we agree that the report does not address in a detailed and thorough manner the issues regarding how such demonstration projects should be designed and implemented .

we believe that these issues would be best addressed with input from diverse stakeholders , especially the various federal and state agencies that have longstanding experience administering and overseeing these means - tested programs .

hhs noted that while considerable progress has been made in developing joint application processes , there has recently been a recognition that this model has limitations .

hhs explained that increasing numbers of medicaid - eligible persons come from working families not eligible for other programs .

hhs added that it is important to strive to effectively reach and serve both this population and the population eligible for multiple programs , so it continues to work on both joint and single - purpose application processes .

we agree with hhs that both types of application processes have appropriate uses .

hhs also said that the report did not acknowledge sufficiently the progress in simplifying eligibility determination that has been made in schip .

in response , we added a section to provide information on state efforts to streamline and simplify administrative processes for schip and medicaid programs for children .

in addition , hhs questioned whether our review of medicaid , which focused on tanf - related medicaid groups and policies , should also have included ssi - related groups and policies .

because the primary focus of our review was on means - tested programs commonly used by low - income families and children , the report does not include a discussion of ssi - related groups and policies .

finally , hhs commented that states have significant flexibility to expand and simplify eligibility for medicaid to coordinate with other programs that serve low - income families .

in its comments , hud agreed that simplification of the financial eligibility and benefit rules for means - tested federal programs is needed and said that the department is interested in exploring participation in a demonstration program in this area .

hud also noted that it has an effort underway — the rental housing income integrity initiative — that has a major goal of simplifying cumbersome income and rent policies in public and assisted housing programs .

hud also provided estimates of administrative costs for housing assistance programs and the percentage of tanf recipients receiving housing assistance ; we revised the report to incorporate these estimates .

we also received technical comments on a draft of this report from the departments of agriculture , health and human services , and housing and urban development , the social security administration , and three of the five states discussed in the report — delaware , nebraska , and utah — and we incorporated these comments where appropriate .

as agreed to with your staff , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we will make no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the subcommittee on human resources , house committee on ways and means ; the director of the office of management and budget ; the secretary of health and human services ; the secretary of agriculture ; the secretary of housing and urban development ; the acting commissioner of social security ; other interested congressional committees ; and interested parties .

copies will be made available to others upon request .

the report is also available on gao's home page at http: / / www.gao.gov .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you have any questions about this report .

other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix vi .

in conducting our review , we obtained and analyzed information from a variety of federal , state , and local sources .

at the federal level , we interviewed officials at three departments ( agriculture , health and human services , and housing and urban development ) and two agencies ( centers for medicare and medicaid services and the social security administration ) .

we visited five states and generally met with officials of state , local , and community - based organizations in two cities in each state — one urban location and one rural community .

our fieldwork was performed in three counties ( contra costa , san mateo , and placer ) in california ; georgetown and wilmington , delaware ; louisville and barren county , kentucky ; omaha and crete , nebraska ; and salt lake city and logan , utah .

in selecting the states for our fieldwork , we sought to include states ( 1 ) that had undertaken welfare simplification or service integration initiatives , ( 2 ) with combined welfare and workforce agencies , ( 3 ) that had enhanced automated systems for eligibility determinations and benefit level calculations , ( 4 ) with state - supervised and county - administered welfare systems , and ( 5 ) that were geographically diverse .

to obtain data on the extent to which temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) families participate in multiple means - tested federal programs , we reviewed and analyzed the results of two national bureau of the census surveys: the march 2000 supplement of the current population survey ( cps ) — the survey has information on tanf families' participation in multiple federal programs , is conducted monthly of about 47,000 households , and is designed to be a nationally representative sample of the country .

the total response rate for the march 2000 cps supplement was about 86 percent .

the survey of income and program participation ( sipp ) — a nationally representative sample of approximately 20,000 households , sipp consists of information on social and demographic characteristics for each person in the household .

sipp contains other household data in areas such as labor force activity , income , assets and liabilities , postsecondary education , private health insurance coverage , pension plan coverage , and participation in selected means - tested federal programs .

to determine the extent and sources of variation in financial eligibility rules among the 11 programs , we reviewed relevant federal statutes and regulations , as well as the 2000 green book ( committee on ways and means , u.s. house of representatives ) and the 2000 catalog of federal domestic assistance ( published by the office of management and budget and the general services administration ) .

we also reviewed information contained in crs' december 1999 report , cash and noncash benefits for persons with limited income: eligibility rules , recipient and expenditure data , fy 1996-fy 1998 .

we discussed the financial eligibility rules with federal program officials and reviewed relevant documents such as program handbooks and policy guidance .

in addition , during our site visits we met with state officials , local office managers , and eligibility workers to obtain their views on variations in financial eligibility rules .

to obtain information about how the variation in financial eligibility rules and other factors affects the administrative processes for determining eligibility , we discussed these issues with state and local eligibility workers and supervisors to obtain their views .

during these meetings , staff assisted us in identifying rule differences and the extent to which these variations affected the eligibility determination processes .

we also reviewed state - prepared documents such as memorandums , discussion papers , and reports .

we met with experts in the areas of means - tested federal programs and eligibility simplification and with advocacy groups to obtain their views on how the variations in financial rules impacted clients and their efforts to access benefits and services .

we also conducted a content analysis of the multiple applications used by different programs in utah to determine the amount of overlap in questions .

to determine how federal , state , and local agencies have sought to streamline or coordinate eligibility determination processes , we met with federal program officials to discuss their efforts to simplify eligibility and work more closely with other departments and agencies .

in addition , we reviewed statutes , program guidance , and other documents that identified actions to streamline and coordinate at the federal level .

as part of our fieldwork , we met with state and local officials to discuss their efforts to simplify eligibility determination processes .

we discussed some of these streamlining efforts with frontline workers , including eligibility workers and supervisors .

we also reviewed documents obtained at these meetings , such as reorganization strategies and other state and local planning documents .

to obtain estimates of federal costs for program administration , we used administrative cost data from federal agency sources for programs where such data were available: tanf , food stamps , medicaid , school meals , housing choice voucher , low - rent public housing , and ssi .

for the other programs , we developed estimates of federal administrative costs as follows .

for the wic program , overall administrative cost data available from the agency includes nutrition education and assessment costs as part of the administrative cost category .

to develop our estimate , we computed and removed the amount ( two - thirds of the costs ) associated with nutrition assessment activities and attributed the remainder to general administration .

for the child care program , eligibility determination data are gathered separately from administrative cost data by the states .

to make a fiscal year 1998 estimate we developed separate estimates for eligibility determination costs and other administrative costs and added the components together .

for the liheap and schip programs , the maximum allowable administrative cost percentage ( 10 percent ) was applied to the separate appropriations for 1998 where administrative costs could be applied .

our work was done between september 2000 and august 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the following people also made important contributions to this report: george erhart ; sheila nicholson ; mikki holmes ; daniel schwimer ; and barbara alsip .

child care: states increased spending on low - income families ( gao - 01-293 , feb. 2 , 2001 ) .

food stamp program: states seek to reduce payment errors and program complexity ( gao - 01-272 , jan. 19 , 2001 ) .

food assistance: activities and use of nonprogram resources at six wic agencies ( gao / rced - 00-202 , sept. 29 , 2000 ) .

benefit and loan programs: improved data sharing could enhance program integrity ( gao / hehs - 00-119 , sept. 13 , 2000 ) .

welfare reform: improving state automated systems requires coordinated federal effort ( gao / hehs - 00-48 , apr .

27 , 2000 ) .

welfare reform: states' experiences in providing employment assistance to tanf clients ( gao / hehs - 99-22 , feb. 26 , 1999 ) .

welfare reform: few states are likely to use the simplified food stamp program ( gao / rced - 99-43 , jan. 29 , 1999 ) .

medicaid: early implications of welfare reform for beneficiaries and states ( gao / hehs - 98-62 , feb. 24 , 1998 ) .

welfare programs: opportunities to consolidate and increase program efficiencies ( gao / hehs - 95-139 , may 31 , 1995 ) .

means - tested programs: an overview , problems , and issues ( gao / t - hehs - 95-76 , feb. 7 , 1995 ) welfare simplification: states' views on coordinating services for low - income families ( gao / hrd - 87-110fs , jul .

29 , 1987 ) .

welfare simplification: thirty - two states' views on coordinating services for low - income families ( gao / hrd - 87-6fs , oct. 30 , 1986 ) .

welfare simplification: projects to coordinate services for low - income families ( gao / hrd - 86-124fs , aug. 29 , 1986 ) .

needs - based programs: eligibility and benefit factors ( gao / hrd - 86- 107fs , jul .

9 , 1986 ) .

