thank you for the opportunity to discuss our covert testing of the nuclear regulatory commission's ( nrc ) licensing process for sealed radioactive sources .

under the atomic energy act of 1954 , nrc regulates domestic medical , industrial , and research uses of sealed radioactive sources through a combination of regulatory requirements , licensing , inspection , and enforcement .

organizations or individuals attempting to purchase a sealed source must apply for a license and gain the approval of either nrc or an “agreement state.” to become an agreement state , a state must first demonstrate to nrc that its regulatory program is compatible with nrc regulations and is effective in protecting public health and safety .

through an agreement between nrc and the state governor , nrc then transfers portions of its regulatory and licensing authority to the state .

according to nrc , there are approximately 22,000 licenses in the united states — nrc administers about 4,400 licenses , and the rest are administered by regulatory authorities in the 34 agreement states .

given that terrorists have expressed an interest in obtaining nuclear material , the congress and the american people expect licensing programs for these materials to be secure .

however , in 2003 , we reported that weaknesses in the licensing program could allow terrorists to obtain radioactive materials .

we recommended that nrc close this vulnerability by modifying its licensing process .

among other things , we recommended that “nrc modify its process for issuing specific licenses to ensure that sealed radioactive sources cannot be purchased before nrc's verification — through inspection or other means — that the materials will be used as intended.” nrc agreed with this recommendation and referred the issue to a working group composed of nrc and state representatives to coordinate nrc's response .

in december 2005 , the working group delivered its recommendations to nrc senior management .

in december 2006 , nrc issued new guidance to agreement states and nrc regional offices meant to strengthen the radioactive materials licensing process .

although these are important steps forward , the subcommittee remained concerned about whether , almost 6 years after september 11 , 2001 , terrorists could still exploit weaknesses in the government's licensing process and obtain radioactive material .

to determine whether nrc actions to address our 2003 recommendations were sufficient , the subcommittee asked us to use covert investigative methods to test the licensing program .

to perform this investigation , we incorporated two bogus businesses — one in a non - agreement state and one in an agreement state .

we selected these two states based on their proximity to the washington , d.c. , metro area .

using the names of the bogus businesses , we then prepared and submitted one application for a byproduct materials license to nrc and a second application to the department of the environment of the agreement state .

in creating these applications , we only used publicly available information .

our investigators did not actually purchase radioactive materials for several reasons — first , the primary intent of our work was to test the licensing process rather than the purchasing process ; second , we did not think the cost borne by the government would be necessary to prove the point of our work ; and third , we did not have the proper facilities to safely store the radioactive materials .

in performing research for this work , we reviewed our previous reports on nuclear security and learned about the licensing process from nrc's web site .

we altered the license we received from nrc , which enabled us to obtain agreements to purchase more radioactive material than the original license permitted .

we conducted our investigative work from october 2006 through june 2007 in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency .

in summary , we found the following: the license application we submitted to nrc was approved .

we received a license in the mail from nrc about 4 weeks after submitting the application .

aside from traveling to a non - agreement state to pick up and send mail , our investigators did not need to leave their office in washington , d.c. , to obtain the license from nrc .

further , other than obtaining radiation safety officer training , investigators gathered all the information they needed for the license from the nrc web site .

after obtaining a license from nrc , we sought to purchase , from two u.s. suppliers , machines containing sealed radioactive material .

our letters of intent to purchase , which included an altered version of the nrc license as an attachment , were accepted by the suppliers .

these suppliers gave us price quotes and commitments to ship the machines containing radioactive materials .

the amount of radioactive material we could have acquired from these two suppliers was sufficient to reach the international atomic energy agency's ( iaea ) definition of category 3 .

according to iaea , category 3 sources are dangerous if not safely managed or securely protected and “could cause permanent injury to a person who handled them , or was otherwise in contact with them , for some hours .

it could possibly — although it is unlikely — be fatal to be close to this amount of unshielded radioactive material for a period of days to weeks.” importantly , with patience and the proper financial resources , we could have accumulated from other suppliers substantially more radioactive source material than what the two suppliers initially agreed to ship to us .

we withdrew our second application from the agreement state department of the environment after license examiners indicated they would visit our company office before granting the license .

since we did not have a company office or the proper storage equipment , we asked the state to withdraw our application to obtain a license in this state .

according to an official with the licensing program for this state , the completion of a site visit is a standard procedure before the state department of the environment approves a radioactive materials license application .

since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks there has been concern that certain radioactive material could be used in the construction of a radiological dispersion device ( rdd ) .

an rdd disperses radioactive material over a particular target area , which could be accomplished using explosives or by other means .

the major purpose of an rdd would be to create terror and disruption , not death or destruction .

depending on the type , form , amount , and concentration of radioactive material used , direct radiation exposure from an rdd could cause health effects to individuals in proximity to the material for an extended time ; for those exposed for shorter periods and at lower levels , it could potentially increase the long - term risks of cancer .

in addition , the evacuation and cleanup of contaminated areas after dispersal could lead to panic and serious economic costs on the affected population .

in 2003 , a joint nrc / department of energy ( doe ) interagency working group identified several radioactive materials ( including americium - 241 and cesium - 137 ) as materials at higher risk of being used in an rdd , describing these as “materials of greatest concern.” in its risk - based approach to securing radioactive sources , nrc has made a commitment to work toward implementing the provisions of iaea's code of conduct .

this document provides a framework that categorizes the relative risk associated with radioactive sources .

while nrc has recently focused on upgrading its capacity to track , monitor , and secure category 1 and 2 sources , which are considered high risk , category 3 sources are not a primary focus of nrc regulatory efforts .

category 3 sources include byproduct material , which is radioactive material generated by a nuclear reactor , and can be found in equipment that has medical , academic , and industrial applications .

for example , a standard type of moisture gauge used by many construction companies contains small amounts of americium - 241 and cesium - 137 .

according to nrc , it would take 16 curies of americium - 241 to constitute a high - risk category 2 quantity , and 1.6 curies of americium - 241 is considered a category 3 quantity .

in october and november 2006 , using fictitious names , our investigators created two bogus companies — one in an agreement state and one in a non - agreement state .

after the bogus businesses were incorporated , our investigators prepared and submitted applications for a byproduct materials license to both nrc and the department of the environment for the selected agreement state .

the applications , mailed in february 2007 , were identical except for minor differences resulting from variations in the application forms .

using fictitious identities , one investigator represented himself as the company president in the applications , and another investigator represented himself as the radiation safety officer .

the license applications stated that our company intended to purchase machines with sealed radioactive sources .

according to nrc guidance finalized in november 2006 and sent to agreement states in december 2006 , both nrc and agreement state license examiners should consider 12 screening criteria to verify that radioactive materials will be used as intended by a new applicant .

for example , one criterion suggests that the license examiner perform an internet search using common search engines to confirm that an applicant company appears to be a legitimate business that would require a specific license .

another screening technique calls for the license examiner to contact a state agency to confirm that the applicant has been registered as a legitimate business entity in that state .

if the examiner believes there is no reason to be suspicious , he or she is not required to take the steps suggested in the screening criteria and may indicate “no” or “not applicable” for each criteria .

if the license examiner takes additional steps to evaluate a criterion , he or she should indicate what publicly available information was considered .

if there is concern for a potential security risk , the guidance instructs license examiners to note the basis for that concern .

nine days after mailing their application form to nrc , our investigators received a call from an nrc license examiner .

the nrc license examiner stated that the application was deficient in some areas and explained the necessary corrections .

for example , the license examiner asked our investigators to certify that the machines containing sealed radioactive source material , which are typically used at construction sites , would be returned to the company office before being transported to a new construction site .

the license examiner explained that this was a standard security precaution .

even though we did not have a company office or a construction site , our investigators nevertheless certified their intent to bring the machines back to their office before sending them to a new location .

they made this certification via a letter faxed to nrc .

four days after our final correction to the license application , nrc approved our application and mailed the license to the bogus business in the non - agreement state .

it took a total of 4 weeks to obtain the license .

see figure 1 for the first page of the transmittal letter we received from nrc with our license .

the nrc license is printed on standard 8-1 / 2 x 11 inch paper and contains a color nrc seal for a watermark .

it does not appear to have any features that would prevent physical counterfeiting .

we therefore concluded that we could alter the license without raising the suspicion of a supplier .

we altered the license so that it appeared our bogus company could purchase an unrestricted quantity of sealed source materials rather than the small amounts of americium - 241 and cesium - 137 listed on the original license .

we determined the proper language for the license by reviewing publicly available information .

next , we contacted two u.s. suppliers of the machines specified in our license .

we requested price quotes and faxed the altered license to the suppliers as proof that we were certified to purchase the machines .

both suppliers offered to sell us the machines and provided us price quotes .

one of these suppliers offered to provide twice as many machines as we requested and offered a discount for volume purchases .

in a later telephone call to one of the suppliers , a representative of the supplier told us that his company does not check with nrc to confirm the terms listed on the licenses that potential customers fax them .

he said that his company checks to see whether a copy of the front page of the license is faxed with the intent to purchase and whether the requested order exceeds the maximum allowable quantity a licensee is allowed to possess at any one time .

although we had no legitimate use for the machines , our investigators received , within days of obtaining a license from nrc , price quotes and terms of payment that would have allowed us to purchase numerous machines containing sealed radioactive source materials .

these purchases would have substantially exceeded the limit that nrc approved for our bogus company .

if these radioactive materials were unsealed and aggregated together , the machines would yield an amount of americium - 241 that exceeds the threshold for category 3 materials .

as discussed previously , according to iaea , category 3 sources are dangerous if not safely managed or securely protected and “could cause permanent injury to a person who handled them , or was otherwise in contact with them , for some hours .

it could possibly — although it is unlikely — be fatal to be close to this amount of unshielded radioactive material for a period of days to weeks.” importantly , with patience and the proper financial resources , we could have accumulated , from other suppliers , substantially more radioactive source material than what the two suppliers initially agreed to ship to us — potentially enough to reach category 2 .

according to iaea , category 2 sources , if not safely managed or securely protected , “could cause permanent injury to a person for a short time ( minutes to hours ) , and it could possibly be fatal to be close to this amount of unshielded material for a period of hours to days. .

ten days after mailing their application form to the agreement state's department of environment , our investigators received a call from a department license examiner .

the license examiner stated that the application was deficient in some areas and said that she would send us a letter outlining what additional information the state required before approving the license .

the examiner further stated that before the license was granted , she would conduct a site visit to inspect the company office and storage facilities cited in our application .

our investigators subsequently decided not to pursue the license in this state and requested that their application be withdrawn .

according to an official in the department of environment for this state , the license examiner followed the required state procedure in requesting a site visit .

the official told us that as a matter of long - standing state policy , license examiners in this state conduct site visits and interview company management ( especially radiation safety officers ) before granting new licenses for radioactive materials .

this state policy is more stringent than the guidance nrc provided agreement states in december 2006 .

the nrc guidance identified a site visit as one possible screening criterion to use in evaluating a new license application , but , as discussed above , a site visit is not required under the nrc guidance .

on june 1 , 2007 , we contacted nrc and discussed the results of our work .

an nrc official indicated that nrc would take immediate action to address the weaknesses we identified .

after this meeting , we learned that nrc suspended its licensing program for specific licenses until it could determine what corrective actions were necessary to resolve the weaknesses .

nrc also held a teleconference with a majority of the 34 agreement states to discuss our work .

on june 12 , 2007 , nrc issued supplemental interim guidance with additional screening criteria .

these criteria are intended to help a license examiner determine whether a site visit or face - to - face meeting with new license applicants is required .

nrc told us that it planned to convene a working group to develop improved guidance addressing the weaknesses we identified .

nrc's goal is to provide licenses to only those entities that can demonstrate that they have legitimate uses for radioactive materials .

however , our work shows that there continues to be weaknesses in the process nrc uses to approve license applications .

in our view , a routine visit by nrc staff to the site of our bogus business would have been enough to reveal our lack of facilities and equipment .

furthermore , if nrc license examiners had conducted even a minimal amount of screening — such as performing common web searches or making telephone calls to local government or business offices — they would have developed serious doubts about our application .

once we received our license , the ease with which we were able to alter the license and obtain price quotes and commitments to ship from suppliers of radioactive materials is also cause for concern .

accordingly , we are making the following three recommendations to the chairman of the nrc: first , to avoid inadvertently allowing a malevolent individual or group to obtain a license for radioactive materials , nrc should develop improved guidance for examining nrc license applications .

in developing improved screening criteria , nrc should consider whether site visits to new licensees should be mandatory .

these improved screening criteria will allow nrc to provide reasonable assurance that licenses for radioactive materials will only be issued to those with legitimate uses .

second , nrc should conduct periodic oversight of license application examiners so that nrc will be assured that any new guidance is being appropriately applied .

third , nrc should explore options to prevent individuals from counterfeiting nrc licenses , especially if this allows the purchase of more radioactive materials than they are approved for under the terms of the original license .

mr. chairman , this concludes our statement .

we would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information about this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-7455 or kutzg@gao.gov or gene aloise at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov .

contacts points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

