coal power plants generate about half of the united states' electricity and are expected to continue supplying a large portion of the nation's electricity in the future .

according to the department of energy's ( doe ) energy information administration ( eia ) , coal will provide 44 percent of the electricity in 2035 in the united states .

the critical role that coal plays in supplying electricity is due in part to the large coal reserves in the united states , which some estimate will last about 240 years at current consumption levels , and the relatively low cost of this energy supply .

however , coal power plants also currently account for about one - third of the nation's emissions of carbon dioxide ( co ) , the most prevalent greenhouse gas .

concerns over rising greenhouse gas emissions and their potential effects on the climate have led some countries to adopt or consider adopting policies to reduce these emissions .

in the united states and elsewhere , these concerns have also increased focus on developing and using technologies to limit co emissions from coal plants: carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) and efficiency technologies .

ccs technologies separate and capture co — post - combustion , pre - combustion , and oxy - combustion .

post - combustion capture involves capturing copre - combustion capture involves capturing co produced when gasifying coal at integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) plants , which are in limited use in the electricity industry .

oxy - combustion capture involves capturing co efficiency upgrades can also be made in existing coal plants , such as overhauling or replacing turbine fan blades .

improving the efficiency of coal plants allows them to use less coal per unit of electricity produced and achieve a corresponding reduction in co emissions could affect coal power plants .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has taken steps to regulate greenhouse gas emissions under the clean air act and plans to begin regulating emissions from certain stationary sources , including coal power plants , beginning in 2011 .

as part of this effort , epa is compiling technical and background information on potential control technologies and measures , such as ccs , and developing policy guidance to assist permitting agencies in determining the best available control technology for greenhouse gas emissions .

in addition , the american clean energy and security act passed the house of representatives on june 26 , 2009 , and would require an 83 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 levels by 2050 .

among other things , this proposed legislation would create a cap and trade program , a market - based mechanism to establish a price for emissions of greenhouse gases , and require additional specific actions to reduce these emissions .

for example , section 116 of the bill would require new coal power plants permitted before 2020 to reduce their co emissions by half , 4 years after certain ccs deployment criteria are met or by 2025 , whichever comes first .

doe plays a key role in accelerating the commercial availability of technologies to reduce co from coal plants along with other policymakers that are considering climate change policies .

in the near term , according to doe's fiscal year 2011 budget submission , doe hopes to facilitate the development of ccs and efficiency technologies , with longer term goals of improving these technologies so that coal can remain part of the nation's fuel mix in generating electricity .

in fiscal year 2009 , doe's coal rd&d funding was at least $681 million , and $3.4 billion was appropriated in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) for fossil energy rd&d .

in this context , you asked us to review key technologies to reduce co emissions from coal power plants ; ( 2 ) the potential for these technologies to be used commercially in the future , and challenges , if any , to their use ; and ( 3 ) the possible implications of deploying these technologies .

we briefed your staffs on the results of our work on june 1 , 2010 ( see app .

i ) .

this report summarizes and formally transmits the information provided during that briefing .

it incorporates technical and other comments provided by agencies since the briefing .

to conduct this work , we reviewed key reports including those from doe's national laboratories , the national academy of sciences ( nas ) , international energy agency ( iea ) , intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) , global ccs institute , the national coal council , and academic reports .

we conducted interviews with stakeholders such as power plant operators , technology vendors , and federal officials from epa and doe along with officials from the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) .

we then selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in ccs or efficiency technologies to answer a standard set of questions .

this group included those from major utilities that are planning or implementing projects using key coal technologies , technology vendors that are developing these technologies , federal officials providing rd&d funding for these technologies , and researchers from academia and industry that are researching these technologies .

we asked these stakeholders to describe the maturity of these technologies using a nine point scale we developed in conjunction with the electric power research institute ( epri ) based on the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) technology readiness levels ( trl ) .

trls are a tool that is used by nasa and other agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended .

we also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by iea and the global ccs institute .

to identify the potential for these technologies to be used commercially in the future along with any associated challenges or implications , we reviewed key reports on ccs and efficiency technologies and examined goals set out by doe , iea , and electricity industry groups for deploying these technologies .

we also asked our 19 stakeholders with expertise in ccs or efficiency technologies for their views on the potential challenges and implications of using these technologies .

finally , we visited coal power plants and research facilities in three states – – alabama , maryland , and west virginia – – that we selected because they contained projects involving advanced coal technologies .

importantly , our discussion focuses on the technological maturity of these technologies .

trls describe the level of demonstration achieved for particular technologies , but they do not provide information on other factors that play a critical role in decisions to deploy them , such as their cost , availability of financing , and applicable regulations .

technological improvements could help these technologies overcome some challenges or potential negative implications .

for example , novel approaches to co capture could help to lower the cost of using these technologies .

we conducted this performance audit from july 2009 through may 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

a more detailed description of our scope and methodology is presented in appendix ii .

doe's office of fossil energy oversees research on key coal technologies , but doe does not systematically assess the maturity of those technologies .

using trls we developed for these technologies , we found consensus among stakeholders that ccs is less mature than efficiency technologies .

although federal standards for internal control require agency managers to compare actual program performance to planned or expected results and analyze significant differences , we found that doe's office of fossil energy does not systematically assess the maturity of key coal technologies as they progress toward commercialization .

while doe officials reported that individual programs are aware of the maturity of technologies and doe publishes reports that assess the technical and economic feasibility of advanced coal technologies , we found that the office of fossil energy does not use a standard set of benchmarks or terms to describe or report on the maturity of technologies .

in addition , doe's goals for advancing these technologies sometimes use terms that are not well defined .

the lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity of key coal technologies and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits: doe's ability to provide a clear picture of the maturity of these technologies to policymakers , utilities officials , and others ; congressional and other oversight of the hundreds of millions of dollars doe is spending on these technologies ; and policymakers' ability to assess the maturity of ccs and the resources that might be needed to achieve commercial deployment .

other agencies similarly charged with developing technologies , such as nasa and the department of defense ( dod ) , use trls to characterize the maturity of technologies .

table 1 shows a description of trls used by nasa .

doe has acknowledged that trls can play a key role in assessing the maturity of technologies during the contracting process .

the agency recently issued a technology readiness assessment guide , which lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments during the contracting process .

identify critical technology elements that are essential to the successful operation of the facility .

assess maturity of these critical technologies using trls .

develop a technology maturity plan which identifies activities required to bring technology to desired trl level .

although use of the guide is not mandatory , doe's office of environmental management uses the guide as part of managing its procurement activities – – a result of a gao recommendation – – and its office of nuclear energy has begun using trls to measure and communicate risks associated with using critical technologies in a novel way .

furthermore , the national nuclear security administration has used trls recently as well .

in the absence of an assessment from doe , we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based on trls .

table 2 shows the trls we developed for coal technologies by adapting the nasa trls .

for eor use .

however , this plant does not produce electricity .

plants have already been demonstrated commercially .

for example , a number of ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 mw have been built or are under construction in europe and asia , and there are five igcc plants in operation around the world , including two in the united states .

commercial deployment of ccs within 10 to 15 years is possible according to doe and other stakeholders , but is contingent on overcoming a variety of economic , technical , and legal challenges .

many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now , but still face challenges .

injection wells can be permitted as class i ( injections of hazardous wastes , industrial nonhazardous wastes , municipal wastewater ) or class v wells ( injections not included in other classes , including wells used in experimental technologies such as pilot co for geologic sequestration .

endangerment of underground sources of drinking water until the operator meets all the closure and post - closure requirements and epa approves site closure of the well .

according to epa , once site closure is approved , well operators will only be liable under the sdwa if they violate or fail to comply with epa orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant that is in or likely to enter an underground source of drinking water .

epa plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall 2010 .

neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored co emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants .

in addition , some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available .

for example , “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees fahrenheit higher than today's ultrasupercritical plants according to doe .

from a legal perspective , most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by the prospect of triggering the clean air act's new source review ( nsr ) requirements – – additional requirements that may apply when a plant makes a major modification , a physical or operational change that would result in a significant net increase in emissions .

emissions than efficiency improvements alone but could raise electricity costs , increase demand for water , and could affect the ability of individual plants to operate reliably .

technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near - term reductions , but also raise some concerns .

according to key reports and stakeholders , the successful deployment of ccs technologies is critical to helping the united states meet potential limits in greenhouse gas emissions .

in addition , ccs could allow coal to remain part of the nation's diverse fuel mix .

iea estimated that ccs technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global co this report also noted that the cost of meeting this goal would increase if ccs was not deployed .

massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) researchers called ccs the “critical enabling technology” to reduce co emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future .

in 2009 , nas reported that if ccs technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade , the electricity sector could move more towards using natural gas to meet emissions targets .

our past work has also found that switching from coal to natural gas can lead to higher fuel costs and increased exposure to the greater price volatility of natural gas .

on the other hand , most stakeholders told us that ccs would increase electricity prices , and key reports raise similar concerns .

mit estimated that plants with post - combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity , and igcc plants with pre - combustion capture have a 27 percent higher cost compared to plants without these technologies .

similarly , doe estimated that plants with post - combustion capture have 83 percent higher cost of electricity , while igcc plants with pre - combustion capture having a 36 percent higher cost .

doe has also raised concerns about ccs and water consumption .

specifically , doe estimated that post - combustion capture technology could almost double water consumption at a coal plant , while pre - combustion capture would increase water use by 73 percent .

some utility officials also said ccs could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably because a power plant might need to shut down if any of the three components ( capture , transport , and storage ) of ccs became unavailable .

in addition , more electricity sources would need to make up for the higher parasitic load associated with ccs .

the national coal council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies .

emission goals with 21st century technologies ( washington , d.c. , december 2009 ) .

we provided a draft of our report to the secretary of energy and the administrator of epa for review and comment .

in addition , we provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to nerc for comment .

we received written comments from doe's assistant secretary of the office of fossil energy , which are reproduced in appendix iii .

the assistant secretary concurred with our recommendation , stating that doe could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity and that it planned to conduct a formal trl assessment of coal technologies in the near future .

the assistant secretary also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate .

in addition , epa and nerc provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , secretary of energy , administrator of epa , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

all u.s. emissions of coco2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas ( ghg ) .

program and interviewed senior doe staff on these visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states — al , md , and wv4 we conducted this performance audit from july 2009 through may 2010 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained projects involving advanced coal technologies .

to conduct this work , we reviewed key reports including those from the department of energy's ( doe ) national laboratories , the national academy of sciences , international energy agency ( iea ) , intergovernmental panel on climate change , global ccs institute , the national coal council , and academic reports .

to identify stakeholders' views on these technologies , we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators , technology vendors , and federal officials from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and doe .

following this initial round of interviews , we selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) or technologies to improve coal plant efficiency and asked them a set of standard questions .

this group of stakeholders included representatives from major utilities that are planning or implementing projects that use these technologies , technology vendors that are developing these technologies , federal officials that are providing research , development , and demonstration funding for these technologies , and researchers from academia or industry that are actively researching these technologies .

during these interviews , we asked stakeholders to describe the maturity of technologies in terms of a scale we developed , based on technology readiness levels ( trl ) .

trls are a tool developed by the national aeronautics and space administration and used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended using a scale of 1 to 9 .

in developing trls for coal technologies , we consulted with the electric power research institute ( epri ) , which had recently used a similar approach to examine the maturity of coal technologies .

specifically , epri developed specific benchmarks to describe trls in the context of a commercial scale coal power plant .

for example , they defined trl 8 as demonstration at more than 25 percent the size of a commercial scale plant .

we applied these benchmarks to a commercial scale power plant , which we defined as 500 megawatts ( mw ) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide ( co ) annually .

we based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed , which used 500 mw as a standard power plant , and stated that such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of co emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors , including the amount of time that a power plant is operated .

we also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by iea and the global ccs institute .

the following are gao's comments on the department of energy's letter dated june 4 , 2010 .

in addition to the contact names above , key contributors to this report included jon ludwigson ( assistant director ) , chloe brown , scott heacock , alison o'neill , kiki theodoropoulos , and jarrod west .

important assistance was also provided by chuck bausell , nirmal chaudhary , cindy gilbert , madhav panwar , and jeanette soares .

