we are pleased to be here today to discuss airport financing issues , which are particularly important as you prepare to reauthorize the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 century ( air - 21 ) .

much has changed since the congress enacted air - 21 3 years ago .

at that time , the focus was on reducing congestion and flight delays .

today , flights are being canceled for lack of business , two major air carriers are in bankruptcy , and attention has shifted from increasing the capacity of the national airspace system to enhancing aviation security .

furthermore , as the federal budget deficit has increased , competition for federal resources has intensified , and the costs of airport capital development are growing , especially with the new requirements for security .

nonetheless , analysts expect the demand for air traffic services to rebound .

until that time , the unexpected slump in air traffic creates a window of opportunity to improve the safety and efficiency of the national airport system .

my statement today is based on our ongoing and completed work on airport funding and addresses the following questions: 1 .

what are the estimated costs of airports' planned capital development ? .

2 .

how much funding did airports receive for planned capital development in recent years , and what were their principal sources of funding ? .

3 .

if past funding levels continue , will they be sufficient to meet estimates of planned capital development ? .

4 .

what options are available to address any potential difference between planned development and available funding ? .

because our information on planned airport capital development , including the information we obtained from surveying 400 smaller airports , is preliminary , it is subject to change as we finalize our ongoing work .

although there is general consensus among stakeholders that maintaining the integrity of the national airport system requires continual capital investment , estimates vary as to the type and cost of planned airport capital development required to ensure a safe and efficient system .

for 2001 through 2005 , faa has estimated annual planned capital development costs of about $9 billion , while the airport council international ( aci ) , a key organization representing the airport industry , has estimated annual costs of about $15 billion for 2002 through 2006 .

the estimates differ primarily because faa's includes only projects that are eligible for federal funding , whereas aci's includes projects that may or may not be eligible for federal funding .

neither faa's nor aci's estimate covers the airport terminal modifications needed to accommodate the new explosives detection systems required to screen checked baggage .

according to aci , the total cost of these modifications could be $3 billion to $5 billion over the next 5 years .

from 1999 through 2001 , airports received an average of about $12 billion a year for planned capital development .

the primary source of this funding was bonds , which accounted for almost $7 billion , followed by federal grants and passenger facility charges , which accounted for $2.4 billion and $1.6 billion , respectively .

the amounts and types of funding also varied by airport type .

of the $12 billion , large - and medium - hub airports received over $9 billion , and smaller airports received over $2 billion .

if airports continue to receive about $12 billion a year for planned capital development , they would be able to fund all of the projects included in faa's estimate , but they would not be able to fund about $3 billion in planned development estimated by aci .

while this projected shortfall could change with revisions in future funding , planned development , or both , it nevertheless indicates where funding differences may be the greatest .

options are available to increase or make better use of the funding for airport development , and these options would benefit different types of airports to varying degrees .

for example , raising the current cap on passenger facility charges would primarily benefit larger airports , while increasing or redistributing airport improvement program grant funds would be more likely to help smaller airports .

the estimated costs of planned airport capital development vary depending on which projects are included in the estimates .

according to faa's estimate , which includes only projects that are eligible for airport improvement program ( aip ) grants , the total cost of airport development will be about $46 billion , or about $9 billion per year , for 2001 through 2005 .

faa's estimate is based on the agency's national plan of integrated airport systems , which faa published in august 2002 .

aci's estimate includes all of the projects in faa's estimate , plus other planned airport capital projects that may or may not be eligible for aip grants .

aci estimates a total cost of almost $75 billion , or nearly $15 billion per year for 2002 through 2006 .

projects that are eligible for aip grants include runways , taxiways , and noise mitigation and noise reduction efforts ; projects that are not eligible for aip funding include parking garages , hangars , and expansions of commercial space in terminals .

both faa's and aci's estimates cover projects for every type of airport .

as table 1 indicates , the estimates are identical for all but the large - and medium - hub airports , which are responsible for transporting about 90 percent of the traveling public .

for these airports , aci's estimate of planned development costs is about twice as large as faa's .

according to faa's analysis of the planned capital development for 2001 through 2005 , airports will use 61 percent of the $46 billion for capacity enhancement , reconstruction , and modifications to bring airports up to the agency's design standards and 39 percent to fund safety , security , environmental , and other projects .

see figure 1 .

neither aci's nor faa's estimate includes funding for the terminal modification projects that are needed to accommodate the new explosives detection systems required to screen checked baggage .

aci estimates that these projects will cost a total of about $3 billion to $5 billion over the next 5 years .

a key reauthorization issue facing the congress is how these terminal modification projects will be funded .

in 2001 , the congress allowed faa to use aip funds to help pay for some new security projects ; however , this use of aip funds affected the amount of funding that was available for some development projects .

specifically , in fiscal year 2002 , faa used $561 million in aip grant funds for security projects , or about 17 percent of the $3.3 billion available .

the use of aip grant funds for new security projects in fiscal year 2002 reduced the funding available for other airport development projects , such as projects to bring airports up to faa's design standards and reconstruction projects .

the use of aip grant funds for security also caused faa to defer three letter - of - intent payments totaling $28 million to three airports until fiscal year 2003 or later .

from 1999 through 2001 , the 3,364 airports that make up the national airport system received an average of about $12 billion per year for planned capital development .

the single largest source of these funds was bonds , followed by aip grants and passenger facility charges .

 ( see table 2. ) .

it is important to note that the authorized aip funding for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 totaled $3.3 billion and $3.4 billion , respectively .

however , because data for funding from other sources were not available for these years , we used the figures from 1999 through 2001 , the most recent years for which consistent data were available .

the amount and type of funding vary depending on the airport's size .

for example , as shown in figure 2 , the large - and medium - hub airports depend primarily on bonds , while the smaller airports rely principally on aip grants .

passenger facility charges are a more important source of revenue for the large - and medium - hub airports because they have the majority of commercial - service passengers .

if the funding for airport capital development remains at about $12 billion a year over the next 5 years , it would cover all of the projects in faa's estimate .

however , it would be about $3 billion less per year than aci's estimate .

figure 3 compares the average annual funding airports received from 1999 through 2001 with faa's and aci's estimated annual planned development costs for 2001 through 2006 .

this difference is not an absolute predictor of future funding shortfalls ; both funding and planned development may change in the future .

however , it does provide a useful indication of where funding differences may be the greatest .

in percentage terms , the difference between recent funding levels and aci's estimate of planned capital development is somewhat greater for smaller airports than it is for large - and medium - hub airports .

from 1999 through 2001 , smaller airports received an average of about $2.4 billion a year for planned capital development while large - and medium - hub airports received an average of about $9.4 billion .

if these funding levels continued , smaller airports would not be able to fund about 27 percent of their planned development , while large - and medium - hub airports would not be able to fund about 20 percent of their planned development .

figures 4 and 5 illustrate the differences between recent funding levels and the costs of planned capital development projected for smaller and for large - and medium - hub airports .

the difference between past funding and planned development has declined over the past 5 years , and , at recent funding levels , airports would be able to fund a higher percentage of their planned capital development than they could fund in 1998 .

at that time , we reported that smaller airports could fund about 52 percent of their planned capital development , compared with about 73 percent today , which represents an increase of 21 percent .

we also reported that large - and medium - hub airports were able to fund about 80 percent of their development and are able to fund the same amount today .

see figure 6 .

the primary reason why smaller airports can fund more of their planned capital development today than they could in 1998 is that air - 21 increased both the total amount of funding for aip grants and the proportion of aip funding that went to smaller airports .

specifically , air - 21 increased the funding for two aip funds that primarily or exclusively benefit smaller airports — the state apportionment fund and the small airport fund — and it created general aviation entitlement grants , which also benefit smaller airports .

as a result of these changes , smaller airports received almost 63 percent of the $2.4 billion in aip grant funds that airports received each year , on average , from 1999 through 2001 .

large - and medium - hub airports can also fund more of their planned development today than they could in 1998 primarily because they are able to issue more bonds and to charge a higher passenger facility fee .

options are available to increase airport funding or to make better use of the existing funding .

these options , some of which were authorized or implemented as part of air - 21 , include increasing the aip grant funding for smaller airports , increasing passenger facility charges , creating a separate fund for new security projects , and using innovative financing approaches .

the various options would benefit different types of airports to varying degrees .

it is also important to note that even though the airlines may be experiencing financial problems , most large airports have very solid credit ratings and could , if necessary , issue more debt without facing exorbitant interest rates .

to help address the difference between funding and planned development , air - 21 provided that up to $150,000 a year in aip grant funds be made available to all general aviation airports for up to 3 years for airfield capital projects , such as runways , taxiways , and airfield construction and maintenance projects .

on february 11 , 2003 , we reported that since the program's inception in fiscal year 2001 , general aviation airports have received about $325 million , which they have used primarily to help build runways , purchase navigational aids , and maintain pavements and airfield lighting .

most of the state aviation officials and general aviation airport managers we surveyed said the grants were useful in meeting their needs , and some suggested that the $150,000 grant limit be increased so that general aviation airports could undertake larger projects .

however , a number of state officials cautioned that an increase in the general aviation entitlement grant could cause a decrease in the state apportionment fund that states use to address their aviation priorities .

another option would be to increase or eliminate the cap on passenger facility charges .

this option would primarily benefit larger airports , because passenger facility charges are a function of the volume of passenger traffic .

however , under aip , large - and medium - hub airports that collect passenger facility charges must forfeit a certain percentage of their aip formula funds .

these forfeited funds are subsequently divided between the small airport fund , which is to receive 87.5 percent , and the discretionary fund , which is to receive 12.5 percent .

thus , smaller airports would benefit indirectly from any increase in passenger facility charges .

in our 1999 report on passenger facility charges , we estimated that a small increase in these charges would have a modest effect on passenger traffic .

at that time , we estimated that each $1 increase would reduce passenger levels by about 0.5 to 1.8 percent , with a midrange estimate of 0.85 percent .

since air - 21 raised the cap on passenger facility charges from $3.00 to $4.50 , the full effect of the increase has not been realized because only 17 of the 31 large - hub airports ( 55 percent ) and 11 of the 37 medium - hub airports ( 30 percent ) have increased their rates to $4.50 .

additionally , 3 large - hub airports and 6 medium - hub airports do not charge a passenger facility fee .

the reluctance to raise passenger facility charges is likely the result of several factors , including the views of airlines , which are opposed to any increase in passenger facility charges because such an increase would raise passenger costs and reduce passenger traffic .

nonetheless , if all airports were to increase passenger facility charges to the current ceiling , additional revenue could be generated .

recently , the head of the transportation security administration suggested setting up a separate fund for security projects .

such a fund might be comparable to aip , which receives revenue from various aviation - related taxes through the airport and airway trust fund .

having a separate fund would be consistent with the recent separation of aviation safety and security responsibilities .

faa has introduced other mechanisms to make better use of existing funding sources , the most successful of which has been letters of intent , a tool that has effectively leveraged private sources of funding .

as noted , letters of intent represents a nonbinding commitment from faa to provide multiyear funding to an airport beyond the current aip authorization period .

thus , the letter allows the airport to proceed with a project without waiting for a future aip grant because the airport and investors know that allowable costs are likely to be reimbursed .

a letter of intent may also enable an airport to receive a more favorable interest rate on bonds that are sold to refinance a project because the federal government has indicated its support for the project .

faa has issued 64 letters of intent with a total commitment of about $3 billion ; large - and medium - hub airports account for the majority of the total .

other approaches to making better use of existing funding resources were authorized under air - 21 .

specifically , the act authorized faa to continue its innovative finance demonstration program , which is designed to test the ability of innovative financing approaches to make more efficient use of aip funding .

under this program , faa enabled airports to leverage additional funds or lower development costs by ( 1 ) permitting flexible local matching on some projects , ( 2 ) purchasing commercial bond insurance , ( 3 ) paying interest costs on debt , and ( 4 ) paying principal and interest debt service on terminal development costs incurred before the enactment of air - 21 .

faa has provided about $31 million for smaller airports to test these innovative uses of aip funding .

according to faa officials , the results of the program have been mixed .

the most popular option for airports has been flexible matching , which has resulted in several creative loan arrangements .

in conclusion , mr. chairman , the aviation industry and the national economy are still struggling to recover their health .

analysts nonetheless expect the demand for air travel to rebound , and the nation's aviation system must be ready to accommodate the projected growth safely and securely .

as the congress moves forward with reauthorizing faa , it will have to decide on several key issues , including how it wants to consider the airports' estimate of $15 billion a year for planned capital development over the next 5 years , how terminal modification projects will be funded , and what priorities it wants to set , both for development and security .

sustaining recent funding levels would allow the majority of planned airport capital development to move forward , but it would not cover all of the airports' estimated costs , and it would not address the costly terminal modifications needed to accommodate explosives detection systems .

options such as additional aip grant funds , increases in passenger facility charges , or the creation of a separate fund for new security projects could make more funding available for airport improvements .

however , the growing competition for federal budget dollars and concerns about the impact of higher charges on airline ticket sales may limit the practicality of these options .

to determine how much planned development would cost over the next 5 years , we obtained planned development data from faa and aci .

aci provided its estimate to us in january 2003 , and we are still analyzing the data on which the estimate is based .

to determine the sources of airport funding , we obtained capital funding data from faa , the national association of state aviation officials , thomson financial , and our survey of 400 general aviation and reliever airports .

we obtained funding data from 1999 through 2001 because these were the most recent years for which consistent data were available .

we screened the planned development and funding data for accuracy and compared funding streams across databases where possible .

we also clarified ambiguous development or funding source information directly with airports .

we did not , however , audit how the databases were compiled , except for our own survey .

however , we have not finished analyzing the results of our survey , and the results presented in this testimony are still preliminary .

we have been performing our ongoing work from may 2002 through february 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have .

