mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here today to present information about what happens when underfunded pension plans are terminated and trusteed by the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) .

under pbgc's single - employer insurance program , if a company's defined benefit pension plan has inadequate assets to pay all promised benefits , plan sponsors meeting certain criteria may voluntarily terminate the plan through a “distress” termination , or pbgc may decide to terminate the plan involuntarily to protect the plan's assets .

if the plan's assets are insufficient to pay benefits currently due , then pbgc must terminate the plan .

in all these situations , pbgc generally becomes the trustee of the plan and assumes responsibility for paying benefits to the participants , up to certain legal limits .

from its inception in 1974 through the end of fiscal year 2008 , pbgc terminated and trusteed a total of 3,860 single - employer plans covering some 1.2 million workers and retirees .

since 2008 , the economic downturn has brought a new influx of pension plan terminations to pbgc , and more are expected to follow .

today i will provide a description , from the workers' and retirees' perspective , of what happens when a plan is terminated and trusteed by pbgc .

specifically , i will describe ( 1 ) pbgc's process for determining the amount of benefits to be paid , and ( 2 ) pbgc's recoupment process when the estimated benefit provided is too high and a retiree receives an overpayment that must be repaid .

this testimony is based primarily on a report we issued on august 17 , 2009 , titled pension benefit guaranty corporation: more strategic approach needed for processing complex plans prone to delays and overpayments .

in developing that report , we reviewed pbgc policies and procedures , analyzed automated data , and interviewed pbgc officials knowledgeable about various stages of the benefit determination process .

we focused our study on participants of plans terminated and trusteed during fiscal years 2000 through 2008 , and spoke with personnel from employee associations and advocacy groups involved in some of these plan terminations .

we conducted this work between october 2008 and august 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

pbgc was created as a government corporation by the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) to help protect the retirement income of u.s. workers with private - sector defined benefit plans by guaranteeing their benefits up to certain legal limits .

pbgc receives no funds from general tax revenues .

operations are financed by insurance premiums set by congress and paid by sponsors of defined benefit plans , recoveries from the companies formerly responsible for the plans , and investment income of assets from pension plans that pbgc trustees .

under current law , other than statutory authority to borrow up to $100 million from the treasury department , no substantial source of funds is available to pbgc if it runs out of money .

in the event that pbgc were to exhaust all of its holdings , benefit payments would have to be drastically cut unless congress were to take action to provide support .

in 2003 , gao designated pbgc's single - employer program as high - risk , and pbgc has remained high - risk with each subsequent update , including our most recent update in 2009 .

this means that the program still needs urgent congressional attention and agency action .

we specifically noted pbgc's prior - year net deficit , as well as the risk of the termination among large , underfunded pension plans , as reasons for the program's high - risk designation .

over the last 6 years or so , the assets and liabilities that pbgc accumulated from trusteeing plans have increased rapidly .

this is largely due to the termination , typically through bankruptcies , of a number of very large , underfunded plan sponsors .

last may , pbgc reported that unaudited financial results through the second quarter of fiscal year 2009 showed its deficit tripling since the end of fiscal year 2008 , from about $11 billion to about $33.5 billion .

since then , the influx of large plan terminations has continued .

for example , in august 2009 , pbgc assumed responsibility for six delphi pension plans , covering about 70,000 workers and retirees , and underfunded by a total of about $7.0 billion .

pbgc estimated that it would be liable for about $6.7 billion of this underfunding .

our review of plans terminated and trusteed between fiscal years 2000 and 2008 found that pbgc completed most participants' benefit determinations in less than 3 years , but required more time — up to 9 years — to process determinations for complex plans , plans with missing data , and plans with large numbers of participants .

as some pension advocacy groups and union representatives have noted , long delays and uncertainty over final benefit amounts make it difficult for workers to plan for retirement , and especially for retirees who have come to depend on a certain level of monthly income .

at the same time , the benefit determination process requires many steps to be complete .

it requires gathering extensive data on plans and each individual's work and personnel history , and identifying who is eligible for benefits under the plan .

this can be particularly complicated if the company or plan has a history of mergers , an elaborate structure , or missing data .

it requires calculating each participant's benefit amount based on provisions that vary from plan to plan , applying the legal limits on guaranteed benefit amounts in each case , and valuing plan assets and liabilities to determine if some or all of the nonguaranteed benefit amount can still be paid .

also , the larger the plan , the heavier the workload for pbgc .

while the average number of participants per plan is slightly fewer than 1,000 , we found that some plans have many more — nearly 93,000 in the case of bethlehem steel .

pbgc's benefit determination process is illustrated in figure 1 .

the key points of contact with workers and retirees that occur during this process are described in detail below .

pbgc's first communication with participants is generally a letter informing them that their pension plan has been terminated and that pbgc has become the plan trustee .

shortly thereafter , this letter is generally followed by a more detailed letter with a packet of materials , including a dvd with an introduction to pbgc and answers to frequently - asked questions about how the benefit determination process works .

pbgc officials refer to this as a “welcome” package .

additionally , for large plans likely to have many participants affected by the legal limits on guaranteed benefits , pbgc will hold on - site information sessions shortly after plan termination .

pbgc also operates a customer service center with a toll - free number that participants can call if they have questions , provides a web site for workers and retirees with detailed information about plans and benefits , and sends participants a newsletter with information about pbgc once or twice per year .

nearly all pension advocacy groups and union representatives with whom we spoke praised pbgc's efforts to hold information sessions with the larger plans .

one union representative commended pbgc staff for going out into the field to talk with participants and answer questions even though participants are likely to be angry .

other union representatives commented that they have been impressed by pbgc's staff for staying at these sessions until they have answered every participant's questions .

while these sessions are generally viewed as helpful , some pension rights advocates noted that the information presented is difficult for participants to understand and apply to their own situations .

comments about pbgc's customer service center and web site were also mixed .

if the participant is already retired , or retires before the benefit determination process is complete , pbgc makes payments to the retiree based on an estimate of what the final benefit amount will be .

according to pbgc , most participants of terminated plans are entitled to receive the full amount of benefits they earned under their plans .

in such cases , the calculation of an estimated benefit is straightforward .

however , some participants may have their benefits reduced to comply with certain limits , specified under erisa and related regulations .

these limits include the phase - in limit , the “accrued - at - normal” limit , and the maximum limit ( see fig .

2 ) .

in these cases , the calculation of an estimated benefit is more complicated .

pbgc does not systematically track the number of participants affected by the limits on guaranteed benefits or how much these limits affect benefit amounts ; however , pbgc has conducted two studies on the impact of these limits in a sample of large plans .

the first study , issued in 1999 , found 5.5 percent of participants were affected by the limits ; and the second study , issued in 2008 , found that 15.9 percent were affected .

following the termination of their plans , those who are already retired may continue to receive their same plan benefit amount as an estimated benefit for several months — or even years — before the estimate is adjusted to reflect the legal limits on guaranteed benefits .

when plans are terminated at the sponsor's request as distress terminations , the sponsors are required to impose these limits themselves so that participants' benefits are reduced as of the date of termination .

however , when plans are terminated involuntarily , there can sometimes be lengthy delays before pbgc reduces estimated benefits to reflect these limits .

not only must pbgc estimate the possible impact of applying the guarantee limits to the participant's benefit , pbgc must also estimate whether there might be sufficient plan assets or recoveries of company assets to pay all or part of the nonguaranteed portion of the participant's benefit .

according to pbgc officials , when it is unclear how much a plan's assets or recoveries will be able to contribute toward the nonguaranteed portion of a retiree's benefit , it can be difficult to calculate an accurate benefit amount until the benefit determination process is complete .

we found cases where estimated benefits were adjusted within 9 months of termination , while in other cases , more than 6 years elapsed before estimated benefits were adjusted .

finalized benefit amounts once the benefit determination process is complete , pbgc notifies each participant of the final benefit amount with a “benefit determination letter.” from the time of its initial contact with plan participants until the benefit determination process is complete , pbgc generally does not communicate with participants .

in some cases , this period can stretch into years .

some of the pension advocacy groups and union representatives we spoke with said that these long periods without communication are problematic for participants for several reasons .

for example , retirees whose benefits are subject to the guarantee limits but who continue to receive their higher plan - level benefits for long periods of time may come to depend on these higher amounts and believe that the this payment level is permanent .

they are surprised when — years later — their benefits are suddenly reduced .

even for participants who are not yet receiving benefits , the lack of communication about the likely amount of their final benefits makes it difficult to plan for retirement .

in addition , pbgc's benefit determination letters generally provide only limited explanations for why the amount may be different from the amount provided under their plan .

in complex plans , when benefit calculations are complicated , the letters often do not adequately explain why benefits are being reduced .

although benefit statements are generally attached , the logic and math involved can be difficult even for pension experts .

some pension advocates and union representatives we spoke with said that they found the explanations in these letters to be too vague and generic , and that the letters did not provide enough information specific to the individual's circumstances to be helpful .

at the same time , they were generally sympathetic to the difficulty of communicating such complicated information .

as one advocate acknowledged , for the letters to be accurate , they have to be complicated ; this may just be “the nature of the beast.” pbgc officials have taken steps to shorten the benefit determination process , although their initiatives have focused on ways to expedite processing of straightforward cases instead of the more difficult cases prone to delays .

pbgc has also developed more than 500 letter formats — in both english and spanish — to address the myriad of situations that may arise in the benefit determination process .

nevertheless , pbgc officials acknowledged that their standard letter formats may not always meet the needs of participants , especially those with complex plans and complicated benefit calculations .

pbgc recently undertook a project to review and update their letters to try to better meet participant needs .

the vast majority of participants in terminated plans are not affected by overpayments or pbgc's recoupment process .

overpayments generally occur when a retiree receives estimated benefits while pbgc is in the process of making benefit determinations and the final benefit amount is less than the estimated benefit amount .

however , we found that of the 1,057,272 participants in plans terminated and trusteed during fiscal years 2000 through 2008 , more than half were not yet retired and , therefore , did not receive estimated benefits before the benefit determination process was complete .

moreover , for most who were retired , the estimated benefit amount received did not change when finalized .

as shown in figure 3 , of the 6.5 percent with benefits that did change when finalized , about half received a benefit amount that was greater , and half received a benefit amount that was less ( about 3 percent of total participants in these plans , overall ) .

in cases with a final benefit greater than the estimated amount , retirees are likely due a backpayment for having been underpaid , which pbgc repays in a lump sum , with interest .

in cases with a final benefit that is less , the retirees are likely to have received an overpayment , which they then must repay to pbgc , with no added interest .

overpayments can occur for two basic reasons: ( 1 ) there is a period of time when the retiree's estimated benefit has not yet been reduced to reflect applicable limits ; and ( 2 ) the retiree's estimated benefit is adjusted to reflect applicable limits , but the estimate is still greater than the benefit amount that is ultimately determined to be correct .

in general , the longer the delay before a retiree's estimated benefit is adjusted to reflect the correct amount , the larger the overpayment , and the greater the amount that will need to be recouped from future monthly benefit payments .

when an overpayment occurs , retirees typically repay the amount owed by having their monthly benefits reduced by some fraction until the debt is repaid .

according to pbgc data , 22,623 participants in plans terminated and trusteed during fiscal years 2000 through 2008 ( 2.1% of the total ) were subject to such recoupment .

the total overpayment amounts varied widely — from less than $1 to more than $150,000 — but our analysis of pbgc data suggests that most owed less than $3,000 .

since in most cases pbgc recoups overpayments by reducing a participant's final benefit by no more than 10 percent each month , recoupment is amortized over many years and the impact on the participant's benefit is limited .

per individual , we found that the median benefit reduction due to recoupment was about $16 a month , or about 3 percent of the monthly payment amount , on average .

the effect of receiving an overpayment of estimated benefits on one retiree's monthly payment is illustrated in figure 4 .

the total amount of this retiree's overpayment was $5,600 .

his monthly payment was ultimately reduced by nearly one - half , but this was primarily due to the application of the guarantee limits .

the amount of the benefit reduction for recoupment of the overpayment is $38 per month , to be paid until 6 / 1 / 2020 .

participants are warned at the beginning of the process that their benefits may be reduced due to the legal limits on guaranteed benefits , and retirees are notified of possible overpayments when they begin to receive estimated payments .

however , these warnings may not have the same meaning for participants when talked about in generalities as when they later receive notices concerning their specific benefit amounts .

it can still come as a shock when — perhaps years later — they receive a final benefit determination letter with this news .

their frustration may be compounded if they fail to understand the explanations provided in the benefit determination letters .

some pension advocates and union representatives we spoke with said that this is often the case in complex cases involving large benefit reductions .

they noted that they did not think most participants would be able to understand the accompanying benefit statements without additional information and assistance .

in the participant files we reviewed , the benefit statements that accompanied the letters ranged in length from 2 to 8 pages .

in some cases , there were as many as 20 to 30 different line items that required making comparisons between the items to understand the logic of the calculations .

participants may appeal the results of the benefit determination process within 45 days of receiving a final benefit determination .

appeals are accepted if they raise a question about how the plan was interpreted , how the law was interpreted , or the practices of the plan's sponsor , but not if they are based only on hardship .

although some appellants have successfully used the appeals process to increase their benefits , less than 20 percent of appeals docketed since fiscal year 2003 have resulted in appellants receiving higher benefit amounts .

we found that a lack of understanding on the part of participants about how their benefits are calculated may engender unnecessary appeals , and that pbgc is not readily providing key information that would be helpful to participants in deciding whether or not to pursue an appeal .

participants may request hardship waivers for overpayments , but only in cases that do not involve an ongoing payment .

pbgc policy stipulates that in cases with an ongoing payment , recoupment of an overpayment may not be waived unless the monthly reduction would be less than $5 .

by comparison , federal agencies such as the social security administration and the office of personnel management generally pursue repayment at a faster rate with larger reductions to benefits when recouping overpayments , but their policies also give greater prominence to waivers .

to address the concerns of workers and retirees in terminated plans who stand to lose as much as one - half or more of their long - anticipated retirement income , and who will likely have to make painful financial adjustments , pbgc needs a more strategic approach for processing complex plans prone to delays and overpayments .

the failure to communicate more often and clearly with participants awaiting a final determination can be disconcerting — especially when participants receive the news that their final determination is “surprisingly” less than they anticipated , or when retirees learn that the estimated interim benefit they had been receiving was too high and that they owe money .

more frequent and clearer communication with plan participants , including more timely adjustments to estimated benefits , more information about how their benefits are calculated , and where to find help if they wish to appeal , would better manage expectations , help people plan for their future , avoid unnecessary appeals , and earn good will during a trying time for all .

in our recently issued report , we recommended that pbgc develop a better strategy for processing complex plans in order to reduce delays , minimize overpayments , improve communication with participants , and make the appeals process more accessible .

after reviewing the draft report , pbgc generally agreed with our recommendations , noting the steps it would take to address gao's concerns .

for example , pbgc said that it had started to track and monitor tasks associated with processing large , complex plans , and would continue to look for other ways to improve its processes .

a complete discussion of our recommendations , pbgc's comments , and our evaluation are provided in our recently issued report .

as pbgc's financial challenges continue to mount and dramatic increases to pbgc's workload appear imminent , improvements to pbgc's processes are urgently needed .

mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include blake l. ainsworth ( assistant director ) , margie k. shields , kristen w. jones , james bennett , susan c. bernstein , and craig w. winslow .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

