we welcome the opportunity to provide this update on our recent work on issues that led us to designate federal real property as a high - risk area .

as you know , in january 2003 , we designated federal real property a high - risk area because of long - standing problems with excess and underutilized property , deteriorating facilities , unreliable real property data , over - reliance on costly leasing , and building security challenges .

as we have reported as part of the high - risk series , the federal real property portfolio largely reflects a business model and the technological and transportation environment of the 1950s .

many federal real property assets are no longer needed ; others are not effectively aligned with , or responsive to , agencies' changing missions .

we issued our latest update on this area in january 2009 , finding that agencies have taken some positive steps to address real property issues but that some of the core problems that led to our designation of this area as high risk persist .

my testimony today is based on our extensive body of work related to these issues .

we also spoke with officials at the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) to update our information on agencies' efforts to address our prior recommendations , and we reviewed recently - introduced initiatives related to agencies' real property disposal authorities .

my testimony focuses on ( 1 ) progress made by major real property - holding agencies to strategically manage real property , ( 2 ) ongoing problems we have identified in recent work regarding agencies' efforts to address real property issues , and ( 3 ) underlying obstacles we have identified through prior work as hampering agencies' real property reform efforts governmentwide .

we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , in june and july 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

major real property - holding agencies and omb have made progress toward strategically managing federal real property .

in april 2007 , we found that in response to the president's management agenda ( pma ) real property initiative and a related executive order , agencies covered under the executive order had , among other things , designated senior real property officers , established asset management plans , standardized real property data reporting , and adopted various performance measures to track progress .

the administration had also established a federal real property council ( frpc ) that guides reform efforts .

under the real property initiative , omb has been evaluating the status and progress of agencies' real property management improvement efforts since the third quarter of fiscal year 2004 using a quarterly scorecard that color codes agencies' progress — green for success , yellow for mixed results , and red for unsatisfactory .

as figure 1 shows , according to omb's analysis , many of these agencies have made progress in accurately accounting for , maintaining , and managing their real property assets so as to efficiently meet their goals and objectives .

as of the first quarter of 2009 , 10 of the 15 agencies evaluated had achieved green status .

according to omb , the agencies achieving green status have established 3-year timelines for meeting the goals identified in their asset management plans ; provided evidence that they are implementing their asset management plans ; used real property inventory information and performance measures in decision making ; and managed their real property in accordance with their strategic plan , asset management plan , and performance measures .

 ( for more information on the criteria omb uses to evaluate agencies' efforts , see app .

i. ) .

omb has also taken some additional steps to improve real property management governmentwide .

according to omb , the federal government disposed of excess real property valued at $1 billion in fiscal year 2008 , bringing the total to over $8 billion since fiscal year 2004 .

omb also reported success in developing a comprehensive database of federal real property assets , the federal real property profile ( frpp ) .

omb recently took further action to improve the reliability of frpp data by implementing a recommendation we made in april 2007 to develop framework that agencies can use to better ensure the validity and usefulness of key real property data in the frpp .

according to omb officials , omb now requires agency - specific validation and verification plans and has developed a frpp validation protocol to certify agency data .

these actions are positive steps towards eventually developing a database that can be used to improve real property management governmentwide .

however , it may take some time for these actions to result in consistently reliable data , and , as described later in this testimony , in recent work we have continued to find problems with the reliability and usefulness of frpp data .

furthermore , our work over the past year has found some other posi steps that some agencies have taken to address ongoing challenges .

specifically: in september 2008 , we found that from fiscal year 2005 through 2007 , va made significant progress in reducing underutilized space ( space not used to full capacity ) in its buildings from 15.4 million square feet to 5.6 million square feet .

we also found that va's use of various legal authorities , suc h as its enhanced use lease authority ( eul ) , which allows it to enter into long - term agreements with public and private entities for the use of va property in exchange for cash or in - kind consideration , likely contrib to its overall reduction of underutilized space since fiscal year 2005 .

however , our work also shows that va does not track it s use of these authorities or of the space reductions .

in spite of some progress made by omb and agencies in managing their real property portfolios , our recent work has found that agencies continue to struggle with the long - standing problems that led us to identify federal real property as high - risk: an over - reliance on costly leasing — and challenges gsa faces in its leasing contracting ; unreliable data ; underutilized and excess property and repair and maintenance backlogs ; and ongoing security challenges faced by agencies and , in particular , by the federal protective service ( fps ) , which is charged with protecting gsa buildings .

one of the major reasons for our designation of federal real property as a high - risk area in january 2003 was the government's overreliance on costly leasing .

under certain conditions , such as fulfilling short - term space needs , leasing may be a lower - cost option than ownership .

however , our work over the years has shown that building ownership often costs less than operating leases , especially for long - term space needs .

in january 2008 , we reported that federal agencies' extensive reliance on leasing has continued , and that federal agencies occupied about 398 million square feet of leased building space domestically in fiscal year 2006 , according to frpp data .

gsa , usps , and usda leased about 71 percent of this space , mostly for offices , and the military services leased another 17 percent .

for fiscal year 2008 , gsa reported that for the first time , it leased more space than it owned .

in 10 gsa and usps leases that we examined in the january 2008 report , decisions to lease space that would be more cost - effective to own were driven by the limited availability of capital for building ownership and other considerations , such as operational efficiency and security .

for example , for four of seven gsa leases we analyzed , leasing was more costly over time than construction — by an estimated $83.3 million over 30 years .

although ownership through construction is often the least expensive option , federal budget scorekeeping rules require the full cost of this option to be recorded up front in the budget , whereas only the annual lease payment and cancellation costs need to be recorded for operating leases , reducing the up - front commitment even though the leases are generally more costly over time .

usps is not subject to the scorekeeping rules and cited operational efficiency and limited capital as its main reasons for leasing .

while omb made progress in addressing long - standing real property problems , efforts to address the leasing challenge have been limited .

we have raised this issue for almost 20 years .

several alternative approaches have been discussed by various stakeholders , including scoring operating leases the same as ownership , but none have been implemented .

in our 2008 report , we recommended that omb , in consultation with the federal real property council and key stakeholders , develop a strategy to reduce agencies' reliance on leased space for long - term needs when ownership would be less costly .

omb agreed with our recommendation .

according to omb officials , in response to this recommendation , an omb working group conducted an analysis of lease performance .

omb is currently using this analysis as it works with officials of the new administration to assess overall real property priorities in order to establish a roadmap for further action .

with gsa's ongoing reliance on leasing , it is critical that gsa manage its in - house and contracted leasing activities effectively .

however , in january 2007 , we identified numerous areas in gsa's implementation of four contracts for national broker services that warranted improvement .

our findings were particularly significant since , over time , gsa expects to outsource the vast majority of its expiring lease workload .

at one time , gsa performed lease acquisition , management , and administration functions entirely in - house .

in 1997 , however , gsa started entering into contracts for real estate services to carry out a portion of its leasing program , and in october 2004 , gsa awarded four contracts to perform broker services nationwide ( national broker services ) , with contract performance beginning on april 1 , 2005 .

gsa awarded two of the four contracts to dual - agency brokerage firms — firms that represent both building owners and tenants ( in this case , gsa acting on behalf of a tenant agency ) .

the other two awardees were tenant - only brokerage firms — firms that represent only the tenant in real estate transactions .

because using a dual - agency brokerage firm creates an increased potential for conflicts of interest , federal contracting requirements ordinarily would prohibit federal agencies from using dual - agency brokers , but gsa waived the requirements , as allowed , to increase competition for the leasing contracts .

when the contracts were awarded , gsa planned to shift at least 50 percent of its expiring lease workload to the four awardees in the first year of the contracts and to increase their share of gsa's expiring leases to approximately 90 percent by 2010 — the fifth and final year of the contracts .

as of may 30 , 2009 , gsa estimated that the total value of the four contracts was $485.6 million .

we reviewed gsa's administration of the four national broker services contracts ( i.e. , the national broker services program ) for the first year of the contracts which ended march 31 , 2006 .

in our january 2007 report , we identified a wide variety of issues related to gsa's early implementation of these contracts .

problems included inadequate controls to ( 1 ) prevent conflicts of interest and ( 2 ) ensure compliance with federal requirements for safeguarding federal information and information systems used on behalf of gsa by the four national brokers .

we also reported , among other matters , that gsa had not developed a method for quantifying what , if any , savings had resulted from the contracts or for distributing work to the brokers on the basis of their performance , as it had planned .

we made 11 recommendations designed to improve gsa's overall management of the national broker services program .

as figure 2 shows , gsa has implemented 7 of these 11 recommendations ; has taken action to implement another recommendation ; and , after consideration , has decided not to implement the remaining 3 .

 ( for more details on the issues we reported in january 2007 and gsa's actions to address our recommendations , see app .

ii ) .

we are encouraged by gsa's actions on our recommendations but have not evaluated their impact .

quality governmentwide and agency - specific data are critical for addressing the wide range of problems facing the government in the real property area , including excess and unneeded property , deterioration , and security concerns .

in april 2007 , we reported that although some agencies have made progress in collecting and reporting standardized real property data for frpp , data reliability is still a challenge at some of the agencies , and agencies lacked a standard framework for data validation .

we are pleased that omb has implemented our recommendation to develop a framework that agencies can use to better ensure the validity and usefulness of key real property data in the frpp , as noted earlier .

however , in the past 2 years , we have found the following problems with frpp data: in our january 2008 report on agencies' leasing , we found that , while frpp data were generally reliable for describing the leased inventory , data quality concerns , such as missing data , would limit the usefulness of frpp for other purposes , such as strategic decision making .

in our october 2008 report on federal agencies' repair and maintenance backlogs , we found that the way six agencies define and estimate their repair needs or backlogs varies .

we also found that , according to omb officials , frpp's definition of repair needs was purposefully vague so agencies could use their existing data collection and reporting process .

moreover , we found that condition indexes , which agencies report to frpp , cannot be compared across agencies because their repair estimates are not comparable .

as a result , these condition indexes cannot be used to understand the relative condition or management of agencies' assets .

thus , they should not be used to inform or prioritize funding decisions between agencies .

in this report , we recommended that omb , in consultation with the federal accounting standards advisory board , explore the potential for adding a uniform reporting requirement to frpp to capture the government's fiscal exposure related to real property repair and maintenance .

omb agreed with our recommendation .

in our february 2009 report on agencies' authorities to retain proceeds from the sale of real property , we found that , because of inconsistent and unreliable reporting , governmentwide data reported to frpp were not sufficiently reliable to analyze the extent to which the six agencies with authority to sell real property and retain the proceeds from such sales actually sold real property .

such data weaknesses reduce the effectiveness of the frpp as a tool to enable governmentwide comparisons of real property efforts , such as the effort to reduce the government's portfolio of unneeded property .

furthermore , although usps is not required to submit data to frpp , in december 2007 , we found reliability issues with usps data that also compromised the usefulness of the data for examining usps's real property performance .

specifically , we found that usps's facility database — developed in 2003 to capture and maintain facility data — has numerous reliability problems and is not used as a centralized source for facility data , in part because of its reliability problems .

moreover , even if the data in the facility database were reliable , the database would not help usps measure facility management performance because it does not track performance indicators nor does it archive data for tracking trends .

in april 2007 , we reported that among the problems with real property management that agencies continued to face were excess and underutilized property , deteriorating facilities , and maintenance and repair backlogs .

we reported some federal agencies maintain a significant amount of excess and underutilized property .

for example , we found that energy , dhs , and nasa reported that over 10 percent of their facilities were excess or underutilized .

agencies may also underestimate their underutilized property if their data are not reliable .

for example , in 2007 , we found during limited site visits to usps facilities that six of the facilities we visited had vacant space that local employees said could be leased , but these facilities were not listed as having vacant , leasable space in usps's facilities database ( see fig .

3 ) .

at that time , usps officials acknowledged the vacancies we cited and noted that local officials have few incentives to report facilities' vacant , leasable space in the database .

underutilized properties present significant potential risks to federal agencies because they are costly to maintain and could be put to more cost - beneficial uses or sold to generate revenue for the government .

in 2007 , we also reported that addressing the needs of aging and deteriorating federal facilities remains a problem for major real property - holding agencies , and that according to recent estimates , tens of billions of dollars will be needed to repair or restore these assets so that they are fully functional .

in october 2008 , we reported that agency repair backlog estimates are not comparable and do not accurately capture the government's fiscal exposure .

we found that the six agencies we reviewed had different processes in place to periodically assess the condition of their assets and that they also generally used these processes to identify repair and maintenance backlogs for their assets .

five agencies identified repair needs of between $2.3 billion ( nasa ) and $12 billion ( doi ) .

gsa reported $7 billion in repair needs .

the sixth agency , dod , did not report on its repair needs .

table 1 provides a summary of each agency's estimate of repair needs .

in addition to other ongoing real property management challenges , the threat of terrorism has increased the emphasis on physical security for federal real property assets .

in 2007 , we reported that all nine major real property - holding agencies reported using risk - based approaches to prioritize security needs , as we have suggested , but cited a lack of resources for security enhancements as an ongoing problem .

for example , according to gsa officials , obtaining funding for security countermeasures , both security fixtures and equipment , is a challenge not only within gsa but for gsa's tenant agencies as well .

moreover , last week we testified before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs that preliminary results show that the federal protective service's ( fps ) ability to protect federal facilities is hampered by weaknesses in its contract security guard program .

we found that fps does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a federal facility and has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post orders .

for example , fps does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed ; and fps's inspections of guard posts at federal facilities are inconsistent , and the quality varied in the six regions we visited .

moreover , we identified substantial security vulnerabilities related to fps's guard program .

gao investigators carrying the components for an improvised explosive device successfully passed undetected through security checkpoints monitored by fps's guards at each of the 10 level iv federal facilities where we conducted covert testing .

once gao investigators passed the control access points , they assembled the explosive device and walked freely around several floors of these level iv facilities with the device in a briefcase .

in response to our briefing on these findings , fps has recently taken some actions including increasing the frequency of intrusion testing and guard inspections .

however , implementing these changes may be challenging , according to fps .

we previously testified before this subcommittee in 2008 that fps faces operational challenges , funding challenges , and limitations with performance measures to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal facilities .

we recommended , among other things , that the secretary of dhs direct the director of fps to develop and implement a strategic approach to better manage its staffing resources , evaluate current and alternative funding mechanisms , and develop appropriate performance measures .

dhs agreed with the recommendations .

according to fps officials , fps is working on implementing these recommendations .

as gao has reported in the past , real property management problems have been exacerbated by deep - rooted obstacles that include competing stakeholder interests , various legal and budget - related limitations , and weaknesses in agencies' capital planning .

while reforms to date are positive , the new administration and congress will be challenged to sustain reform momentum and reach consensus on how the obstacles should be addressed .

in 2007 , we found that some major real property - holding agencies reported that competing local , state , and political interests often impede their ability to make real property management decisions , such as decisions about disposing of unneeded property and acquiring real property .

for example , we found that usps was no longer pursuing a 2002 goal of reducing the number of “redundant , low - value” retail facilities , in part , because of legal restrictions on and political pressures against closing them .

to close a post office , usps is required to , among other things , formally announce its intention to close the facility , analyze the impact of the closure on the community , and solicit comments from the community .

similarly , va officials reported that disposal is often not an option for most properties because of political stakeholders and constituencies , including historic building advocates or local communities that want to maintain their relationship with va .

in addition , interior officials reported that the department faces significant challenges in balancing the needs and concerns of local and state governments , historical preservation offices , political interests , and others , particularly when coupled with budget constraints .

if the interests of competing stakeholders are not appropriately addressed early in the planning stage , they can adversely affect the cost , schedule and scope of a project .

despite its significance , the obstacle of competing stakeholder interests has gone unaddressed in the real property initiative .

it is important to note that there is precedent for lessening the impact of competing stakeholder interests .

base realignment and closure act ( brac ) decisions , by design , are intended to be removed from the political process , and congress approves all brac decisions as a whole .

omb staff said they recognize the significance of the obstacle and told us that frpc would begin to address the issue after the inventory is established and other reforms are initiated .

but until this issue is addressed , less than optimal decisions based on factors other than what is best for the government as a whole may continue .

as discussed earlier , budgetary limitations that hinder agencies' ability to fund ownership leads agencies to rely on costly leased space to meet new space needs .

furthermore , the administrative complexity and costs of disposing of federal property continue to hamper efforts by some agencies to address their excess and underutilized real property problems .

federal agencies are required by law to assess and pay for any environmental cleanup that may be needed before disposing of a property — a process that may require years of study and result in significant costs .

as valuable as these legal requirements are , their administrative complexity and the associated costs of complying with them create disincentives to the disposal of excess property .

for example , we reported that va , like all federal agencies , must comply with federal laws and regulations governing property disposal that are intended to protect subsequent users of the property from environmental hazards and to preserve historically significant sites , among other purposes .

we have reported that some va managers have retained excess property because the administrative complexity and costs of complying with these requirements were disincentives to disposal .

additionally , some agencies reported that the costs of cleanup and demolition sometimes exceed the costs of continuing to maintain a property that has been shut down .

in such cases , in the short run , it can be more beneficial economically to retain the asset in a shut - down status .

some federal agencies have been granted authorities to enter into euls or to retain proceeds from the sale of real property .

recently , in february 2009 , we reported that the 10 largest real property - holding agencies have different authorities for entering into euls and retaining proceeds from the sale of real property , including whether the agency can use any retained proceeds without further congressional action such as an annual appropriation act , as shown in table 2 .

officials at five of the six agencies with the authority to retain proceeds from the sale of real property , ( the forest service , gsa , state , usps , and va ) said this authority is a strong incentive to sell real property .

officials at the five agencies that do not have the authority to retain proceeds from the sale of real property ( doe ; doi ; doj ; nasa ; and usda except for the forest service ) said they would like to have such expanded authorities to help manage their real property portfolios .

however , officials at two of those agencies said that , because of challenges such as the security needs or remote locations of most of their properties , it was unlikely that they would sell many properties .

we have previously found that , for agencies which are required to fund the costs of preparing property for disposal , the inability to retain any of the proceeds acts as an additional disincentive to disposing of real property .

as we have testified previously , it seems reasonable to allow agencies to retain enough of the proceeds to recoup the costs of disposal , and it may make sense to permit agencies to retain additional proceeds for reinvestment in real property where a need exists .

however , in considering whether to allow federal agencies to retain proceeds from real property transactions , it is important for congress to ensure that it maintains appropriate control and oversight over these funds , including the ability to redistribute the funds to accommodate changing needs .

two current initiatives relate to these issues .

the administration's 2010 budget includes a real property legislative proposal that , among other things , would permit agencies to retain the net proceeds from the transfer or sale of real property subject to further congressional action .

on may 19 , 2009 , h.r .

2495 , the federal real property disposal enhancement act of 2009 , was introduced in the house of representatives , and this bill , like the administration's legislative proposal , would authorize federal agencies to retain net proceeds from the transfer or sale of real property subject to further congressional action .

additionally , both the administration's legislative proposal and h.r .

2497 would establish a pilot program for the expedited disposal of federal real property .

over the years , we have reported that prudent capital planning can help agencies to make the most of limited resources , and failure to make timely and effective capital acquisitions can result in acquisitions that cost more than anticipated , fall behind schedule , and fail to meet mission needs and goals .

in addition , congress and omb have acknowledged the need to improve federal decision making in the area of capital investment .

a number of laws enacted in the 1990s placed increased emphasis on improving capital decision - making practices and omb's capital programming guide and its revisions to circular a - 11 have attempted to address the government's shortcomings in this area .

however , we have continued to find limitations in omb's efforts to improve capital planning governmentwide .

for example , real property is one of the major types of capital assets that agencies acquire , and therefore shortcomings in the capital planning and decision - making area have clear implications for the administration's real property initiative .

however , while omb staff said that agency asset management plans are supposed to align with their capital plans , omb does not assess whether the plans are aligned .

moreover , we found that guidance for the asset management plans does not discuss how these plans should be linked with agencies' broader capital planning efforts outlined in the capital programming guide .

without a clear linkage or crosswalk between the guidance for the two documents , agencies may not link them .

furthermore , the relationship between real property goals specified in the asset management plans and longer - term capital plans may not be clear .

in april 2007 , we recommended that omb , in conjunction with the frpc , should establish a clearer link between agencies' efforts under the real property initiative and broader capital planning guidance .

according to omb officials , omb is currently considering options to strengthen agencies' application of the capital planning process as part of circular a - 11 , with a focus on preventing cost overruns and schedule delays .

in 2007 , we concluded that the executive order on real property management and the addition of real property to pma provided a good foundation for strategically managing federal real property and addressing long - standing problems .

these efforts directly addressed the concerns we had raised in past high - risk reports about the lack of a governmentwide focus on real property management problems and generally constitute what we envisioned as a transformation strategy for this area .

however , we found that these efforts were in the early stages of implementation , and the problems that led to our high - risk designation — excess property , repair backlogs , data issues , reliance on costly leasing , and security challenges — still existed .

as a result , this area remains high risk until agencies show significant results in eliminating the problems by , for example , reducing inventories of excess facilities and making headway in addressing the repair backlog .

while the prior administration took several steps to overcome some obstacles in the real property area , the obstacles posed by competing local , state , and political interests went largely unaddressed , and the linkage between the real property initiative and broader agency capital planning efforts is not clear .

in 2007 , we recommended that omb , in conjunction with the frpc , develop an action plan for how the frpc will address these key problems .

according to omb officials , these key problems are among those being considered as omb works with administration officials to assess overall real property priorities in order to establish a roadmap for further action .

while reforms to date are positive , the new administration and congress will be challenged to sustain reform momentum and reach consensus on how the ongoing obstacles should be addressed .

madam chair , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact mark goldstein on ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by email at goldsteinm@gao.gov .

key contributions to this testimony were also made by keith cunningham , dwayne curry , susan michal - smith , steven rabinowitz , kathleen turner , and alwynne wilbur .

in april 2007 , we found that adding real property asset management to the president's management agenda ( pma ) had increased its visibility as a key management challenge and focused greater attention on real property issues across the government .

as part of this effort , the office of management and budget ( omb ) identified goals for agencies to achieve in right - sizing their real property portfolios .

to achieve these goals and gauge an agency's success in accurately accounting for , maintaining , and managing its real property assets so as to efficiently meet its goals and objectives , the administration established the real property scorecard in the third quarter of fiscal year 2004 .

the scorecard consists of 13 standards that agencies must meet to achieve the highest status — green — as shown in figure 1 .

these 13 standards include 8 standards needed to achieve yellow status , plus 5 additional standards .

an agency reaches green or yellow status if it meets all of the standards for success listed in the corresponding column in figure 1 and red status if it has any of the shortcomings listed in the column for red standards .

