thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the findings from our recent work on fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in federally funded employment and training programs and our prior work on the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ) .

as you know , we recently issued two reports addressing fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in federal programs — one that outlined opportunities to reduce potential duplication across a wide range of federal programs and another that focused more specifically on employment and training programs .

this work and our larger body of work in the area will help government policymakers address the rapidly building fiscal pressures facing our nation's government — pressures that stem , in part , from our mounting debt and sustained high unemployment .

our work to examine fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in employment and training programs has a long history .

as early as the 1990s we issued a series of reports that raised questions about the efficiency and effectiveness of the federally funded employment and training system , and we concluded that a structural overhaul and consolidation of these programs was needed .

partly in response to these concerns , congress passed wia .

the purpose of wia , in part , was to transform the fragmented employment and training system into a coherent one , establishing a one - stop system that serves the needs of job seekers and employers .

since wia was enacted , we have issued numerous reports that have included recommendations regarding many aspects of wia , such as performance measures and accountability , one - stop centers , and training , among other topics .

gao's work has continued to find fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication in employment and training programs .

the area is characterized by a large number of programs with similar goals , beneficiaries , and allowable activities that are administered by multiple federal agencies .

fragmentation of programs exists when programs serve the same broad area of national need but are administered across different federal agencies or offices .

program overlap exists when multiple agencies or programs have similar goals , engage in similar activities or strategies to achieve them , or target similar beneficiaries .

overlap and fragmentation among government programs or activities can be harbingers of unnecessary duplication .

given the challenges associated with fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication , careful , thoughtful actions will be needed to address these issues .

my testimony today will discuss ( 1 ) what gao has found regarding fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in federal employment and training programs , ( 2 ) the role that wia activities can play in addressing these conditions , and ( 3 ) what additional information could help congress minimize fragmentation , overlap , and duplication among these programs .

in preparing this statement we relied on our previous work in these areas ( please see the related gao products appendix ) .

these products contain detailed overviews of the scope and methodology we used .

the work on which this statement is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in summary , for fiscal year 2009 , gao identified 47 federally funded employment and training programs administered across nine agencies .

almost all of these programs overlap with at least one other program in that they provide at least one similar service to a similar population , but differences may exist in eligibility , objectives , and service delivery .

wia's structure provides the opportunity to reduce overlap and duplication because it requires that several of these programs provide services through the one - stop system , but they need not be on - site .

increasing colocation at one - stop centers , as well as consolidating state workforce and welfare administrative agencies could increase efficiencies , and several states and localities have undertaken such initiatives .

to facilitate further progress in increasing administrative efficiencies , we recommended that the secretaries of labor and health and human services ( hhs ) work together to develop and disseminate information about such efforts .

sustained congressional oversight is pivotal in addressing issues of fragmentation , overlap , and potential duplication .

specifically , congress could explore opportunities to enhance program evaluations and performance information and foster state and local innovation in integrating services and consolidating administrative structures .

for fiscal year 2009 , we identified 47 federally funded employment and training programs administered across nine agencies , primarily the departments of labor , education , and health and human services ( hhs ) ( for a list of programs and agencies , see appendix i ) .

these programs reported spending approximately $18 billion on employment and training services in fiscal year 2009 .

seven programs accounted for about three - fourths of this spending , including the wia adult , dislocated worker , and youth programs , which spent nearly $6 billion on employment and training services ( see table 1 ) .

most participants received employment and training services through one of two programs: employment service / wagner - peyser funded activities ( employment service ) and wia adult .

together , these two programs reported serving over 18 million individuals , or about 77 percent of the total number of participants served across all programs .

almost all programs overlap with at least one other program , but differences may exist in eligibility , objectives , and service delivery .

forty - four of the 47 programs , which include broad multipurpose block grants , overlap with at least one other program , in that they provide at least one similar service to a similar population .

some of these overlapping programs serve multiple population groups , while others target specific populations , and some programs require participants to be economically disadvantaged .

the target populations being served by the most programs are native americans , veterans , and youth .

for example , all 8 programs that target native americans provide seven similar types of employment and training services .

however , some individuals within a population group may be eligible for one program , but not another because program eligibility criteria differ .

one of the programs targeting native americans , for example , serves only disabled native americans residing on or near a federal or state reservation , and another program serves only native hawaiians .

some efforts have been made to address overlap in programs and services .

officials from 27 of the 47 programs reported that their agencies have coordinated efforts with other federal agencies that provide similar services to similar populations .

for example , labor and hhs issued a joint letter encouraging state - administered youth programs to partner together using funds under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) to promote subsidized employment opportunities .

in addition , an official from the department of the interior reported that the agency works with labor and hhs to coordinate programs for native americans .

under law , native american tribes are allowed significant flexibility to combine funding from multiple programs .

moreover , as part of its proposed wia reforms , the administration is proposing consolidating 4 employment and training programs administered by education into 1 program .

the administration also proposes consolidating education's career and technical education – basic grants to states and tech - prep education programs , at the same time reducing program funding .

in addition , the budget proposal would transfer the senior community service employment program from labor to hhs .

three of the largest programs maintain separate administrative structures to provide some of the same services .

the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , employment service , and wia adult programs provide some of the same employment and training services — such as job search and job referral services — to low - income individuals , although there are differences between the programs ( see figure 1 ) .

the tanf program serves low - income families with children , while the employment service and wia adult programs serve all adults , including low - income individuals .

all three programs share a common goal of helping individuals secure employment , and the tanf and wia adult programs also aim to reduce welfare dependency .

however , employment is only one aspect of the tanf program , which also has three other broad social service goals: to assist needy families so that children can generally be cared for in their own homes , to reduce and prevent out - of - wedlock pregnancies , and to encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

as a result , tanf provides a wide range of other services beyond employment and training , including cash assistance .

although the extent to which individuals receive the same employment and training services from tanf , the employment service , and wia adult is unknown , the programs maintain separate administrative structures to provide some of the same services to low - income individuals .

data limitations make it difficult to assess duplication of services , but labor officials estimate that in program year 2008 approximately 4.5 percent of all wia adult participants who received training — about 4,500 of the nearly 100,000 participants who exited the program — were also receiving tanf .

however , it is unclear whether the wia adult participants who self - identify as tanf recipients have received tanf employment and training services .

nonetheless , the three programs maintain separate administrative structures .

at the federal level , the tanf program is administered by hhs , and the employment service and wia adult programs are administered by labor .

at the state level , the tanf program is typically administered by state human services or welfare agencies , while the other two programs are typically administered by state workforce agencies .

at the local level , employment service and wia adult services are generally provided through the one - stop centers , while tanf employment and training services may be administered through the one - stop or through other structures .

federal agency officials acknowledged that greater administrative efficiencies could be achieved in delivering these services , but also said that other factors , such as the proximity of services to clients , could warrant having multiple entities providing the same services .

congress passed wia partly in response to concerns about fragmentation and inefficiencies in federal employment and training programs .

wia authorized several employment and training programs — including job corps and programs for native americans , migrant and seasonal farmworkers , and veterans — as well as the adult education and literacy program .

wia replaced the job training partnership act ( jtpa ) programs for economically disadvantaged adults and youths and dislocated workers with three new programs — wia adult , wia dislocated worker , and wia youth .

the adult and dislocated worker programs provide three tiers , or levels , of service: core , intensive , and training .

core services include basic services such as job search assistance and labor market information and they may be self - service in nature .

intensive services may include such activities as comprehensive assessment and case management — activities that require greater staff involvement .

training services may include occupational skills or on - the - job training .

beyond authorizing these programs , wia also established one - stop centers in all local areas and mandated that many federal employment and training programs provide services through the centers .

under wia , sixteen different categories of programs , administered by four federal agencies , must provide services through the one - stop system , according to labor officials .

thirteen of these categories include programs that meet our definition of an employment and training program , and three categories do not , but offer other services to jobseekers who need them ( see figure 2 ) .

these thirteen program categories represent about 40 percent of the federal appropriations for employment and training programs in fiscal year 2010 .

figure 2 .

categories of programs required to provide services through the one - stop system and related federal agencies d e pt .

of e■ adlt edtion nd litercy ■ wia adlt , yoth , nd dilocted worker ■ voctionl edtion ( perkin act ) one - stop centers serve as the key access point for a range of services that help unemployed workers re - enter the workforce — such as job search assistance , skill assessment and case management , occupational skills and on - the - job training , basic education and literacy training , as well access to unemployment insurance ( ui ) benefits and other supportive services — and they also assist employers in finding workers .

any person visiting a one - stop center may look for a job , receive career development services , and gain access to a range of vocational education programs .

in our 2007 study , we found that a typical one - stop center in many states offered services for 8 or 9 required programs on - site , and one state offered services for 16 required programs on - site .

in addition to required programs , one - stop centers have the flexibility to include other , optional programs in the one - stop system , such as tanf , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) employment and training program , or other community - based programs , which helps them better meet specific state and local workforce development needs .

the dayton , ohio one - stop center , for example , boasts over 40 programs on - site at the 8-1 / 2 acre facility , including an organization that provides free business attire to job seekers who need it , an alternative high school program that assists students in obtaining a diploma , and organizations providing parenting and self - sufficiency classes .

under wia , services may also be provided at affiliated sites — designated locations that provide access to at least one employment and training program .

while wia requires certain programs to provide services through the one - stop system , it does not provide additional funds to operate one - stop systems and support one - stop infrastructure .

as a result , required programs are expected to share the costs of developing and operating one - stop centers .

in 2007 , we reported that wia programs and the employment service program were the largest funding sources states used to support the infrastructure — or nonpersonnel costs — of their comprehensive one - stop centers .

for program year 2005 , of the 48 states that could provide funding information , 23 states identified wia programs as the primary funding source and 19 states reported it was the employment service program .

in addition , 27 states reported using tanf funds to pay for part of their one - stop center infrastructure costs , and 3 states identified tanf as the primary funding source .

in 2007 , tanf was on - site at a typical one - stop in 30 states .

one - stop centers required under wia provide an opportunity for a broad array of federal employment and training programs — both required and optional programs — to coordinate their services and avoid duplication .

although wia does not require that programs be colocated within the one - stop center , this is one option that programs may use to provide services within the one - stop structure .

labor's policy is to encourage colocation of all required programs to the extent possible ; however , officials acknowledged that colocation is one of multiple means for achieving service integration .

we previously reported that colocating services can result in improved communication among programs , improved delivery of services for clients , and elimination of duplication .

while colocation does not guarantee efficiency improvements , it affords the potential for sharing resources and cross - training staff , and may lead , in some cases , to the consolidation of administrative systems , such as information technology systems .

our early study of promising one - stop practices found that the centers nominated as exemplary did just that — they cross - trained program staff , consolidated case management and intake procedures across multiple programs , and developed shared data systems .

other types of linkages between programs , such as electronic linkages or referrals , may not result in the same types of efficiency improvements , but they may still present opportunities to streamline services .

consolidating administrative structures and colocating services may increase efficiencies , but implementation could pose challenges .

florida , texas , and utah have consolidated their workforce and welfare agencies and officials said that this reduced costs and improved the quality of services for participants , but they could not provide a dollar figure for cost savings .

even when states consolidate their agencies , they must still follow separate requirements for individual programs .

with regard to colocating services , wia adult and the employment service are generally colocated in one - stop centers , but tanf employment and training services are colocated in one - stops to a lesser extent .

efforts to increase colocation could prove challenging due to issues such as limited available office space , differences in client needs and the programs' client service philosophies , and the need for programs to help fund the operating costs of the one - stop centers .

while states and localities have undertaken some potentially promising initiatives to achieve greater administrative efficiencies , little information is available about the strategies and results of these initiatives , so it is unclear the extent to which practices in these states could serve as models for others .

moreover , little is known about the incentives states and localities have to undertake such initiatives and whether additional incentives may be needed .

we recently recommended that the secretaries of labor and hhs work together to develop and disseminate information that could inform such efforts , including information on state initiatives to consolidate program administrative structures and state and local efforts to colocate additional programs at one - stop centers .

as part of this effort , we recommended that labor and hhs examine the incentives for states and localities to undertake such initiatives and , as warranted , identify options for increasing them .

in their responses , labor and hhs agreed with our recommendations .

in addition , gao is currently examining innovative one - stop strategies to enhance collaboration with employers and economic development partners to better meet local labor market needs .

to the extent that colocating services and consolidating administrative structures reduce administrative costs , funds could potentially be available to serve more clients or for other purposes .

for the tanf program alone , gao estimated that states spent about $160 million to administer employment and training services in fiscal year 2009 .

according to a department of labor official , the administrative costs for the wia adult program were at least $56 million in program year 2009 .

officials told gao they do not collect data on the administrative costs associated with the employment service program , as they are not a separately identifiable cost in the legislation .

labor officials said that , on average , the agency spends about $4,000 for each wia adult participant who receives training services .

making informed decisions about where to invest scarce resources requires information about what's working and what's not but , despite improvements , performance data do not provide a complete picture of the employment and training system .

nearly all employment and training programs track multiple outcome measures and many programs track similar measures — most often an “entered employment” rate ( the number of participants who found jobs ) , employment retention , and wage gain or change .

we have made a number of recommendations regarding the performance management systems of the key employment and training programs , and labor has made some progress addressing our concerns .

however , two issues remain .

first , only a small proportion of job seekers who receive services at one - stops are reflected in wia outcome data .

while customers who use self - services are estimated to be the largest portion of those served under wia , job seekers who receive self - service or informational services are specifically excluded from performance calculations by the statute .

second , wia's performance measurement system contains no provision for measuring overall one - stop performance , relying instead on a program - by - program approach that cannot easily be used to assess the overall performance of the one - stop system .

information about the effectiveness of these programs can also help guide policymakers and program managers in making decisions about how to improve , coordinate , or consolidate existing programs .

however , little is known about the effectiveness of employment and training programs because only 5 of the 47 programs reported that they had conducted any impact studies since 2004 .

impact studies , which allow for determining the extent to which a program is causing participant outcomes , can be difficult and expensive to conduct because they take steps to examine what would have happened in the absence of a program to isolate its impact from other factors .

such studies may not be cost - effective for smaller programs , particularly in periods of tight budgets , but strategically chosen impact studies can be an important means for understanding where efficiencies can be achieved .

labor has been slow to comply with a requirement to conduct a multi - site control group evaluation of the wia - funded programs .

in 2004 and 2007 , we recommended that labor comply with the requirements of the law and conduct an impact evaluation of wia services to better understand what services are most effective for improving outcomes .

since then , labor has completed a nonexperimental study of the wia adult and dislocated worker programs and also has an experimental design impact study of these programs currently under way .

the nonexperimental study found that the wia adult program had positive impacts on average earnings up to 4 years after participant entry , but noted that the magnitude of this effect could have been due to the selection of applicants with greater income prior to participation and better job prospects .

the study found that the impacts for participants in the dislocated worker program were also positive , but smaller .

labor expects that the experimental design impact study currently underway will examine impact by funding stream , but will not be completed until june 2015 .

understanding how well the one - stop system is reducing fragmentation through coordinated service delivery would be useful in deciding where efficiencies could be achieved , but no study has been undertaken to evaluate the effectiveness of the one - stop system approach .

while a few program impact studies have been done or are underway , these studies largely take a program - by - program approach rather than focusing on understanding which approaches are most effective in streamlining service delivery and improving one - stop efficiency .

in addition , labor's efforts to collaborate with other agencies to assess the effects of different strategies to integrate job seeker services have been limited .

we previously recommended that labor collaborate with education , hhs , and hud to develop a research agenda that examines the impacts of various approaches to program integration on job seeker and employer satisfaction and outcomes .

labor has committed to collaborating with other agencies and has involved them in developing inter - agency initiatives for certain targeted activities , but has not yet evaluated the effectiveness of the one - stop system .

in january 2011 , the president signed the gpra modernization act of 2010 ( gprama ) , further amending the almost two - decades - old government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) .

implementing provisions of the new act — such as its requirement to establish outcome - oriented goals covering a limited number of crosscutting policy areas — could play an important role in clarifying desired outcomes , addressing program performance spanning multiple organizations , and facilitating future actions to reduce unnecessary duplication , overlap , and fragmentation .

specifically , gprama requires ( 1 ) disclosure of information about accuracy and validity , ( 2 ) data on crosscutting areas , and ( 3 ) quarterly reporting on priority goals on a publicly available web site .

additionally , gprama significantly enhances requirements for agencies to consult with congress when establishing or adjusting governmentwide and agency goals .

this information can inform deliberations on spending priorities and help re - examine the fundamental structure , operation , funding , and performance of a number of federal programs .

however , to be successful , it will be important for agencies to build the analytical capacity to both use the performance information , and to ensure its quality — both in terms of staff trained to do the analysis and availability of research and evaluation resources .

in conclusion , removing and preventing unnecessary duplication , overlap , and fragmentation among federal employment and training programs is clearly challenging .

these are difficult issues to address because they may require agencies and congress to re - examine within and across various mission areas the fundamental structure , operation , funding , and performance of a number of long - standing federal programs and activities .

implementing provisions of gprama could play an important role in clarifying desired outcomes , addressing program performance spanning multiple organizations , and facilitating future actions to reduce unnecessary duplication , overlap , and fragmentation .

sustained attention and oversight by congress will also be critical .

our work highlights two key areas where congressional oversight could facilitate progress: enhancing program evaluations and performance information ; and fostering state and local innovation in integrating services and consolidating administrative structures .

as the nation rises to meet its current fiscal challenges , gao will continue to assist congress and federal agencies in identifying actions needed to address these issues .

likewise , we will continue to monitor developments in the areas we have already identified .

chairman rehberg , ranking member delauro , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or sherrilla@gao.gov .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include dianne blank , caitlin croake , pamela davidson , patrick dibattista , alex galuten , andrew nelson , paul schearf , and kathleen van gelder .

opportunities to reduce potential duplication in government programs , save tax dollars , and enhance revenue .

gao - 11-441t .

washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2011 .

opportunities to reduce potential duplication in government programs , save tax dollars , and enhance revenue .

gao - 11-318sp .

washington , d.c.: march 1 , 2011 .

multiple employment and training programs: providing information on colocating services and consolidating administrative structures could promote efficiencies .

gao - 11-92 .

washington , d.c.: january 13 , 2011 .

workforce investment act: labor has made progress in addressing areas of concern , but more focus needed on understanding what works and what doesn't .

gao - 09-396t .

washington , d.c.: february 26 , 2009 .

workforce development: community colleges and one - stop centers collaborate to meet 21st century workforce needs .

gao - 08-547 .

washington , d.c.: may 15 , 2008 .

workforce investment act: one - stop system infrastructure continues to evolve , but labor should take action to require that all employment service offices are part of the system .

gao - 07-1096 .

washington , d.c.: september 4 , 2007 .

workforce investment act: additional actions would further improve the workforce system .

gao - 07-1051t .

washington , d.c.: june 28 , 2007 .

workforce investment act: substantial funds are used for training , but little is known nationally about training outcomes .

gao - 05-650 .

washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2005 .

workforce investment act: states and local areas have developed strategies to assess performance , but labor could do more to help .

gao - 04-657 .

washington , d.c.: june 1 , 2004 .

workforce investment act: labor actions can help states improve quality of performance outcome data and delivery of youth services .

gao - 04-308 .

washington , d.c.: february 23 , 2004 .

workforce investment act: one - stop centers implemented strategies to strengthen services and partnerships , but more research and information sharing is needed .

gao - 03-725 .

washington , d.c.: june 18 , 2003 .

multiple employment and training programs: funding and performance measures for major programs .

gao - 03-589 .

washington , d.c.: april 18 , 2003 .

workforce investment act: states' spending is on track , but better guidance would improve financial reporting .

gao - 03-239 .

washington , d.c.: november 22 , 2002 .

workforce investment act: better guidance and revised funding formula would enhance dislocated worker program .

gao - 02-274 .

washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2002 .

multiple employment and training programs: overlapping programs indicate need for closer examination of structure .

gao - 01-71 .

washington , d.c.: october 13 , 2000 .

workforce investment act: implementation status and the integration of tanf services .

gao / t - hehs - 00-145 .

washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2000 .

multiple employment training programs: information crosswalk on 163 employment training programs .

gao / hehs - 95-85fs .

washington , d.c.: february 14 , 1995 .

multiple employment training programs: major overhaul needed to reduce costs , streamline the bureaucracy , and improve results .

gao / t - hehs - 95-53 .

washington , d.c.: january 10 , 1995 .

multiple employment training programs: overlap among programs raises questions about efficiency .

gao / hehs - 94-193 .

washington , d.c.: july 11 , 1994 .

multiple employment training programs: conflicting requirements underscore need for change .

gao / t - hehs - 94-120 .

washington , d.c.: march 10 , 1994 .

multiple employment and training programs: major overhaul is needed .

gao / t - hehs - 94-109 .

washington , d.c.: march 3 , 1994 .

multiple employment training programs: overlapping programs can add unnecessary administrative costs .

gao / hehs - 94-80 .

washington , d.c.: january 28 , 1994 .

multiple employment training programs: conflicting requirements hamper delivery of services .

gao / hehs - 94-78 .

washington , d.c.: january 28 , 1994 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

