i appreciate the opportunity to discuss critical issues surrounding the federal government's management of electronic mail messages .

as you are aware , federal agencies are increasingly using electronic mail ( e - mail ) for essential communication , and in doing so , they are potentially creating messages that have the status of federal records .

according to the federal records act , federal records are information in whatever form that documents government functions , activities , decisions , and other important transactions , and such records must be managed and preserved in accordance with the act .

as the volume of federal e - mail grows , so does the challenge of managing electronic records .

under the act , the national archives and records administration ( nara ) has responsibilities for oversight and guidance of federal records management , which includes management of e - mail records .

agencies also have records management responsibilities , which as specified by nara include the responsibility to develop e - mail management policies and practices that include specific requirements , such as defining staff responsibilities for determining whether an e - mail ( including any associated attachments ) is a federal record and , further , requiring preservation of record e - mail .

as requested , my statement will focus on current practices used in managing e - mail messages that qualify as federal records .

after a brief discussion of federal requirements , i will outline some of the challenges facing agencies when managing their e - mail records and then discuss e - mail records management policies and practices that we are reviewing at four agencies .

finally , i will offer brief comments on recently drafted legislation in this area .

in my statement today , my discussion of e - mail records management challenges , policies , and practices is based on the preliminary results of work we are doing at your and the full committee's request , which we expect to publish later this year .

for this engagement , we selected four federal agencies based on contrasting sizes and structures and on the significance of their records to protecting rights and documenting accountability: the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

for each agency , we are reviewing the e - mail management practices of four senior officials ( including the agency head ) , using responses to a series of data collection instruments , interviews with agency officials , and inspection of a limited number of sample e - mail records identified by the agencies to corroborate their statements .

also , to develop comments on the legislation , we analyzed the provisions of the bill related to our ongoing work .

the ongoing performance audit on which my comments today are based , which began in april 2007 , is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

advances in information technology and the explosion in computer interconnectivity have had far - reaching effects , including the transformation from a paper - based to an electronic business environment and the capability for rapid communication through e - mail .

although these developments have led to improvements in speed and productivity , they also require the development of ways to manage information that is increasingly in electronic rather than paper form .

for federal agencies , such information includes e - mail messages that may have the status of federal records .

under the federal records act , each federal agency is required to make and preserve records that ( 1 ) document the organization , functions , policies , decisions , procedures , and essential transactions of the agency and ( 2 ) provide the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the government and of persons directly affected by the agency's activities .

these records , which include e - mail records , must be effectively managed .

if they are not , individuals might lose access to benefits for which they are entitled , the government could be exposed to unwarranted legal liabilities , and historical records of vital interest could be lost forever .

in addition , agencies with poorly managed records risk increased costs when attempting to search their records in response to freedom of information act requests or litigation - related discovery actions .

accordingly , agencies are required to develop records management programs to ensure that they have appropriate recordkeeping systems with which to manage and preserve their records .

among the activities of a records management program are identifying records and sources of records and providing records management guidance , including agency - specific recordkeeping practices that establish what records need to be created in order to conduct agency business .

agencies are also required to schedule their records: that is , to identify and inventory records , appraise their value , determine whether they are temporary or permanent , and determine how long the temporary records should be kept .

the act also gives the national archives and records administration ( nara ) responsibilities for oversight and guidance of federal records management , which includes management of e - mail records .

nara works with agencies to schedule records , and it must approve all records schedules .

records schedules may be specific to an agency , or they may be general , covering records common to several or all agencies .

according to nara , records covered by general records schedules make up about a third of all federal records .

for the other two thirds , nara and the agencies must agree upon specific records schedules .

no record may be destroyed unless it has been scheduled .

for temporary records , the schedule is of critical importance , because it provides the authority to dispose of the record after a specified time period .

 ( for example , general records schedule 1 , civilian personnel records , provides instructions on retaining case files for merit promotions ; agencies may destroy these records 2 years after the personnel action is completed , or after an audit by the office of personnel management , whichever is sooner. ) .

once a schedule has been approved , the agency must issue it as a management directive , train employees in its use , and apply its provisions to temporary and permanent records .

nara has issued regulations that specifically address the management of e - mail records .

as with other records , agencies are required to establish policies and procedures that provide for appropriate retention and disposition of e - mail records .

nara further specified that for each e - mail record , agencies must preserve certain transmission data — names of sender and addressees and message date .

further , except for a limited category of “transitory” e - mail records , agencies are not permitted to store the recordkeeping copy of e - mail records in the e - mail system , unless that system has certain features , such as the ability to group records into classifications according to their business purposes and to permit easy and timely retrieval of both individual records and groupings of related records .

these recordkeeping features are important to ensure that e - mail records remain both accessible and usable during their useful lives .

for example , it is essential to be able to classify records according to their business purpose so that they can be retrieved in case of mission need .

further , if records cannot be retrieved easily and quickly , or they are not retained in a usable format , they do not serve the mission or historical purpose that led to their being preserved .

if agencies do not keep their e - mail records in systems with the required capabilities , records may also be at increased risk of loss from inadvertent or automatic deletion .

if agency e - mail systems do not have the required recordkeeping features , either agencies must copy e - mail records to a separate electronic recordkeeping system , or they must print e - mail messages ( including associated transmission information that is needed for purposes of context ) and file the copies in traditional paper recordkeeping files .

nara's regulations allow agencies to use either paper or electronic recordkeeping systems for record copies of e - mail messages , depending on the agencies' business needs .

the advantages of using a paper - based system for record copies of e - mails are that it takes advantage of the recordkeeping system already in place for the agency's paper files and requires little or no technological investment .

the disadvantages are that a paper - based approach depends on manual processes and requires electronic material to be converted to paper , potentially losing some features of the electronic original ; such manual processes may be especially burdensome if the volume of e - mail records is large .

the advantage of using an electronic recordkeeping system , besides avoiding the need to manage paper , is that it can be designed to capture certain required data ( such as transmission data ) automatically .

electronic recordkeeping systems also make searches for records on particular topics much more efficient .

in addition , electronic systems that are integrated with other applications may have features that make it easier for the user to identify records , and potentially could provide automatic or partially automatic classification functions .

however , as with other information technology investments , acquiring an electronic recordkeeping system requires careful planning and analysis of agency requirements and business processes ; in addition , electronic recordkeeping raises the issue of maintaining electronic information in an accessible form throughout its useful life .

because of its nature , e - mail can present particular challenges to records management .

first , the information contained in e - mail records is not uniform: it may concern any subject or function and document various types of transactions .

as a result , in many cases , decisions on which e - mail messages are records must be made individually .

second , the transmission data associated with an e - mail record — including information about the senders and receivers of messages , the date and time the message was sent , and any attachments to the messages — may be crucial to understanding the context of the record .

third , a given message may be part of an exchange of messages between two or more people within or outside an agency , or even of a string ( sometimes branching ) of many messages sent and received on a given topic .

in such cases , agency staff need to decide which message or messages should be considered records and who is responsible for storing them in a recordkeeping system .

finally , the large number of federal e - mail users and high volume of e - mails increase the management challenge .

according to nara , the use of e - mail results in more records being created than in the past , as it often replaces phone conversations and face - to - face meetings that might not have been otherwise recorded .

these challenges have been recognized by nara and the records management community in numerous studies and articles .

a 2001 survey of federal recordkeeping practices conducted by a contractor for nara concluded , among other things , that managing e - mail was a major records management problem and that the quality of recordkeeping varied considerably across agencies .

in addition , the study concluded that for many federal employees , the concept of a “record” and what should be scheduled and preserved was not clear .

a 2005 nara - sponsored survey of federal agencies' policy and practices for electronic records management concluded that procedures for managing e - mail were underdeveloped .

the study , performed by the university of maryland center for information policy , stated that most of the surveyed offices had not developed electronic recordkeeping systems , but were instead maintaining recordkeeping copies of e - mail and other electronic documents in paper format .

however , all of the offices also maintained electronic records ( frequently electronic duplicates of paper records ) .

according to the study team , the agencies did not establish electronic recordkeeping systems due to financial constraints , and implementing such systems was a considerable challenge that increased with the size of the agency .

as a result , organizations were maintaining unsynchronized parallel paper and electronic systems , resulting in extra work , confusion regarding which is the recordkeeping copy , and retention of many records beyond their disposition date .

most recently , a nara study team examined in 2007 the experiences of five federal agencies ( including itself ) with electronic records management applications , with a particular emphasis on how these organizations used these applications to manage e - mail .

the purpose of the study was to gather information on the strategies that organizations are using that may be useful to others .

among the major conclusions from the survey was that implementing an electronic records management application requires considerable effort in planning , testing , and implementation , and that although the functionality of the software product itself is important , other factors are also crucial , including agency culture , training provided , and management and information technology support .

with regard to e - mail in particular , the survey concluded that e - mail messages can constitute the most voluminous type of record that is filed into records management applications .

our work on e - mail records management demonstrates that agencies continue to face challenges similar to those identified by the prior studies .

while our results are preliminary and we are not able to project them beyond the agencies we reviewed , i believe they help illustrate the difficulties agencies can face when applying nara's requirements to today's operating environment .

three of the four agencies we reviewed — ftc , dhs , and epa — had policies in place that generally complied with nara's guidance on how to identify and preserve e - mail records , but each was missing one applicable requirement .

specifically , the policies at epa and ftc did not instruct staff on the management and preservation of e - mail records sent or received from nongovernmental e - mail systems ( such as commercial web - based systems ) .

both epa and ftc officials told us that these instructions were not provided because the staff were informed that use of outside e - mail systems for official business was prohibited .

however , whenever access to such external systems is available at an agency , providing these instructions is still required .

dhs's policy did not specify that draft documents circulated via e - mail may be federal records .

dhs officials recognized that their policies did not specifically address the need to assess the records status of draft documents , and said they planned to address the omission during an ongoing effort to revise the policies .

the policy at one of the four agencies , hud , was missing three of eight applicable requirements .

one element of the policy was inconsistent with nara's regulation: it required only the sender of an e - mail message to review it for potential records status , but the regulation states that e - mail records could include both messages sent or received .

hud officials acknowledged that its policy omits the recipient's responsibility for determining the record status of e - mail messages and stated that its e - mail policy fell short of fully implementing nara regulations in this regard because the department's practice is not to use e - mail for business matters in which official records would need to be created .

however , this practice does not remove the requirement for agency employees to assess e - mail received for its record status , because the agency cannot know that employees will not receive e - mail with record status ; the determination of record status depends on the content of the information , not its medium .

in addition , two other requirements were missing from hud's policy: it did not state , as required , that recordkeeping copies of e - mail should not be stored in e - mail systems and that backup tapes should not be used for recordkeeping purposes .

hud officials stated that they considered that these requirements were met by a reference in their policy to the nara regulations in which these requirements appear .

however , this reference is not sufficient to make clear to staff that e - mail systems and backup tapes are not to be used for recordkeeping .

while agency policies were generally compliant with recordkeeping regulations , these policies were not applied consistently .

specifically , for 8 of the 15 senior officials we reviewed , e - mail messages that qualified as records were not being appropriately identified and preserved .

instead , the officials generally kept every message within their e - mail systems .

each of the four agencies generally followed a print and file process to preserve e - mail records in paper - based recordkeeping systems because their e - mail systems did not have required record - keeping capabilities .

factors contributing to this lack of compliance with recordkeeping requirements were the lack of adequate staff support and the volume of e - mail received — several of these officials had thousands or even tens of thousands of messages in their e - mail system accounts .

another reason was that keeping every e - mail ensured that no information was lost , which was seen as safe from a legal standpoint .

however , by keeping every message , they were potentially increasing the time and effort that would be needed to search through and review all the saved messages in response to an outside inquiry , such as a freedom of information act request .

in addition , by not keeping the e - mail in an appropriate recordkeeping system , these officials were making it more difficult for their agencies to find information by subject .

appropriately identifying and saving record material also allows agencies to avoid expending resources on unnecessarily preserving nonrecord material and on keeping record material beyond its usefulness ( that is , beyond the date when it can be disposed of according to the records schedule ) .

in contrast , many of the officials whose e - mail records were appropriately managed delegated responsibility for this task to one or more administrative staff members .

these individuals were responsible for identifying which e - mail messages qualified as records and ensuring that the message and any attachments were preserved according to the agency's records management policies .

generally , this required that they print the message , including any attachments and transmission information ( who the message was to and from and when it was sent ) , and place the paper copy in a file .

printing and filing copies of e - mail records is acceptable under nara's regulations .

however , printing copies of e - mails can lead to an agency maintaining multiple copies of the message in both paper and electronic formats , which can lead to agencies' expending resources on duplicative storage , as well as confusion over which is the recordkeeping copy .

further , as with all electronic documents , conversion to paper entails the risk of losing some features of the electronic original .

awareness of federal records requirements is also an ongoing concern .

at one department , training for senior officials on their records management responsibilities took place only at the beginning of the current administration .

officials who joined the department subsequently were not trained on records management .

similarly , several administrative staff responsible for managing the e - mail of senior officials told us that they had not been trained to recognize a record .

a draft bill , the electronic communications preservation act , would mandate agencies to transition to electronic records management by requiring the archivist of the united states to promulgate regulations governing agency preservation of electronic communications that are federal records .

among other things , the regulations would ● require the electronic capture , management , and preservation of ● require that such electronic records are readily accessible for retrieval through electronic searches ; and ● require the archivist to develop mandatory minimum functional requirements for electronic records management applications to meet the first two requirements .

the legislation would also require agencies to comply with the new regulations within 4 years of enactment .

requiring a governmentwide transition to electronic recordkeeping systems could help federal agencies improve e - mail management .

for example , storing e - mail records in an electronic repository could make them easier to search and potentially speed agency responses to freedom of information act requests .

as our review shows , agencies recognize that devoting significant resources to creating paper records from electronic sources is not a viable long - term strategy and have accordingly begun to plan or implement such a system .

the 4-year deadline in the draft bill could help expedite this transition .

in addition , the development of minimum functional requirements by nara should reduce the development risk that could have resulted from multiple agencies concurrently developing similar systems .

by providing time both for standards to be developed and implemented by agencies , these provisions recognize the need for a well - planned process .

like any investment in information technology , the development of electronic recordkeeping systems will have to be carefully managed to avoid unnecessary cost and performance risks .

however , once implemented , such systems could potentially provide the efficiencies of automation and avoid the expenditure of resources on duplicative manual processes and storage .

in summary , the increasing use of e - mail is resulting in records management challenges for federal agencies .

for example , the large number of federal e - mail users and the high volume of e - mails present challenges , particularly in the current paper - based environment .

while agency e - mail policies generally contained required elements , about half of the senior officials we reviewed were not following these policies and were instead maintaining their e - mail messages within their e - mail accounts , where records cannot be efficiently searched , are not accessible to others who might need the information in the records , and are at increased risk of loss .

several agencies are considering developing electronic recordkeeping systems , but until such systems are implemented , agencies may have reduced assurance that information that is essential to protecting the rights of individuals and the federal government is being adequately identified and preserved .

mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony today .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

if you have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact linda koontz , director , information management issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6240 , or koontzl@gao.gov .

other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony were timothy case , barbara collier , jennifer stavros - turner , and james sweetman .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

