with the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in 2002 , congress granted dhs special acquisition authority , known as “other transaction” authority , to help accomplish its mission of providing state - of - the - art technology to improve homeland security .

an other transaction agreement is a special vehicle used for obtaining or advancing research and development or prototypes .

this authority provides the dhs science and technology directorate the flexibility to reach nontraditional contractors , that is , those that traditionally have not done business with the government .

however , other transaction agreements carry the risk of reduced accountability and transparency , in part because they are exempt from the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and the government's cost accounting standards .

congress recently authorized the use of this authority through september 2012 .

congress required that we report on dhs's use of this authority to help determine if its use attracts nontraditional contractors , results in the acquisition of needed technologies , and whether additional safeguards are needed if the authority were to be made permanent .

in 2004 , we reported on the science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority and made recommendations to improve its use .

in 2008 , we reported that nontraditional contractor involvement in dhs other transaction agreements provided a variety of technologies and services described by dhs as critical , and that dhs continued to develop policies and procedures for other transaction agreements .

we also found that dhs faced challenges in systematically assessing its use of these agreements and maintaining a skilled contracting workforce and made recommendations to address these and other challenges.we reviewed ( 1 ) the science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority , ( 2 ) the extent to which dhs has addressed challenges we previously identified with its use of the authority , and ( 3 ) the information dhs collects and reports on the use of other transaction authority .

to address our objectives , we analyzed other transaction agreement data provided by dhs and interviewed program and acquisition officials regarding any trends in use from fiscal years 2004 through 2011 .

we drew upon our prior reports on other transactions , annual reports to congress by dhs , and relevant statutes , directives , and guidance .

we also reviewed the files for 27 of the 28 other transaction agreements that were active on or after april 2008 through september 2011 and interviewed dhs representatives as needed .

dhs could not locate one agreement file before we drafted this report .

additional information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 through may 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the acquisition function plays a critical role in helping federal agencies fulfill their missions .

other transaction authority provides the ability to acquire cutting - edge science and technology , in part through attracting entities that typically have not pursued government contracts because of the cost and impact of complying with government procurement requirements .

this authority , when used selectively , is a tool intended to help the science and technology directorate leverage commercial technology to reduce the cost of homeland security items and systems .

other transaction agreements are distinct from procurement contracts , grants , or cooperative agreements because of the flexibilities that they offer to both awardees and the government .

for example , they allow the federal government and awardees flexibility in negotiating intellectual property and data rights , which stipulate each party's rights to technology developed under the agreements .

the flexibility of other transaction agreements is an important characteristic to attract nontraditional contractors .

we previously reported , however , that because these agreements do not have a standard structure based on regulatory guidelines , they can be challenging to create and administer .

the homeland security act of 2002 originally authorized dhs to carry out a 5-year pilot program to exercise other transaction authority .

in 2007 , other transaction authority has been extended annually through appropriations legislation .

the homeland security act of 2002 authorizes dhs to enter into an other transaction agreement that advances the development , testing , and evaluation of critical supports basic , applied , and advanced research and development ; technologies ; and carries out prototype projects .

pub .

l. no .

107-296 , § 831 ( a ) .

business arrangements or structures that would not be feasible or appropriate under a procurement contract .

other transaction agreements for research do not require the involvement of a nontraditional contractor .

one science and technology directorate program funded other transaction agreements to promote homeland security by advancing the development and testing of rapid biological detectors .

this “detect - to - protect” system would monitor a facility and detect the presence of biological agents in time to provide sufficient warning to facility occupants to limit their exposure ( see left image in fig .

1 ) .

a different science and technology directorate program used an other transaction agreement to develop and test a new high - voltage transformer that helps provide power during the recovery time following blackouts or outages resulting from severe natural disasters or terrorist attacks ( see right image in fig .

1 ) .

the period of performance for other transaction agreements varies and may last longer than a traditional far contract .

other transaction agreements are generally structured in successive phases , so each project may have several phases .

at the end of a phase , the awardees submit a statement of work and technical and cost proposals for the next phase .

continuation between phases may be based on an independent technical evaluation and is not guaranteed .

unlike far contracts , which are generally limited to a length of 5 years , an other transaction agreement may continue as long as funding is available and work is required under a phase .

as a result , other transaction agreements can vary in length , from 3 months to over 7 years , as shown in figure 2 .

further , the funding for other transaction agreements may grow over time .

for example , in one other transaction agreement , the science and technology directorate obligated $200,000 in the first phase with an 8- month period of performance .

this agreement has been in existence for almost 7 years with at least $5.3 million obligated on it .

another two agreements were funded for $2 million at the time of award , but at completion , each other transaction agreement had obligations of approximately $100 million .

the use of other transaction authority by the science and technology directorate has declined since its peak in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 .

from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2011 , the science and technology directorate entered into 58 other transaction agreements , totaling $583 million in obligations .

fourteen agreements remained active in fiscal year 2011 and the directorate has not entered into a new other transaction agreement since fiscal year 2010 .

the science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority has declined since 2005 when it entered into 28 new agreements .

total obligations also have declined since peaking at $151 million in 2006 ( see fig .

3 ) .

dhs officials offered reasons for the decline in use of other transaction authority .

dhs acquisition officials told us that recently they have noted a decrease in the number of nontraditional contractors submitting proposals to use other transaction agreements while the use of far contracts has increased .

further , one official explained that as dhs's requirements have changed over time , the requirements have targeted different industries .

finally , dhs officials have been uncertain about renewal of other transaction authority .

for example , in fiscal year 2011 , there was a gap in dhs's other transaction authority because the continuing resolution did not extend the authority until april 2011 .

dhs officials explained that they were unsure if dhs had the authority to enter into new agreements or modify existing agreements under continuing resolutions .

however , while use has declined , dhs officials said the flexibility provided by other transaction authority to conduct business with nontraditional contractors is still important to the directorate's research needs .

for example , one program manager explained that without other transaction authority , dhs would be required to go through a traditional contractor to reach a nontraditional contractor , and this could affect the science and technology directorate's ability to directly obtain the necessary technology .

dhs has made some progress in addressing challenges and the related recommendations we previously made regarding its use of other transaction agreements ( see fig .

4 ) .

dhs has faced challenges overseeing its use of other transaction authority and establishing safeguards in the following five areas: 1. developing guidance for the use of audit provisions,2 .

updating policies related to documentation of lessons learned , 3. identifying workforce training requirements , and 4. conducting a workforce assessment , 5. collecting relevant data on other transaction agreements .

gao - 05-136 .

gao - 05-136 .

gao - 08-1088 .

gao - 08-1088 .

based on our review of all 27 available dhs agreement files , we found three gaps in the collection and reporting of information on its use of other transaction authority: ( 1 ) dhs does not consistently document the rationale for entering into an other transaction agreement in an agreement analysis document , despite dhs guidance to do so ; ( 2 ) discrepancies between dhs's data sources result in an incomplete picture of other transaction agreements activity , including an inaccurate annual report to congress ; and ( 3 ) dhs does not track the circumstances that permit the use of other transaction authority , such as the involvement of a nontraditional contractor , through the phases of an other transaction agreement .

involving nontraditional contractors is one of the benefits of having other transaction authority , yet without knowing how many are involved or for how long , dhs is not in a position to measure the benefits of using the special acquisition authority .

while dhs's guidance requires it to document the rationale for using other transaction authority , dhs does not do this consistently .

one of the following three conditions must be met to use an other transaction agreement for prototypes: ( 1 ) there is at least one nontraditional government contractor participating to a significant extent , ( 2 ) at least one - third of the total cost of a prototype project is to be paid out of funds provided by parties to the transaction other than the federal government , or ( 3 ) the dhs chief procurement officer determines , in writing , that exceptional circumstances justify the use of a transaction that provides for innovative business arrangements or structures that would not be feasible or appropriate under a procurement contract .

since 2005 , dhs other transaction guidance requires that this rationale be documented in an agreement analysis that should be maintained in the other transaction agreement file .

we found that the agreement analysis is not consistently documented in the files .

in our review of 11 other transaction for prototype agreement files , we found inconsistent documentation of the agreement analysis — 7 other transaction agreement files contained an agreement analysis document for the initial award and 4 did not contain an agreement analysis document .

these 4 other transaction agreement files that do not contain any agreement analysis documentation were awarded recently , from 2007 to 2009 .

dhs other transaction agreement officers said they rely on the agreement analysis to learn the background on agreements they have inherited from previous other transaction agreement officers .

given the high turnover of acquisition staff , the agreement analysis document is an important tool to capture information about the rationale for use of other transaction authority .

recent annual reports to congress on other transaction activity have been incomplete .

dhs is required to provide an annual report to congress detailing the projects for which other transaction authority was used , the rationale for its use , the funds spent using the authority , the outcome of each project , and the results of any audits of such projects .

we previously reported that dhs's june 30 , 2008 report to congress did not include 14 agreements from the reporting period.current analysis of dhs's fiscal year 2010 congressional report and other transaction agreement files , we found that dhs did not report three agreements that received funding totaling over $3.2 million in obligations , based on our or 22 percent of other transaction obligations for the year .

in addition , dhs does not include information on open agreements that did not involve the exercise of an option or the award of a new phase during the reporting period .

while this information is not expressly required by the legislation , without it dhs is not providing a complete picture of the use of its authority .

based on our file review , we found the following other transaction agreements which were not reported in dhs's 2009 and 2010 annual congressional reports ( see fig .

5 ) .

for example , one open other transaction agreement , which was not reported in the fiscal year 2009 annual report , included a payment schedule with four dates during fiscal year 2009 totaling about $10 million .

without accurate information about the universe of other transaction agreements , congress may be unable to oversee dhs's use of its other transaction authority .

further , we found that dhs does not track information to measure the benefits of other transaction authority , which include reaching nontraditional contractors .

dhs's guidance states that the government team , which includes acquisition and program officials , should establish and track metrics that measure the value or benefits directly attributable to the use of other transaction authority .

but dhs officials told us they have not established metrics .

in addition , dhs does not collect information at each phase of an other transaction agreement to determine if the original circumstances permitting the use of other transaction authority still exist .

specifically , dhs does not track the involvement of a nontraditional contractor throughout the various phases of the other transaction agreement .

based on our file review , we identified 11 other transaction agreements that cited the significant contribution of a subawardee nontraditional contractor as the circumstance permitting the use of other transaction authority .

however , we found that six of these agreement files did not include documentation to demonstrate that the subawardee nontraditional contractor was involved during one or more phases of the agreement .

for example , one nontraditional contractor was involved as a subawardee for 14 months , but the other transaction agreement lasted 40 months .

while circumstances frequently change when conducting research or prototype development , the science and technology directorate does not have visibility into the impact of these changes over time .

in contrast , the department of defense ( dod ) has determined that tracking information about participants , which includes nontraditional contractors , is important to managing its other transaction authority .

in its guidance , dod requires defense agencies and military departments to report significant changes to key participants involved in the agreement .

this information is used to track the number of nontraditional contractors involved in other transaction agreements , which dod officials use to measure the benefit of its other transaction authority .

even with the recently reduced use of other transaction authority , the science and technology directorate continues to identify this as an important tool that provides the flexibilities needed to develop critical technologies .

however , while other transaction agreements may carry the benefit of reaching nontraditional contractors to develop and test innovative homeland security technology , they also carry the risk of reduced accountability and transparency because they are exempt from federal procurement regulations .

while dhs has responded to our prior recommendations , it still faces challenges addressing our recommendation to develop a mechanism to collect and track relevant data .

without consistent information on the universe of other transaction agreements , dhs continues to report inaccurate or incomplete information on the use of its other transaction authority in its annual report to congress .

this may undermine congress's ability to obtain a full picture on the use of this special acquisition authority .

dhs has taken steps by updating its guidance to require documentation of lessons learned ; however , the guidance is not being implemented .

in particular , we found that dhs does not document lessons learned from completed other transaction agreements nor has it consistently documented the agreement analysis , as required by guidance .

other transaction agreements may be in place for an extended time period and obligate a significant amount of funds , yet dhs does not have full information on other transaction activity at each phase of the award .

involving nontraditional contractors is one of the circumstances permitting the use of other transaction authority , yet without knowing how many are involved or for how long , dhs is not in a position to determine whether the continued use of the other transaction authority is still the best approach through the life of the agreement .

if other transaction authority is made permanent , it is important for dhs to have complete information to understand and track its use of other transaction authority over time .

to promote the efficient and effective use by dhs of its other transaction authority to meet its mission needs , we recommend that the secretary of homeland security direct the under secretary for management to take the following three actions: establish an action plan with specific time frames for fully implementing the prior gao recommendation to establish a mechanism to collect and track relevant data on other transaction agreements , including the role of the nontraditional contractor , and systematically assess the data and report to congress .

establish an action plan with specific time frames to help ensure full implementation of dhs other transaction guidance , regarding documentation of lessons learned and documentation of the agreement analysis .

establish a policy to review and document the circumstances permitting the use of other transaction authority at each new phase , throughout the life of the agreement , to determine if the continued use of an other transaction agreement is appropriate .

we provided a draft of this report to dhs for comment .

in written comments , dhs agreed with our recommendations and described actions under way or planned to address them .

dhs also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report as appropriate .

dhs's comments are reprinted in appendix iii .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretary of homeland security .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

the objectives for this report were to review ( 1 ) the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority , ( 2 ) the extent to which dhs has addressed challenges we previously identified with its use of the authority , and ( 3 ) the information dhs collects and reports on the use of other transaction authority .

to review the science and technology directorate's use of other transaction authority , we analyzed data provided by dhs's office of procurement operations science and technology acquisitions division on all other transaction agreements it has entered into since 2004 .

these data included agreement award date , agreement end date , annual obligations , and information on nontraditional contractors' roles as prime awardees or subawardees .

dhs officials compiled these data from dhs's procurement system , annual reports to congress on other transaction authority , and hard copy agreement files .

to understand reasons for its trends in use of other transaction authority , we interviewed science and technology directorate program officials and dhs acquisition officials .

to determine the extent to which dhs has addressed challenges with its use of other transaction authority , we drew upon prior gao reports on dhs's use of other transaction authority , reviewed dhs other transaction agreement policies and procedures , conducted interviews with dhs officials , and reviewed other transaction agreement files that were active on or after april 1 , 2008 , through september 2011 .

to determine the steps taken to encourage the use of audit provisions , we reviewed dhs's may 2008 guidance and its october 2009 updated guidance , other transactions for research and prototype projects guide .

we identified and reviewed 4 other transaction agreements that were awarded after may 2008 to determine if dhs has included audit provisions as encouraged by the guidance .

to determine the steps taken by dhs to document lessons learned , we identified dhs's policy to document lessons learned in the october 2009 guidance , reviewed the files of 10 agreements that ended after october 2009 , and interviewed acquisition and program officials to determine if they had participated in lessons learned discussions or documented lessons learned , as described in the guidance .

to determine the steps taken by dhs to identify and implement workforce training requirements , we reviewed dhs's management directive 0771.1 , procurement operating procedure 311 , and the associated june 2011 cancellation ; we obtained acquisition official training certifications ; and interviewed program staff to determine if they had attended training .

we also reviewed training materials to determine if other transaction authority was covered in the contract officer technical representative training attended by program officials .

to identify steps taken by dhs to conduct a workforce analysis to determine if it has the appropriate number of agreement officers to execute other transaction authority , we interviewed dhs officials and requested workforce assessments addressing dhs's acquisition workforce .

to determine whether dhs collects relevant data on other transaction authority , we analyzed information that dhs collected from its review of the hard copy files , its procurement system , and annual reports to congress on other transaction authority .

to assess the information dhs collects and reports on its use of other transaction authority , we obtained an initial list of agreements from dhs's office of procurement operations science and technology acquisitions division ; reviewed annual reports to congress on other transaction authority ; and interviewed program , acquisition , and general counsel officials .

we also contacted officials at the department of defense to understand its policies and procedures to manage its other transaction authority .

we identified 28 agreements that were active on or after april 1 , 2008 , through september 30 , 2011 .

we conducted an in - depth file review for 27 of these 28 agreements ; dhs was unable to locate one agreement file prior to the date we drafted this report .

to determine the accuracy of dhs's annual report to congress , we reviewed the requirements for the report and compared the information included in these reports to the requirements and information from the other transaction agreement files .

to identify information documenting the circumstances permitting the use of other transaction authority , such as information collected on nontraditional contractors , we looked at several documents in the agreement files .

specifically , we reviewed preaward documentation , such as awardee proposals , determination and findings , and agreement analysis documents , and postaward documentation , such as the signed other transaction agreement , all modifications , and statements of work .

we interviewed program , acquisition , and general counsel officials to determine the process for verifying a nontraditional contractor's status and significant contribution .

in analyzing dhs's agreements , we did not independently verify a contractor's reported status as a nontraditional contractor .

we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 through may 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

table 1 presents the information in figure 4 in a noninteractive format .

in addition to the contact named above , penny berrier , assistant director ; kristin van wychen ; beth reed fritts ; anne mcdonough - hughes ; john krump ; kenneth patton ; mary quinlan ; roxanna sun ; robert swierczek ; keo vongvanith ; and rebecca wilson made key contributions to this report .

