the navy's vh - 92a® program is to replace the aging presidential helicopter fleet , which has been in service for several decades .

the vh - 92a program is expected to provide new helicopters that ensure the safe , reliable , and timely transportation of the president and other parties as directed by the white house military office .

the navy plans to acquire a fleet of 23 vh - 92a helicopters to replace the marine corps' existing fleet of vh - 3d and vh - 60n helicopters .

the navy's acquisition strategy is to integrate mature technologies and an executive interior into an existing in - production commercial helicopter while minimizing modifications to avoid the technical challenges and cost overruns that led to the termination of its predecessor program in 2009 .

delivery of production vh - 92a helicopters is scheduled to begin in april 2021 with final delivery in january 2023 .

the national defense authorization act of 2014 includes a provision for gao to report annually on the acquisition of the vh - 92a presidential helicopter until the navy awards a contract for full - rate production .

we have previously issued five reports in response to this provision .

this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which the program is meeting cost goals and ( 2 ) performance and schedule challenges that the program has experienced in developmental testing and plans for addressing them .

to evaluate the extent to which the program is meeting cost goals , we identified and assessed changes in the program's development , production , and operation and support cost estimates by comparing the program's april 2014 approved program baseline estimates with estimates developed in april 2019 that supported the program's production decision .

these data were contained in defense acquisition executive summary reports , selected acquisition reports , and briefings provided by the program office and sikorsky aircraft corporation , a lockheed martin company ( the prime contractor for the program ) .

we also examined and analyzed key acquisition documents , including contractor monthly status reports and defense contract management agency reports .

we interviewed officials from the office of cost assessment and program evaluation ( cape ) , the navy's presidential helicopter program office to discuss the methodology used to develop the independent cost estimate , and component cost position , respectively .

we also compared cape's independent cost estimate to the navy's component cost estimate to identify differences in the estimates .

to assess the challenges gao previously identified and those recently experienced in developmental testing and steps taken to address those challenges , we examined may 2019 operational assessment reports on the vh - 92a program prepared by the navy's commander , operational test and evaluation force and the director , operational testing and evaluation ; and contractor and defense contract management agency status reports .

we also interviewed representatives from the navy's presidential helicopter program office in patuxent river , maryland ; sikorsky's program office in stratford , connecticut ; the defense contract management agency ; the navy's commander , operational test and evaluation force ; and the offices of the director , operational testing and evaluation , and director , developmental test and evaluation .

to assess whether the program is achieving schedule goals , we compared program milestones established at the start of the program in april 2014 to the program's october 2019 integrated master schedule .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2019 to april 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit and obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the marine corps' marine helicopter squadron one ( hmx - 1 ) currently uses a fleet of 23 helicopters to support the president in the national capital region , the continental united states and overseas .

in april 2002 , the navy began developing a replacement helicopter later identified as the vh - 71 .

schedule delays , performance issues , and a doubling of estimated acquisition costs from $6.5 billion to $13 billion prompted the navy to terminate the vh - 71 program in 2009 .

our prior work found that the vh - 71 program's failure to follow acquisition best practices was a critical factor in the program's poor performance that led to its ultimate termination .

in the case of the vh - 71 , the navy had a faulty business case , did not perform appropriate systems engineering analysis to gain knowledge at the right times , and failed to make necessary trade - offs between resources and requirements even after years of development .

because of these failures , the program was unable to achieve a stable design and experienced significant cost growth and schedule delays .

although the prior replacement program was terminated , the need for a replacement helicopter remained .

as a result , the navy initiated a follow - on replacement program in 2010 .

in april 2012 , the secretary of defense approved the navy's plan based on the modification of an in - production helicopter to meet navy requirements .

the vh - 92a is expected to provide improved performance , survivability , and communications capabilities , while offering increased passenger capacity when compared to legacy helicopters .

in may 2014 , the navy competitively awarded a contract to sikorsky to develop the vh - 92a , which included options for production .

the $2.7 billion contract includes a fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase and a firm - fixed price production phase with options for three lots for 17 helicopters , spares and support equipment .

under the emd phase , sikorsky has delivered two development test helicopters which were used in an operational assessment that was completed in april 2019 .

additionally , sikorsky has delivered three of four system demonstration test article ( sdta ) production representative helicopters that are being used in developmental testing and that will also be used to evaluate the vh - 92a's operational effectiveness and suitability during the program's initial operational test and evaluation ( iot&e ) .

the fourth sdta helicopter is to be delivered in may 2020 and will also be used to conduct iot&e .

in june 2019 , the assistant secretary of the navy , research , development and acquisition ( rd&a ) approved the program to begin low - rate initial production of the helicopters and authorized the program to exercise the contract options for the first two low - rate production lots .

shortly thereafter , the navy exercised the lot l option for 6 helicopters , initial spares , and support equipment for $542 million .

those helicopters , initial spares and support equipment are all to be delivered in calendar year 2021 .

in february 2020 , the navy exercised the lot ll option for $471 million for 6 additional helicopters and associated support equipment .

all of these helicopters and support equipment will be delivered in calendar year 2022 .

the navy had planned for two years of low - rate initial production of 6 helicopters each year followed by one year of full - rate production for the remaining 5 helicopters .

the navy's acquisition strategy in support of the production decision included a change in that plan with the re - designation of full - rate production as a third lot of low - rate production .

a key reason for the change is that the planned full - rate production run of 5 helicopters was too small to achieve the potential cost benefits of full - rate production , which typically involves purchasing a sufficient number of helicopters to decrease unit cost .

this revised strategy would also enable the navy to award the third production lot seven months earlier than the originally planned may 2021 .

before obligating the funding available for the second lot , the program office had to brief the assistant secretary of the navy ( rd&a ) on various elements of the vh - 92a's performance .

the program office is required to obtain approval from the assistant secretary of the navy ( rd&a ) for the procurement of the last lot ( lot lll ) with a decision brief that includes , among other things , the status of iot&e .

building a vh - 92a helicopter involves work at three facilities .

to begin the production process , sikorsky takes an s - 92a helicopter from its commercial production line in coatesville , pennsylvania and flies it to a dedicated vh - 92a modification facility in stratford , connecticut .

once there , sikorsky removes some components , such as circuit breaker panels , engines , and main and tail rotor blades and replaces them with vh - 92a components .

additionally , sikorsky modifies the helicopter to accommodate vh - 92a specific subsystems , including racks and wiring for a navy - developed mission communications system ( mcs ) .

sikorsky then flies the helicopter to a dedicated facility in owego , new york where it integrates the mcs , installs the executive cabin interior , paints the helicopter , and conducts final testing before delivering the helicopter to the government .

see figure 1 for a depiction of modifications of the commercial s - 92a helicopter to the vh - 92a presidential helicopter .

we have reported annually on the navy's effort to replace the current fleet of presidential helicopters since 2011 .

our reports highlighted , in part , the extent to which the navy used the lessons learned from the failed vh - 71 program — the need to balance requirements , costs , and schedule and the importance of establishing a knowledge - based program that is aligned with acquisition best practices — in its new effort .

for example , our 2011 report found that while the replacement program was early in its development cycle , the navy's initial efforts appeared to reflect the intent to pursue a best practices aligned knowledge - based acquisition .

following the program's entry into the emd phase of acquisition in april 2014 , we found that the navy's reliance on mature technologies , selection of an existing helicopter for use in the program , and award of a fixed - price incentive type contract reduced risk .

as to be expected with a major system development effort , however , we found the program still faced a number of technical challenges .

in four reports issued from 2016 to 2019 , we found that the navy continued making progress in developing the vh - 92a helicopter while managing design , integration and technical challenges .

some key technical risk and challenges that we previously identified are summarized in table 1 .

we discuss the current status of the navy's efforts to address these challenges later in the report .

in april 2019 , the navy estimated that the vh - 92a would cost about $4.9 billion to develop and produce and about $15.6 billion to operate and support the helicopters through fiscal year 2062 .

overall , the navy's $20.5 billion estimate reflects a 10-percent reduction from the program's 2014 baseline estimate ( see table 2 ) .

the navy and contractor officials worked together to remain within the program's april 2014 cost baseline , in part , by keeping requirements stable , limiting the design changes , and taking advantage of cost saving initiatives .

for example , the navy has not added any key performance requirements to the fixed - price incentive contract since it was awarded in 2014 .

the navy has , however , implemented a small number of design changes to add an additional cockpit display and increase the height of the upper portion of the forward aircraft door .

previously , we found that cost saving initiatives included leveraging the federal aviation administration's airworthiness certification process , optimizing work processes , and reducing the movement of helicopters between contractor sites .

in addition , the navy attributes the reduction in cost to support the vh - 92a fleet to using a planned maintenance interval concept as the basis for its april 2019 cost estimate .

program officials explained that the april 2014 baseline estimate was based on the approach used to maintain the current fleet of vh - 3d and vh - 60n presidential helicopters .

for these helicopters , the contractor carries out depot - level maintenance by disassembling , inspecting , and reassembling them at its maintenance depot .

however , for the vh - 92a , the navy intends to perform depot - level maintenance itself through scheduled inspections at its own presidential helicopter support facility , which was designed to support this approach .

as a result , the navy expects to be able to support the vh - 92a fleet in a more cost - effective manner while ensuring the availability of the helicopter to perform its mission .

the program has made progress addressing technical risks and performance challenges we discussed in prior reports and deficiencies confirmed during the april 2019 operational assessment .

according to program officials , solutions for these performance shortfalls , except for the landing zone suitability issue , have been developed and successfully tested during integrated testing and will be evaluated during the 3-month iot&e test scheduled to begin in june 2020 .

the program is pursuing options to achieve landing zone suitability that include possible changes in operational procedures , helicopter design , and lawn surface treatments .

if design modifications are required , they will not be implemented until after iot&e .

as a result , the navy may not be able to fully demonstrate that the vh - 92a helicopter meets all its key requirements until after the test program is complete .

further , iot&e results may also identify additional issues that may require additional design or software changes .

depending on the severity of the issues , the navy may need additional time to test and incorporate changes into the helicopter , including those helicopters currently in production .

the program office has mitigated or reduced risk on some technical issues we discussed in prior reports .

for example , according to program documents , the program has mitigated the risk in the following areas: helicopter start procedures , electromagnetic environment effects / electromagnetic pulse and cybersecurity .

the navy assessed these capabilities during earlier developmental test and during the operational assessment , which concluded in april 2019 ; subsequently , the navy approved the program to enter into production .

however , the operational assessment confirmed other known performance shortfalls — specifically those associated with the mcs — that , if not corrected , could prevent the program from meeting certain operational requirements .

the mcs replaces the communications suite currently used by the in - service fleet and provides vh - 92a passengers , pilots , and crew with simultaneous short - and long - range secure and non - secure voice and data communications capabilities .

as such , its performance is critical for the vh - 92a to meet its mission .

to conduct its operational assessment , the navy used two development test helicopters and a developmental version of mcs software with known performance and capability limitations .

the operational assessment confirmed these mcs - related performance limitations , including dropped communication connections .

navy officials noted that these and other mcs - related performance shortfalls could , if not addressed , reduce the helicopter's availability to perform its transport mission and lower overall reliability , among other operational requirements .

overall , the operational assessment confirmed 24 mcs - related performance limitations .

according to program officials , they have incorporated or identified fixes to 22 of the 24 issues , which they are now testing on sdta helicopters .

in turn , these fixes are expected to be incorporated into mcs software that will be tested during iot&e .

according to program officials , the remaining two mcs issues are related to bandwidth and an unreliable off - aircraft network configuration affecting on - aircraft system performance .

according to those officials , the vh - 92a is already equipped with a wide - band line - of - sight system that provides high bandwidth , though with coverage limitations .

the program is conducting market research on how to provide the helicopter with increased bandwidth with increased coverage .

the remaining two issues were assessed earlier as having a serious ( but not critical ) impact to mission accomplishment .

in addition to the mcs deficiencies , the helicopter experienced problems with other components during the april 2019 operational assessment .

for example , the mission and maintenance data computer repeatedly sent out false warning alarms / notifications , which affected the reliability and required the aircrew to spend extra time troubleshooting or switch to a backup helicopter .

a software update to help address this issue is planned for the computer prior to iot&e .

the program is also still working to demonstrate the ability of the helicopter to meet a key system capability requirement to land the helicopter without damaging landing zones ( including the white house south lawn ) .

for landing zone suitability , the program's objective has been to assess the downwash and exhaust effects on the landing zone .

in a september 2018 training event , the navy found that vh - 92a's exhaust damaged a landing zone .

program officials stated that the training event did not represent a typical operational scenario since the lawn was exposed to the helicopter's exhaust for a longer period than it would be under normal operating conditions .

the program is studying solutions to minimize risk of landing zone damage including possible changes in operational procedures , helicopter design , and lawn surface treatments .

for example , the contractor developed a prototype design change to the helicopter's auxiliary power unit to deflect exhaust .

flight testing of the prototype design change was conducted in march 2020 with analysis of the results expected in april 2020 .

navy officials stated the contractor is also conducting testing to determine if changes in helicopter and / or engine operating procedures can mitigate the risk of landing zone damage .

according to both program officials and contractor representatives , a decision on potential solutions will be made prior to iot&e .

if design modifications are required , they will not be implemented until after iot&e .

initial operational testing of the vh - 92a , which will be used to evaluate operational effectiveness and suitability of the helicopter , training system , support equipment , upgraded mcs software and other changes implemented to address previously identified issues , is now scheduled to be conducted between june and september 2020 .

as such , iot&e will be conducted about 3 months later than we reported in 2019 , but is expected to be completed by the threshold ( latest acceptable ) date in the navy's april 2014 baseline .

program officials attributed the 3-month delay to the need to develop mcs hardware and software changes that are currently being tested .

should iot&e demonstrate that efforts to address the mcs performance issues or other previously identified issues are insufficient — or if the testing identifies new issues that result in the program being unable to meet its operational requirements — then the program may need to identify , test and incorporate changes into the vh - 92a's design and into the helicopters already in production , further delaying the program and increasing associated costs .

as previously noted , the first delivery of the helicopters ordered under the first production option is scheduled to begin in april 2021 .

as a result of the revised iot&e test schedule , the program office has also delayed the initial operational capability ( ioc ) milestone , which clears the helicopter to enter service , by 3 months to january 2021 .

this new date represents a total delay of 6 months from the original date but still remains within the ioc threshold date established in april 2014 .

figure 2 compares the program's 2019 schedule with the 2014 baseline schedule and the 2018 schedule we reported on last year .

program officials acknowledged that if there is a delay in the program that results in the program breaching a schedule threshold established in its acquisition baseline , they would need to submit a program deviation report to the assistant secretary of the navy ( rd&a ) .

in turn , the program may need to keep certain staff in place longer than originally planned , potentially increasing program costs .

however , program officials told us that the program can cover any additional costs with existing funding .

further , navy officials stated that should ioc be delayed , the navy will continue to use its existing fleet of presidential helicopters as the vh - 92a transitions into the hmx - 1 fleet .

navy officials indicated that the transition process will be gradual , and that the existing fleet is sufficiently funded until hmx - 1 completes the transition .

we are not making any recommendations in this report .

we provided dod with a draft of this report .

dod provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of defense and the secretary of the navy .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or dinapolit@gao.gov .

contacts points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix l .

in addition to the contact above , bruce h. thomas , assistant director ; marvin e. bonner ; bonita j.p. oden ; alexander webb ; peter anderson ; robin wilson ; and marie ahearn made key contributions to this report .

presidential helicopter: program continues to make development progress while addressing challenges .

gao - 19-329 .

washington , d.c.: april 11 , 2019 .

* presidential helicopter: vh - 92a program is stable and making progress while facing challenges .

gao - 18-359 .

washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2018 .

* defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs .

gao - 17-333sp .

washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2017 .

* presidential helicopter: program progressing largely as planned .

gao - 16-395 .

washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2016 .

* presidential helicopter acquisition: program established knowledge - based business case and entered system development with plans for managing challenges .

gao - 15-392r .

washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2015 .

* presidential helicopter acquisition: update on program's progress toward development start .

gao - 14-358r .

washington , d.c.: april 10 , 2014 .

department of defense's waiver of competitive prototyping requirement for the vxx presidential helicopter replacement program .

gao - 13-826r .

washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2013 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: program makes progress in balancing requirements , costs , and schedule .

gao - 13-257 .

washington , d.c.: april 9 , 2013 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: effort delayed as dod adopts new approach to balance requirements , costs , and schedule .

gao - 12-381r .

washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2012 .

defense acquisitions: application of lessons learned and best practices in the presidential helicopter program .

gao - 11-380r .

washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2011 .

*gao issued these reports on the vh - 92a program in response to a provision in national authorization defense act of 2014 .

