to advance u.s. foreign policy and economic interests , the department of state ( state ) had staffed foreign service employees to about 9,850 overseas positions at more than 270 overseas posts worldwide as of march 31 , 2018 .

those foreign service employees play a critical role in achieving u.s. foreign policy goals .

however , as we reported in 2009 and 2012 , state has faced challenges in meeting its overseas staffing needs , resulting in foreign service staffing gaps that put diplomatic readiness at risk .

we were asked to review staffing for state's foreign service at overseas posts .

in this report , we examine ( 1 ) vacancies in state's foreign service staffing at overseas posts , ( 2 ) reported effects of foreign service vacancies on diplomatic readiness , and ( 3 ) state's efforts to address foreign service vacancies .

to address these objectives , we analyzed state's personnel data on foreign service staffing at overseas posts from state's global employment management system ( gems ) as of march 2018 .

we also interviewed state officials from the bureau of human resources and the bureau of consular affairs , as well as state officials representing the offices of the executive director for state's six regional bureaus .

in addition , we interviewed staff at 10 overseas posts .

we conducted interviews in person with staff at 3 of these posts — the u.s. embassy in beijing , china ; the u.s. consulate in shanghai , china ; and the u.s. embassy in new delhi , india — and conducted telephone interviews with staff at the other 7 posts — the u.s. embassies in abuja , nigeria ; bogota , colombia ; kinshasa , democratic republic of the congo ; kabul , afghanistan ; mexico city , mexico ; and n'djamena , chad ; and the u.s. consulate in frankfurt , germany .

we also reviewed state workforce planning documents and budget documents , such as state's five year workforce and leadership succession plan: fiscal years 2016-2020 and quadrennial diplomacy and development review .

we did not assess whether the total number of authorized overseas foreign service positions was appropriate or met state's needs .

in addition , we reviewed state office of inspector general ( oig ) reports as well as our 2012 and 2009 reports on human capital challenges at state and effective strategic human capital management across the federal government .

in particular , our 2017 report high - risk series: progress on many high - risk areas , while substantial efforts needed on others states that strategic human capital management is a high - risk issue across the federal government , and lists five key elements as a road map for agency efforts to improve and ultimately address such issues .

for our third objective , we assessed whether state's efforts to address vacancies were guided by a corrective action plan that identifies the root causes of persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts and suggests corrective measures to reduce such vacancies .

appendix i contains a more detailed description of our objectives , scope , and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from august 2017 to march 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

state is the lead agency involved in implementing american foreign policy and representing the united states abroad .

according to state and usaid's joint strategic plan for fiscal years 2018 through 2022 , state's goals are to ( 1 ) protect america's security at home and abroad , ( 2 ) renew america's competitive advantage for sustained economic growth and job creation , ( 3 ) promote american leadership through balanced engagement , and ( 4 ) ensure effectiveness and accountability to the american taxpayer .

state's foreign service employees serve in a variety of functions at overseas posts as either generalists or specialists .

foreign service generalists help formulate and implement u.s. foreign policy and are assigned to work in one of five career tracks: consular , economic , management , political , or public diplomacy .

generalists at overseas posts collect information and engage with foreign governments and citizens of foreign countries and report the results of these interactions back to state headquarters in washington , d.c. , among other functions .

foreign service specialists abroad support and maintain the functioning of overseas posts and serve in one of 25 different skill groups , in positions such as security officer or information management .

specialists at overseas posts play a critical role in ensuring the security and maintenance of the posts' facilities , computer networks , and supplies as well as the protection of post staff , their family members , and local staff , among other functions .

state may require foreign service employees to be available for service anywhere in the world , as needed , and state has the authority to direct foreign service employees to any of its posts overseas or to its headquarters in washington , d.c .

however , as noted in our 2012 report , state generally does not use this authority , preferring other means of filling high - priority positions , according to state officials .

the process of assigning foreign service employees to their positions typically begins when they receive a list of upcoming vacancies for which they may compete .

foreign service employees then submit a list of positions for which they would like to be considered , known as bids , to the office of career development and assignments and consult with their career development officer .

the process varies depending on an officer's grade and functional specialty , and state uses a variety of incentives to encourage foreign service employees to bid on difficult - to - fill posts .

state groups countries of the world — and corresponding u.s. overseas posts in these countries — into areas of responsibility under six geographic regional bureaus: bureau of african affairs bureau of east asian and pacific affairs bureau of european and eurasian affairs bureau of near eastern affairs bureau of south and central asian affairs bureau of western hemisphere affairs overseas posts report to state headquarters through their respective regional bureaus .

for example , because the bureau of african affairs has responsibility for developing and managing u.s. policy concerning parts of the african continent , u.s. overseas posts in nigeria report through the bureau to state headquarters .

according to state officials , state maintains personnel data on state employees in its gems database .

gems includes information on foreign service and civil service positions ; in particular , it shows the total number of authorized foreign service positions at state and whether each position is currently filled or vacant .

as displayed in figure 1 , the gems data show that the majority of foreign service employees ( 73 percent ) work in positions at overseas posts .

however , some foreign service staff ( 27 percent ) are assigned to positions in the united states , where they may complete required language or other training , serve as desk officers for the regional bureaus , or work in other functions at state headquarters .

according to state data , the number of both staffed and vacant overseas foreign service positions increased between 2008 and 2018 .

as shown in figure 2 , the number of positions staffed grew from 6,979 in 2008 to 8,574 in 2018 — a more than 20 percent increase .

despite the increase in the number of positions staffed , our analysis found that as of march 31 , 2018 , overall , 13 percent of state's overseas foreign service positions were vacant .

this vacancy percentage is similar to the percentages of vacancies in overseas foreign service positions that we reported in 2012 and 2008 .

in 2012 , we reported that 14 percent of state's overseas foreign service positions were vacant as of october 31 , 2011 , and we reported that the same percentage of overseas foreign service positions — 14 percent — were vacant as of september 30 , 2008 .

according to state officials , state's ability to hire foreign service employees to fill persistent vacancies has been affected by factors such as reduced appropriations .

for instance , according to state officials and state's five year workforce plan , because of funding cuts enacted in fiscal year 2013 , state could only hire one employee for every two leaving the foreign service .

from fiscal years 2014 to 2016 , funding for state's annual appropriations supported hiring to replace foreign service employees projected to leave the agency , according to state officials .

these officials indicated , however , that foreign service hiring was again impacted from january 2017 through may 2018 by a hiring freeze .

as a result , state hired below levels required to replace full projected attrition of foreign service employees .

while state's data show persistent vacancies in both generalist and specialist positions at overseas posts , specialist positions remain vacant at a higher rate .

state's data show that 12 percent ( 680 of 5,660 ) of overseas foreign service generalist positions were vacant as of march 31 , 2018 , a slight decrease from the 14 percent of overseas foreign service generalist positions that we reported vacant in 2012 .

state's data also show that 14.2 percent ( 594 of 4,188 ) of all overseas foreign service specialist positions were vacant , close to the 14.8 percent vacancy rate that we reported in 2012 .

state's data show persistent vacancies in foreign service generalist positions responsible for analysis , engagement , and reporting at overseas posts .

as shown in table 1 , among foreign service generalist career tracks , the political , economic , and “other” tracks had the largest percentage of vacant positions , with , respectively , 20 percent , 16 percent , and 14 percent of positions vacant as of march 31 , 2018 .

our 2012 report noted vacancies in the same three career tracks .

political officers at overseas posts are responsible for collecting and analyzing information on political events , engaging with foreign governments , and reporting back to state headquarters .

economic officers at overseas posts work with foreign governments and other u.s. agencies on technology , science , economic , trade , and environmental issues .

the “other” generalist career track includes positions designated as “executive” or “international relations,” which , according to state officials , may be filled by generalists from any of state's five career tracks .

state's data show persistent vacancies in foreign service specialist positions that support and maintain the functioning of overseas posts .

among the 10 largest foreign service specialist skill groups , security officer , office management specialist , and information management had the largest percentages of vacant positions .

as shown in figure 3 , in these three groups , respectively , 16 percent , 16 percent , and 14 percent of positions were vacant .

the vacancies in these three specialist skill groups are persistent ; in 2012 , we reported that the same three groups had the largest numbers of vacant positions .

security officers are typically responsible for responding to various threats to the physical security of overseas posts and for ensuring the protection of post staff , their family members , and local staff .

office management specialists provide professional management and administrative support .

information management staff are typically responsible for maintaining and ensuring the security of state's computer networks and communications systems at overseas posts .

state officials said that state has had difficulty in recruiting and hiring foreign service employees to fill specialist positions in some skill groups at overseas posts .

according to state officials and staff at overseas posts , some vacant specialist positions are more difficult to fill than others because candidates for these positions must often possess skills in fields such as medicine or information technology that tend to be highly sought after in the private sector .

according to staff at overseas posts , it is not uncommon for specialist candidates in these fields to choose higher - paying jobs in the private sector rather than specialist positions in the foreign service .

additionally , in some circumstances , state must compete with other federal agencies to recruit specialists from the same limited pool of talent .

consequently , according to state officials , state has been unable to attract and retain personnel with the skills necessary to fill some foreign service specialist positions , which has led to persistent vacancies in specialist positions .

vacancies in foreign service specialist positions at overseas posts present additional challenges because specialized skills and competencies are often required to perform the work of these positions .

according to state officials , because foreign service generalists may be assigned to work outside of their career tracks , in some circumstances , state has more flexibility in filling a generalist vacancy than a specialist vacancy .

for example , generalists outside the consular career track can serve as a consular officer for one or more tours of duty .

however , specialist positions often require specialized skills or experience that generalists may not possess .

in addition , according to staff at overseas posts , it is generally not possible for a foreign service specialist from one skill group to perform the work of a foreign service specialist from a different skill group .

for instance , a foreign service specialist assigned to the medical section at a post will not be able to help address the workload of a vacant position in the information management section .

thus , according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies in specialist positions at the posts may create greater challenges than vacancies in generalist positions .

according to state's data , as of march 31 , 2018 , overseas posts with state's highest foreign policy priorities had the highest percentages of vacant foreign service positions .

using its overseas staffing model process , state assigns each embassy to one of seven categories based primarily on the level and type of work required to pursue the u.s. government's diplomatic relations with the host country at post .

as we previously reported , the rankings are closely associated with the department's foreign policy priorities ; the higher the category , the greater the resources needed to conduct the work of the overseas post and the higher the post's foreign policy priority .

for example , the highest - level category , level 5+ , includes the largest , most comprehensive full - service posts , where the host country's regional and global role requires extensive u.s. personnel resources .

the lowest - level category includes small embassies with limited requirements for advocacy , liaison , and coordination in the host country's government .

as shown in table 2 , according to state's data , as of march 31 , 2018 , overseas posts in the “embassy 5+” category had the highest percentage of vacant positions .

the results of this analysis were similar to those we reported in 2012 .

while state has foreign service vacancies worldwide , as of march 31 , 2018 , the highest percentages of vacancies were in the south and central asian affairs bureau ( sca ) and near eastern affairs bureau ( nea ) — bureaus representing regions with heightened security risks that could threaten u.s. foreign policy interests , according to state .

sca , which includes countries such as afghanistan , pakistan , and india , faces a host of security and stability challenges that could threaten u.s. interests , according to a february 2018 report from state's office of inspector general .

nea includes countries , such as egypt , iraq , and saudi arabia , which have faced numerous security threats in recent years that could also threaten u.s. interests overseas .

as shown in figure 4 , among state's regional bureaus , as of march 31 , 2018 , sca and nea had the highest percentages of overseas foreign service vacancies at 21 percent ( 238 of 1,115 positions ) and 18 percent ( 234 of 1,279 positions ) , respectively .

in 2012 , we reported that these two bureaus also had the highest percentages of overseas foreign service vacancies among regional bureaus .

vacancies in foreign service positions at overseas posts increase workloads and adversely affect the morale of foreign service employees .

according to state officials in headquarters and staff at overseas posts , when a foreign service position at an overseas post is vacant , foreign service employees at that post are generally responsible for covering the workload of the vacant position .

further , foreign service employees at some posts — particularly posts with fewer foreign service staff — may be responsible for covering the workload of multiple vacant positions .

for example , at two african posts we heard examples of foreign service employees covering the workload of multiple vacant foreign service positions .

as a result of increased workloads , foreign service employees are also more likely to have less time available to perform some important functions , according to staff at overseas posts .

according to staff at overseas posts , such functions include training and supervising entry - level foreign service employees , local staff , and eligible family members ( efm ) ; reducing the risk of fraud , waste , and abuse ; improving and innovating processes at post that could reduce inefficiencies ; initiating and implementing projects that could enhance various diplomatic efforts ; and conducting maintenance of systems .

in addition , according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies adversely affect staff morale .

staff at multiple posts said that vacancies and the resulting increased workloads had created substantial stress and increased “burnout” of foreign service employees at the posts .

they noted that these levels of stress and burnout had contributed to foreign service employees' ending their overseas assignments early for medical or personal reasons .

these curtailments , in turn , had increased the overall vacancies and their effects at overseas posts .

according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies in foreign service generalist positions at overseas posts adversely affect state's diplomatic readiness .

among foreign service generalist career tracks , the political and economic career tracks had the two largest percentages of vacant positions — 20 percent and 16 percent , respectively — as of march 31 , 2018 .

according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies in political and economic positions at overseas posts — particularly posts with fewer foreign service employees — limit the amount of reporting on political and economic developments that posts are able to submit back to state headquarters .

for example , foreign service employees from three posts in africa told us that persistent , long - term vacancies in those posts' political and economic positions had constrained their abilities to provide full reporting on political and economic developments in their host countries .

according to staff at overseas posts , reporting on political and economic developments in other countries — submitted by overseas posts back to state headquarters — is essential for state to make informed foreign policy decisions .

foreign service employees from two posts in large countries in east and south asia also told us that vacancies in these sections had limited their capacity to engage with host government officials on important , strategic issues for the united states , such as reducing nuclear proliferation or enhancing trade and investment relationships with the united states .

vacancies in the political and economic career tracks at overseas posts could adversely affect state's ability to achieve two of the goals in state and usaid's joint strategic plan for fiscal years 2018 through 2022 — ( 1 ) renew america's competitive advantage for sustained economic growth and job creation and ( 2 ) promote american leadership through balanced engagement .

according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies in foreign service specialist positions at overseas posts may heighten the level of security risk at the posts and disrupt post operations .

among foreign service specialist skill groups with the highest number of vacant positions , security officer , office management specialist , and information management had the largest percentages of vacant positions — 16 percent , 16 percent , and 14 percent , respectively — as of march 31 , 2018 .

according to staff at overseas posts , vacancies in security officer positions at overseas posts reduce the amount of time that security staff can spend identifying , investigating , and responding to potential security threats to the post .

security officers are also responsible for identifying and analyzing host - country intelligence - gathering efforts at their respective overseas posts — and post staff told us that , because of vacancies in these positions , some security officers had been unable to complete this work for their posts , potentially increasing the risk of foreign government officials gaining access to sensitive information .

also , post staff told us that security officer vacancies limit the amount of time that security officers present at posts can devote to important security oversight activities , including regular training , drilling , and supervising of local guard forces and security contractors .

post staff noted , for example , that security officers at overseas posts should conduct regular training and drilling exercises to evaluate their local guard force's effectiveness in searching a vehicle entering the post compound for explosive devices .

according to post staff , when these important security oversight activities are not properly and regularly conducted , the level of security risk at these overseas posts may increase .

according to state officials in headquarters and staff at overseas posts , as well as reporting by state's oig , vacancies in information management positions at overseas posts have increased the vulnerability of posts' computer networks to potential cybersecurity attacks and other malicious threats .

state officials told us that the foreign service had faced chronic shortages of information management staff available to fill these positions worldwide .

according to state officials , because of ongoing information management vacancies , some required tasks — such as conducting planned network maintenance — were performed infrequently or not at all .

in another example , staff at overseas posts said that because of vacancies , information management staff had been unable to regularly check their computer system logs to ensure that security breaches had not taken place .

post staff added that , if a breach did occur , vacancies could increase the amount of time needed to identify an attack and deploy countermeasures , further increasing the risks to posts' computer networks .

inspections conducted by state's oig from fall 2014 to spring 2016 found that information management staff at 33 percent of overseas posts had not performed various required information management duties .

according to state's oig , neglect of these duties may leave the department vulnerable to increased cybersecurity attacks .

according to staff at overseas posts , the office management specialist position at overseas posts has evolved considerably over time ; these specialists increasingly play a critical role in ensuring that the work of overseas posts is effectively completed .

post staff said that office management specialists provide administrative and other support services to other foreign service employees and are assigned to various sections of post .

for example , staff at one post noted that office management specialists assigned to the security officer sections at overseas posts reduce the workload of security officers by completing more routine security tasks and allowing the security officers to focus on more challenging or involved tasks necessary to secure overseas posts .

post staff told us that vacancies in office management specialist positions reduce the amount of work that can be completed by other foreign service employees at overseas posts .

for example , when office management specialist positions assigned to the security officer or information management sections of posts are vacant , these vacancies further exacerbate the higher number of vacancies that already exist in these sections .

according to staff at overseas posts , higher numbers of office management specialist vacancies require other foreign service employees to spend a significant amount of time on administrative tasks , reducing the amount of time these staff can spend on mission - critical activities .

officials in headquarters and at overseas posts described various state efforts to help address overseas foreign service vacancies .

according to state officials , foreign service vacancies at overseas posts are a complex problem that multiple offices within state address on an individual basis .

state's various efforts to address overseas foreign service vacancies are not guided by an integrated action plan to reduce persistent vacancies .

our 2017 high - risk series report calls for agencies to , among other things , design and implement action plan strategies for closing skills gaps .

the action plan should ( 1 ) define the root cause of all skills gaps within an agency and ( 2 ) provide suggested corrective measures , including steps necessary to implement solutions .

this report also emphasizes the high risk that mission - critical skills gaps in the federal workforce pose to the nation .

while various state offices have implemented the efforts we identified , state lacks an action plan that is integrated — or consolidated — across its relevant offices to guide its efforts to address persistent overseas foreign service vacancies .

moreover , some staff at overseas posts acknowledged that the efforts state has taken to help address vacancies have not reduced persistent foreign service vacancies , notably in specialist positions .

in response to our inquiry about an action plan , state officials said that the agency does not have a single document that addresses foreign service staffing gaps at overseas posts .

instead , state officials directed us to state's five year workforce plan: fiscal years 2016-2020 , stating that it was the most comprehensive document that outlines state's efforts to address foreign service vacancies at overseas posts .

the workforce plan notes that it provides a framework to address state's human capital requirements and highlights state's challenges and achievements in recruiting , hiring , staffing , and training foreign service staff .

however , in reviewing the portions of the workforce plan that state indicated were most relevant , we found that the workforce plan does not include an integrated action plan that defines the root causes of the persistent overseas foreign service vacancies we identified or suggest corrective measures to reduce vacancies in these positions , including steps necessary to implement solutions .

state officials also noted that they frequently meet to discuss and address workforce issues .

for example , they said they convene a multi - bureau planning group that meets biweekly to discuss strategic workforce issues such as hiring needs based on attrition and other issues .

however , according to state officials , this group has not developed an action plan to reduce persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts .

state lacks an integrated action plan to guide its efforts to address persistent foreign service vacancies that includes corrective measures to address the root causes of the vacancies .

without defining the root causes of persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts and identifying appropriate corrective measures , overseas vacancies may persist and continue to adversely affect state's ability to achieve u.s. foreign policy goals .

foreign service generalists and specialists at overseas posts are critical to advancing u.s. foreign policy and economic interests abroad .

however , for at least a decade , the foreign service has had persistent vacancies in both generalist and specialist positions at overseas posts .

in particular , large numbers of vacant positions have persisted over time in certain overseas foreign service positions , such as information management and security officer positions .

these vacancies in critical positions at overseas posts have adversely affected state's ability to carry out its mission effectively and threaten state's ability to ensure the security and safety of its employees , their families , and post facilities .

while state has made some efforts to address foreign service vacancies , addressing chronic vacancies in critical positions at overseas posts requires a thoughtful , coherent , and integrated action plan that defines the root causes of persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts along with suggested corrective measures to reduce such vacancies , following what was called for in our 2017 high - risk series report .

developing such an action plan would help state address its persistent staffing gaps , improve its ability to achieve u.s. foreign policy goals , and help ensure secure and efficient operations .

the secretary of state should develop an integrated action plan that defines the root causes of persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts and provides suggested corrective measures to reduce such vacancies , including steps necessary to implement solutions .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to state for review and comment .

in its comments , reproduced in appendix iii , state concurred with our recommendation .

state also noted that it has taken actions and identified some causes of vacancies , but acknowledged that it lacks an integrated action plan and will take steps to develop such a plan .

state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6881 or bairj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

this report examines ( 1 ) vacancies in the department of state's ( state ) foreign service staffing at overseas posts , ( 2 ) reported effects of foreign service vacancies on diplomatic readiness , and ( 3 ) state's efforts to address foreign service vacancies .

to address these three objectives , we interviewed state officials from the department's bureau of human resources and bureau of consular affairs as well as state officials representing the offices of the executive director for state's six regional bureaus .

we also interviewed staff at 10 overseas posts .

we conducted in - person interviews with staff at 3 of these posts — the u.s. embassy in beijing and the u.s. consulate in shanghai , china , and the u.s. embassy in new delhi , india .

we conducted telephone interviews with staff at the other 7 posts — the u.s. embassies in abuja , nigeria ; bogota , colombia ; kinshasa , democratic republic of the congo ; kabul , afghanistan ; mexico city , mexico ; and n'djamena , chad ; and the u.s. consulate in frankfurt , germany .

we used the following criteria to select overseas posts for interviews: ( 1 ) posts with larger numbers of foreign service vacancies ; ( 2 ) posts with diversity in the types of foreign service positions that were vacant ; ( 3 ) posts with higher relative importance to u.s. economic , national security , and other foreign policy interests ; and ( 4 ) posts in a range of geographic locations by state region .

to examine vacancies in state's foreign service staffing at overseas posts , we analyzed state's personnel data on foreign service staffing at overseas posts from the department's global employment management system ( gems ) , as of march 2018 .

our analysis of the gems data includes foreign service positions filled by permanent foreign service employees as well as positions filled by nonpermanent foreign service employees , such as consular fellows .

this analysis does not include the number of staffed and vacant positions at overseas posts in libya , syria , and yemen , which , at the time of our review , were in suspended operations status , as well as u.s. mission somalia , which was operating under special circumstances at a different location .

to calculate vacancy rates , we divided the total number of positions by the number of positions listed as vacant in gems .

for example , a post with 10 positions and 2 vacancies would have a vacancy rate of 20 percent .

we calculated vacancy rates for each of the following categories: type ( i.e. , generalist or specialist ) , function ( eg , consular or information management ) , regional bureau ( i.e. , bureau of african affairs or bureau of western hemisphere affairs ) , and embassy and nonembassy rankings from state's overseas staffing model ( i.e. , embassy 3+ or 5 ) .

according to state officials , the data in gems have a number of limitations: the number of vacant positions at overseas posts listed in gems may be overstated , because state has not yet decided to remove some of these positions from its database .

some of the vacancies in gems are short - term or temporary .

foreign service employees periodically rotate out of their positions at their overseas posts , sometimes creating temporary vacancies until the positions are filled by incoming foreign service employees .

the gems data show larger numbers of vacant foreign service positions at posts in afghanistan , iraq , and pakistan than actually were unstaffed at these posts .

according to state officials , this discrepancy results from state's relying heavily on shorter - term assignments to fill foreign service positions at these locations .

these shorter - term assignments are not reflected in gems , and the positions therefore appear vacant .

the gems data may not reflect foreign service employees who have been temporarily reassigned from one overseas post to another .

the gems data may show positions as filled although the foreign service employee filling the position has not yet arrived at post .

to assess the reliability of the gems database , we asked state officials whether state had made any major changes to the database since our 2012 report , when we assessed the gems data to be sufficiently reliable .

state officials indicated that no major changes had been made .

we also tested the data for completeness , confirmed the general accuracy of the data with officials at selected overseas posts , and interviewed knowledgeable officials from state's office of resource management and organizational analysis concerning the data's reliability .

we found the gems data to be reliable for the purpose of determining the numbers and percentages of vacant foreign service positions at overseas posts .

we did not validate whether the total number of authorized overseas foreign service positions was appropriate or met state's needs .

we also reviewed state workforce planning documents and budget documents , such as state's five year workforce and leadership succession plan: fiscal years 2016-2020 and quadrennial diplomacy and development review .

in addition , we reviewed state office of inspector general reports as well as our previous reports on human capital challenges at state and effective strategic human capital management across the federal government .

in particular , our report high - risk series: progress on many high - risk areas , while substantial efforts needed on others notes that strategic human capital management is a high - risk issue across the federal government and lists five key elements as a road map for agency efforts to improve and ultimately address such issues .

for our third objective , we assessed whether state's efforts to address vacancies were guided by a corrective action plan that identifies the root causes of persistent foreign service vacancies at overseas posts and suggests corrective measures to reduce such vacancies , including steps necessary to implement solutions .

we conducted this performance audit from august 2017 to march 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the “economic” generalist career track includes positions from the “science officer” staffing skill group in the gems data .

170 foreign service employees were not staffed to one of the six regional bureaus .

in addition to the contact named above , godwin agbara ( assistant director ) , ian ferguson ( analyst - in - charge ) , anthony costulas , natalia pena , debbie chung , chris keblitis , reid lowe , justin fisher , and alexander welsh made key contributions to this report .

