i appreciate the opportunity to participate in the committee's hearing on pandemic influenza and continuity of operations ( coop ) planning .

as you know , essential government services can be interrupted by a range of events , including terrorist attacks , severe weather , building - level emergencies , and public health emergencies , such as pandemic influenza .

the federal government requires agencies to develop plans for ensuring the continuity of essential services during such emergencies .

to assist agencies , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which is responsible for managing federal response and recovery efforts following any national incident , has issued guidance that defines the elements of a viable coop capability .

a potentially useful option for continuity planning is telework ( in which work is performed at an employee's home or at a work location other than a traditional office ) ; this alternative has gained widespread attention over the past decade in both the public and private sectors as a human capital flexibility that offers a variety of potential benefits to employers , employees , and society .

in a december 2005 report to congress , the office of personnel management ( opm ) indicated that 43 of the 82 federal agencies it surveyed had employees eligible to telework during 2004 , and more than 140,000 federal employees used telework that year .

opm also reported that there is a symbiotic relationship between coop and telework because many government functions that must be carried out in emergencies can be accomplished using telework .

similarly , we reported in april 2004 that telework is an important and viable option for federal agencies in continuity planning and implementation efforts , especially as the duration of an emergency event is extended .

this option appears particularly appropriate in the case of pandemic influenza , which occurs when an influenza virus causes an outbreak of disease that spreads easily from person to person and results in serious illness worldwide .

experts believe that the effects of a pandemic could come in waves that last for weeks or even months , in which time absentee rates could reach 40 percent during peak periods due to illness , the need to care for family members , and fear of infection .

recent executive branch guidance states that social distancing measures , such as telework , may be appropriate public health interventions for infection control and containment during a pandemic outbreak .

gao recognizes the importance of telework and continuity planning and is striving to lead by example on these issues .

for example , during certain emergencies , our current telework policy allows me to approve telework for all employees in an affected area to promote continuity of operations .

we are also completing a supplement to our coop plan that addresses preparations specific to a pandemic , and are coordinating our continuity planning efforts with those of other legislative branch agencies .

as you requested , i will discuss how agencies are addressing the use of telework in their continuity planning , based on work described in a report that we are issuing today .

in earlier work , we identified steps agencies that should take to effectively use telework during an emergency , and we surveyed agency officials responsible for continuity planning at 23 major agencies .

for this report , we repeated this survey to obtain updated information on the extent to which key telework practices were used in making continuity preparations .

we reviewed documentation submitted by agency officials to support their survey responses and compared these responses to those from our earlier work ; we briefed your staff on the results of our work on april 13 , 2006 .

this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

federal operations and facilities have been disrupted by a range of events , including the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 ; the oklahoma city bombing ; localized shutdowns due to severe weather conditions , such as hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma in 2005 ; and building - level events , such as asbestos contamination at the department of the interior's headquarters .

in addition , federal operations could be significantly disrupted by people - only events , such as an outbreak of severe acute respiratory illness ( sars ) .

such disruptions , particularly if prolonged , can lead to interruptions in essential government services .

prudent management , therefore , requires that federal agencies develop plans for dealing with emergency situations , including maintaining services , ensuring proper authority for government actions , and protecting vital assets .

until relatively recently , continuity planning was generally the responsibility of individual agencies .

in october 1998 , presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 67 identified fema — which is responsible for leading the effort to prepare the nation for all hazards and managing federal response and recovery efforts following any national incident — as the lead agent for federal coop planning across the federal executive branch .

fema's responsibilities include ● formulating guidance for agencies to use in developing viable plans ; ● coordinating interagency exercises and facilitating interagency coordination , as appropriate ; and ● overseeing and assessing the status of coop capabilities across the executive branch .

in july 1999 , fema issued the first version of federal preparedness circular ( fpc ) 65 , its guidance to the federal executive branch on developing viable and executable contingency plans that facilitate the performance of essential functions during any emergency .

fpc 65 applies to all federal executive branch departments and agencies at all levels , including locations outside washington , d.c. fema released an updated version of fpc 65 in june 2004 , providing additional guidance to agencies on each of the topics covered in the original guidance .

in partial response to a recommendation we made in april 2004 , the 2004 version of fpc 65 also included new guidance on human capital considerations for coop events .

for example , the guidance instructed agencies to consider telework — also referred to as telecommuting or flexiplace — as an option in their continuity planning .

telework has gained widespread attention over the past decade in both the public and private sectors as a human capital flexibility that offers a variety of potential benefits to employers , employees , and society .

in a 2003 report to congress on the status of telework in the federal government , the director of opm described telework as “an invaluable management tool which not only allows employees greater flexibility to balance their personal and professional duties , but also allows both management and employees to cope with the uncertainties of potential disruptions in the workplace , including terrorist threats.” a 2005 opm report on telework notes the importance of telework in responding flexibly to emergency situations , as demonstrated in the wake of the devastation caused by hurricane katrina , when telework served as a tool to help alleviate the issues caused by steeply rising fuel prices nationwide .

in 2004 , we surveyed major federal agencies at your request to determine how they planned to use telework during coop events .

we reported that , although agencies were not required to use telework in their coop plans , 1 of the 21 agency continuity plans in place on may 1 , 2004 , documented plans to address some essential functions through telework .

in addition , 10 agencies reported that they intended to use telework following a coop event , even though those intentions were not documented in their continuity plans .

the focus on using telework in continuity planning has been heightened in response to the threat of pandemic influenza .

in november 2005 , the white house issued a national strategy to address this threat , which states that social distancing measures , such as telework , may be appropriate public health interventions for infection control and containment during a pandemic outbreak .

the strategy requires federal departments and agencies to develop and exercise preparedness and response plans that take into account the potential impact of a pandemic on the federal workforce .

it also tasks dhs — the parent department of fema — with developing plans to implement the strategy in regard to domestic incident management and federal coordination .

in may 2006 , the white house issued an implementation plan in support of the pandemic strategy .

this plan outlines the responsibilities of various agencies and establishes time lines for future actions .

although more agencies reported plans for essential team members to telework during a coop event than in our 2004 survey , few documented that they had made the necessary preparations to effectively use telework during an emergency .

while fpc 65 does not require agencies to use telework during a coop event , it does state that they should consider the use of telework in their continuity plans and procedures .

all of the 23 agencies that we surveyed indicated that they considered telework as an option during coop planning , and 15 addressed telework in their coop plans ( see table 1 ) .

for agencies that did not plan to use telework during a coop event , reasons cited by agency officials for this decision included ( 1 ) the need to access classified information — which is not permitted outside of secured areas — in order to perform agency essential functions and ( 2 ) a lack of funding for the necessary equipment acquisition and network modifications .

the agencies that did plan to use telework in emergencies did not consistently demonstrate that they were prepared to do so .

we previously identified steps agencies should take to effectively use telework during an emergency .

these include preparations to ensure that staff has adequate technological capacity , assistance , and training .

table 1 provides examples of gaps in agencies' preparations , such as the following: ● nine of the 23 agencies reported that some of their coop essential team members are expected to telework during a coop event .

however , only one agency documented that it had notified its team members that they were expected to telework during such an event .

● none of the 23 agencies demonstrated that it could ensure adequate technological capacity to allow designated personnel to telework during a coop event .

no guidance addresses the steps that agencies should take to ensure that they are fully prepared to use telework during a coop event .

when we reported the results of our 2004 survey , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security direct the under secretary for emergency preparedness and response to develop , in consultation with opm , guidance on the steps that agencies should take to adequately prepare for the use of telework during a coop event .

however , to date , no such guidance has been created .

in march 2006 , fema disseminated guidance to agencies regarding the incorporation of pandemic influenza considerations into coop planning .

the guidance states that the dynamic nature of a pandemic influenza requires that the federal government take a nontraditional approach to continuity planning and readiness .

it suggests the use of telework during such an event .

according to the guidance , agencies should consider which essential functions and services can be conducted from a remote location ( eg , home ) using telework .

however , the guidance does not address the steps agencies should take when preparing to use telework during an emergency .

for example , although the guidance states that agencies should consider testing , training , and exercising of social distancing techniques , including telework , it does not address other necessary preparations , such as informing designated staff of the expectation to telework or providing them with adequate technical resources and support .

earlier this month , after we briefed your staff , the white house released an implementation plan in support of the national strategy for pandemic influenza .

this plan calls on opm to work with dhs and other agencies to revise existing telework guidance and issue new guidance on human capital planning and coop .

the plan establishes an expectation that these actions will be completed within 3 months .

if the forthcoming guidance from dhs and other responsible agencies does not require agencies to make the necessary preparations for telework , agencies are unlikely to take all the steps necessary to ensure that employees will be able to effectively use telework to perform essential functions during any coop event .

in addition , inadequate preparations could limit the ability of nonessential employees to contribute to agency missions during extended emergencies , including a pandemic influenza scenario .

in summary , mr. chairman , although more agencies reported plans for essential team members to telework during a coop event than in our previous survey , few documented that they had made the necessary preparations to effectively use telework during an emergency .

in addition , agencies lack guidance on what these necessary preparations are .

although fema's recent telework guidance does not address the steps agencies should take to prepare to use telework during an emergency event , new guidance on telework and coop is expected to be released later this year .

if the new guidance does not specify the steps agencies need to take to adequately prepare their telework capabilities for use during an emergency situation , it will be difficult for agencies to make adequate preparations to ensure that their teleworking staff will be able to perform essential functions during a coop event .

in our report , we made recommendations aimed at helping to ensure that agencies are adequately prepared to perform essential functions following an emergency .

among other things , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security direct the fema director to establish a time line for developing , in consultation with opm , guidance on the steps that agencies should take to adequately prepare for the use of telework during a coop event .

in commenting on a draft of the report , the director of dhs's liaison office partially agreed with this recommendation and stated that fema will coordinate with opm in the development of a time line for further telework guidance .

in addition , he stated that both fema and opm have provided guidance on the use of telework .

however , as stated in our report , present guidance does not address the preparations agencies should make for using telework during emergencies .

with the release of the white house's implementation plan regarding pandemic influenza , a time line has now been established for the issuance of revised guidance on telework ; however , unless the forthcoming guidance addresses the necessary preparations , agencies may not be able to use telework effectively to ensure the continuity of their essential functions .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time .

for information about this testimony , please contact linda d. koontz at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or at koontzl@gao.gov .

key contributions to this testimony were made by james r. sweetman , jr. , assistant director ; barbara collier ; sairah ijaz ; nick marinos ; and kim zelonis .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

