i am pleased to be here today as you discuss options for increasing medicare beneficiaries' access to prescription drugs .

there are growing concerns about gaps in the medicare program , most notably the lack of outpatient prescription drug coverage , which may leave medicare's most vulnerable beneficiaries with high out - of - pocket costs .

recent estimates suggest that , at any point in time , over a third of medicare beneficiaries lack prescription drug coverage .

the rest have at least some drug coverage through various sources — most commonly employer - sponsored health plans — although recent evidence indicates that this coverage is beginning to erode .

at the same time , however , the short - term and long - term cost pressures facing the existing medicare program are considerable .

after a brief slowdown in the late 1990s , medicare spending growth has recently accelerated .

in the last fiscal year , growth in program spending reached nearly 9 percent , with spending on certain services increasing much more rapidly .

for example , spending for home health grew about 30 percent and spending for skilled nursing facility care grew slightly over 20 percent .

as i have noted previously , substantive financing and programmatic reforms are necessary to put medicare on a sustainable footing for the future .

these fundamental reforms are vital to reducing the program's growth , which threatens to absorb ever - increasing shares of the nation's budgetary and economic resources .

thus , any proposals to help seniors with the costs of prescription drugs would need to be carefully crafted to avoid further erosion of the projected financial condition of the medicare program , which is already unsustainable in its present form .

we must also remain mindful that the fiscal pressures created by the retirement of the baby boom generation and rising health care costs are just over the horizon .

between now and 2035 , the number of people who are 65 and older will double .

federal health and retirement spending are expected to surge as people live longer and spend more time in retirement .

in addition , advances in medical technology are likely to keep pushing up the cost of providing health care .

moreover , the baby boomers will have left behind fewer workers to support them in retirement .

absent substantive reform of the entitlement programs , a rapid escalation of federal spending for social security , medicare , and medicaid beginning less than 10 years from now is virtually certain to overwhelm the rest of the federal budget .

as figure 1 shows , fiscal flexibility has already decreased as spending for social security , medicare , and medicaid have absorbed an increasingly large share of the federal budget .

reductions in defense spending have helped accommodate the growth in these entitlement programs .

however , reductions in defense spending can no longer be used as a means to help fund other claims on the budget ; indeed , spending on defense and homeland security will grow as we seek to combat threats to our nation .

today my remarks will focus on ( 1 ) the access and affordability issues that underlie the interest in a medicare prescription drug benefit , ( 2 ) the financial challenges medicare faces to meet its current obligations , and ( 3 ) key considerations in light of the tension between benefit expansions and budgetary pressures .

in summary , intentions to add prescription drug coverage to medicare's benefits come during a period of rapid growth in national spending for pharmaceuticals .

between 1995 and 2000 , spending for prescription drugs rose more than 2 1 / 2 times faster than spending for health care overall , and this dramatic growth is expected to continue in the coming years .

in the absence of a drug benefit in the medicare program , many beneficiaries obtain coverage from other sources , including health plans , public programs , and the medigap insurance market .

but the price , availability , and level of such coverage vary widely , leaving substantial gaps and exposure to high out - of - pocket costs for hundreds of thousands of beneficiaries .

despite the various pressures to adopt a prescription drug benefit , the rapidly escalating cost of meeting current obligations for present and future beneficiaries argues for careful deliberation and extreme caution in crafting any benefit expansion .

medicare's trustees have indicated in recent years that the medicare program is already unsustainable in its present form .

gao's long - term budget simulations show that the aging of the baby boom generation and rising per capita health care spending will , absent meaningful reform , lead to massive fiscal challenges in future years .

assuming , for example , that last year's tax reductions are made permanent and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy , by mid - century , spending for the current medicare program — without the addition of a drug benefit — is projected to account for more than one - quarter of all federal revenues .

in fact , federal revenues may only be adequate to pay social security and interest on the federal debt .

as a result , massive spending , tax increases , or some combination of the two would be necessary to obtain balance .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

the huge budgetary pressures that we are sure to face in the coming years require that we set priorities so that any benefit expansions are in line with available resources .

in this regard , the application of basic health insurance principles to any proposed benefit could help moderate the cost for both beneficiaries and taxpayers .

under these principles , beneficiaries receive protections against the risk of catastrophic medical expenses while remaining conscious of the cost of care .

at the same time , it is important that benefit expansion proposals include targeting mechanisms to ensure that federal support is directed at the beneficiaries with the greatest financial risk .

nevertheless , as i have stated previously , no matter how well designed a new benefit may be , adding benefits without fundamentally reforming the existing program will merely hasten the exhaustion of medicare's hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund and the draining of general revenues .

any benefit expansion will also serve to make our long - range fiscal challenge even greater .

ideally , medicare reforms should be designed to improve our long - range fiscal situation .

at a minimum , they should be designed so as not to make our long - range fiscal challenge worse .

extensive research and development have led to new and improved prescription drug therapies that , in some instances , have replaced other health care interventions .

for example , new medications for the treatment of ulcers have virtually eliminated the need for some surgical treatments .

as a result of these innovations , the importance of prescription drugs as part of health care has grown .

however , not all new drug therapies serve to reduce the need for more invasive and expensive medical procedures .

some new drug therapies are substitutes for already existing , less expensive , ones and may not appreciably improve efficacy or reduce side effects .

others may be used more for making lifestyle enhancements than for extending life or treating a serious medical condition .

spending on the new drug therapies , along with the mass media advertising of prescription drugs , serves to significantly increase total drug spending as a component of health care costs .

the medicare benefit package , largely designed in 1965 , provides virtually no outpatient drug coverage .

beneficiaries may fill this coverage gap in various ways .

all beneficiaries have access to individually purchased supplemental policies — medigap — when they first become eligible for medicare at age 65 .

those policies that include drug coverage tend to be expensive and provide only limited benefits .

some beneficiaries have access to coverage through employer - sponsored policies or medicare health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) .

in recent years , coverage through these sources has become more expensive and less widely available .

beneficiaries whose income falls below certain thresholds may qualify for medicaid or other public programs .

in recent years , prescription drug expenditures have grown substantially , both in total and as a share of all heath care outlays .

prescription drug spending grew an average of almost 15 percent per year from 1995 to 2000 , well more than double the 5.6 percent average growth rate for health care expenditures overall .

 ( see table 1. ) .

as a result , prescription drugs account for a growing share of health care spending rising from 6.1 percent in 1995 to 9.4 percent in 2000 .

by 2011 , prescription drug expenditures are expected to account for almost 15 percent of total health expenditures .

total drug expenditures have been driven up by several factors .

drug coverage by private insurance has likely contributed to the rise in spending , because insured consumers are partially insulated from the costs .

in the years from 1993 to 2000 , the share of prescription drug expenditures paid by private health insurers rose from more than a fourth to almost a half .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

the development of new , more expensive drug therapies — including new drugs that replace old drugs and new drugs that treat disease more effectively — also contributed to the growth in drug spending by boosting the volume of drugs used as well as the average price for drugs used .

similarly , biotechnology advances and a growing knowledge of the human immune system are significantly shaping the discovery , design , and production of drugs .

advertising pitched to consumers has also served to increase the demand for prescription drugs .

a recent study found that , in 2000 , the 50 drugs most heavily advertised directly to consumers were responsible for nearly half of the roughly $21- billion increase in retail spending on prescription drugs from 1999 to 2000 .

in 2001 , cbo estimated that the average medicare beneficiary would use $1,756 worth of prescription drugs .

this is a substantial amount considering that some beneficiaries lack any drug coverage and others with coverage may have less than in previous years .

moreover , significant numbers of beneficiaries have drug expenses much higher than those of the average beneficiary .

cbo also estimated that some 10 percent of medicare beneficiaries would have expenditures of $4,000 or more .

according to a recent survey , in the fall of 1999 , nearly two - thirds of medicare beneficiaries had some form of drug coverage from a supplemental insurance policy , health plan , or public program .

more than one - third reported that they lacked drug coverage altogether .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

employer - sponsored health plans provide drug coverage to the largest segment of the medicare population with coverage .

however , there are signs that this coverage is eroding .

fewer employers are offering health benefits to retirees eligible for medicare , and those that continue to offer coverage are requiring retirees to pay a larger share of costs .

the proportion of large employers offering health coverage to retirees eligible for medicare declined from 31 percent in 1997 to 23 percent in 2001 .

at the same time , the proportion of large employers requiring medicare - eligible retirees to pay the full cost of their health coverage increased from 27 percent to 31 percent .

in march 2001 , 10 percent of medicare beneficiaries obtained prescription drug coverage through a medicare hmo , down from about 15 percent in 1999 .

medicare hmos have found drug coverage to be an attractive benefit that beneficiaries consider when choosing to enroll .

however , owing to rising drug expenditures and their effect on plan costs , fewer medicare hmos are offering a drug benefit .

in 2002 , 50 percent of medicare beneficiaries have access to a medicare hmo with drug coverage , down from 65 percent in 1999 .

the drug benefits the plans do offer have become less generous , increasing enrollees' out - of - pocket costs and limiting their total drug coverage .

about 7 percent of beneficiaries purchase medigap policies that provide drug coverage .

these policies have shortcomings: they tend to be expensive , involve significant cost - sharing , and do not provide protection against catastrophic out - of - pocket expenses .

in 1999 , average premiums for standard medigap policies that included drug coverage ranged from about $1,400 per year to $1,700 per year .

beneficiaries remained responsible for a $250 deductible for drugs and 50-percent coinsurance .

the drug benefit was capped at an annual limit of $1,250 or $3,000 .

furthermore , medigap premiums have been increasing in recent years .

one recent study reported that , from 1999 to 2000 , premiums for the medigap plans offering prescription drug coverage rose the most — by 17 to 34 percent — compared to 4 to 10 percent increases for medigap plans without prescription drug coverage .

all medicare beneficiaries who qualify for full medicaid benefits receive drug coverage that may include some limits , such as restrictions on the number of prescriptions that can be filled per month , depending on the state's medicaid plan .

individuals with low incomes who are not eligible for full medicaid benefits may have access to some drug coverage through a state pharmacy assistance program .

as of april 2002 , 26 states and the district of columbia had such a program in operation .

access barriers to prescription drugs may be particularly acute for medicare beneficiaries who lack drug coverage and have substantial health care needs .

in 1998 , among beneficiaries in poor health , those without drug coverage had drug expenditures that were $910 lower than those with drug coverage and they filled 14.5 fewer prescriptions .

the difference in expenditures and use between the two groups suggests that the lack of drug coverage may impose barriers to health care .

the current medicare program , without improvements , is ill suited to serve future generations of seniors and eligible disabled americans .

although the need to modernize medicare's benefit package is compelling , the program is already fiscally unsustainable in its present form , and the disparity between program expenditures and program revenues is expected to widen dramatically in the coming years .

on march 26 , 2002 , the trustees of the medicare trust funds reported on the current and projected financial status of the program over the next 75 years .

the report stated that , while the near - term financial condition has improved slightly since last year's report , medicare continues to face substantial financial challenges in the not - too - distant future that need to be addressed soon .

medicare's fiscal health is often gauged by the projected solvency of the hi trust fund , which pays for inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing care , hospice , and certain home health services and is financed by payroll taxes .

the gap between income and costs can best be expressed relative to taxable payroll ( the hi trust fund's funding base ) .

this year , under the trustees' 2002 intermediate estimates , the 75-year actuarial deficit is projected to be 2.02 percent of taxable payroll — an increase from last year's projected deficit of 1.97 percent .

this means that to bring the hi trust fund into balance over the 75-year period , either program outlays would have to be immediately reduced by 38 percent or payroll tax income immediately increased by almost 70 percent , or some combination of the two .

the trustees' report also projected that the trust fund for medicare's hi component would remain solvent until 2030 .

however , the projection that the hi trust fund is not facing imminent insolvency does not mean that we can or should wait until 2030 to take action .

although hi revenues currently exceed hi outlays , the march 2002 trustees' report projects that cash deficits will reemerge in 2016 and grow larger with each passing year .

 ( see fig .

5. ) .

unlike private trust funds that can set aside money for the future by investing in financial assets , the medicare hi trust fund is essentially an accounting device .

it allows the government to track the extent to which earmarked payroll taxes cover medicare's hi outlays .

while the u.s. treasury securities in the hi trust fund are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government , they essentially represent an unfunded promise to pay , which will require tough fiscal choices in future years .

to finance its cash deficits , the hi trust fund will need to draw on the special - issue treasury securities acquired during the years when the program generated cash surpluses .

the negative cash flow will place increased pressure on the federal budget .

in essence , for hi to “redeem” its securities , the government will need to obtain cash through some combination of increased taxes , spending cuts , increased borrowing from the public ( or correspondingly less debt reduction than would have been the case had cash flow remained positive ) .

a focus on hi solvency alone , however , does not provide a complete picture of the medicare program ‘s expected future fiscal claims .

the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) portion of medicare , which covers physician and outpatient hospital services , diagnostic tests , and certain other medical services , is not reflected in the hi solvency measure .

smi is largely funded through general revenues and its outlays are projected to grow even faster than hi outlays in the near future .

without meaningful reform , the long - term financial outlook for medicare is bleak .

together , medicare's hi and smi expenditures are expected to increase dramatically , rising from about 11 percent of federal revenues in 2001 to more than one - quarter by mid - century .

over the same time frame , medicare's expenditures are expected to more than double as a share of the nation's economy , from 2.4 to 6.0 percent , as shown in figure 6 .

moreover , relatively fewer potential workers will be available to shoulder medicare's financial burden .

in 2000 there were 4.9 working - age persons ( 18 to 64 years ) per elderly person , but by 2030 , this ratio is projected to decline to 2.8 .

for the hi portion of medicare , in 2001 there were 4 covered workers per hi beneficiary .

under their intermediate 2002 estimates , the trustees project that by 2030 there will be only 2.4 covered workers per hi beneficiary .

about 12 percent of the total population ; by 2030 , they will comprise 20 percent .

medicare growth rates , however , reflect not only a rapidly increasing beneficiary population , but also the escalation of health care costs at rates well exceeding general rates of inflation .

when viewed from the perspective of the entire budget and the economy , the growth in medicare spending will become progressively unsustainable over the longer term .

our updated budget simulations show that to move into the future with no changes in federal health and retirement programs is to envision a very different role for the federal government .

assuming , for example , that last year's tax reductions are made permanent and discretionary spending keeps pace with the economy , spending for net interest , social security , medicare , and medicaid consumes nearly 50 percent of federal revenue by 2015 and more than three - quarters of federal revenue by 2030 , leaving little room for other federal priorities including defense and education .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

by 2050 , total federal revenue is insufficient to fund entitlement spending and interest payments , resulting in deficits that are escalating out of control .

our long - term simulations illustrate the magnitude of the fiscal challenges associated with an aging society and the significance of the related challenges the government will be called upon to address .

as i have stated previously , early action to reform medicare and other programs would yield the highest fiscal dividends for the federal budget and would provide a longer period for prospective beneficiaries to make adjustments in their own planning .

waiting to build economic resources and reform future claims entails significant risks .

first , we lose an important window during which today's relatively large workforce can increase savings and enhance productivity , two elements critical to growing the future economy .

second , we lose the opportunity to reduce the interest burden on the federal budget , thereby creating a legacy of higher debt .

third and most critically , we risk losing the opportunity to phase in changes gradually so that all affected parties can make the adjustments needed to adequately plan for the future .

unfortunately , our long - range challenge has become more difficult , and the window of opportunity to address the entitlement challenge is narrowing .

it remains more important than ever to return to these issues over the next several years .

ultimately , the critical question is not how much a trust fund has in assets , but whether the government as a whole can afford the promised benefits now and in the future and at what cost to other claims on scarce resources .

given the current federal fiscal environment , we cannot afford to ignore the difficult policy choices that must be made to keep the medicare program on a sustainable footing .

adding prescription drug coverage to the medicare benefit package would require balancing competing concerns about program sustainability , federal obligations , and the hardship faced by some beneficiaries .

the addition of a benefit that has the potential to be massively expensive should be focused on meeting the needs deemed to be of the highest priority .

this focus would entail targeting financial help to beneficiaries most in need and , to the extent possible , avoiding the substitution of public for private coverage .

i continue to maintain , that , optimally , benefit expansions should be made in the context of overall program reforms that are designed to make the program more sustainable over the long term .

several basic principles of health insurance provide a framework for keeping any new prescription drug benefit more affordable for both beneficiaries and the taxpayers .

first , as health insurance is intended to protect individuals against large , or catastrophic , expenses , a well - designed benefit should limit beneficiaries' liability for out - of - pocket expenses .

second , a benefit should be designed to include reasonable cost - sharing to encourage the appropriate use of services .

third , the benefit should include features to avoid adverse selection , that is , avoid covering only beneficiaries who will use the benefit .

including the individuals who may not currently need the benefit — but may need it in the future — can spread the risk and help keep the cost down for everyone .

leading proposals to integrate prescription drug coverage into the medicare program , to varying degrees , incorporate these principles .

for example , the proposals commonly limit a beneficiary's financial liability for prescription drug costs .

they seek to restrain inappropriate spending , in part by requiring cost - sharing in the form of a deductible and coinsurance .

to make drug coverage attractive to a broader spectrum of beneficiaries , the proposals subsidize the beneficiary premium .

to further encourage beneficiaries to sign up for prescription drug coverage when they are healthy , the proposals include provisions that discourage delayed enrollment .

finally , because even modest cost - sharing amounts might prove too burdensome for some individuals , the proposals include targeting mechanisms to help prevent low income from becoming a barrier to obtaining prescription drug coverage .

although the leading prescription drug coverage proposals share certain key design features , they differ in important details , such as the amount of required cost sharing and the limit on beneficiary out - of - pocket costs .

these differences reflect trade - offs in cost - control mechanisms , benefit generosity , and protections for beneficiaries with high needs .

careful debate about the different trade - offs is important , because both the overall design of a new benefit and the associated details determine the likely impact on both beneficiaries and taxpayers .

frankly , we know that incorporating a prescription drug benefit into the existing medicare program will add hundreds of billions of dollars to program spending over the next 10 years .

for this reason , i cannot overstate the importance of adopting meaningful financial reforms to ensure that medicare remains viable for future generations .

updating the medicare benefit package may be an important step in addressing an aging society's legitimate expectations for health care .

expanding access to prescription drugs could ease the significant financial burden some medicare beneficiaries face because of outpatient drug costs .

however , it is essential that we not take our eye off the ball .

the most critical issue facing medicare is the need to ensure the program's long - range financial integrity and sustainability .

care must be taken to ensure that any potential expansion of the program be balanced with other programmatic reforms so that we do not worsen medicare's existing financial imbalances .

the program needs to include adequate fiscal incentives to control costs and should be carefully targeted to meet genuine needs while remaining affordable .

this generation has a stewardship responsibility to future generations to reduce the debt burden they will inherit , to provide a strong foundation for future economic growth , and to ensure that future commitments are both adequate and affordable .

changes need to be considered as part of a broader initiative to address medicare's current fiscal imbalance and promote the program's longer - term sustainability .

balancing these competing concerns may require the best from government - run programs and private sector efforts to modernize medicare for the future .

medicare reform and modernization are best done with considerable lead - time to phase in changes and take action before the changes that are needed become dramatic and disruptive .

