the united states has abundant solar energy resources and solar , along with wind , offers the greatest energy and power potential among all commercial domestic renewable resources currently available , according to the national academies of science .

while helping meet the nation's energy needs , solar sources of electricity could also offer substantial environmental benefits , such as a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , over conventional electricity generation .

however , solar and wind energy as sources of electricity at the utility scale also face numerous challenges related to their intermittent availability and higher costs compared with traditional energy sources .

the department of energy's ( doe ) energy information administration , an independent statistical and analytical agency , reports that although solar energy accounted for only 1 percent of all renewable energy electricity consumed in the united states in 2010 , solar energy use increased by about 60 percent from 2006 to 2010 .

doe has also embarked on a comprehensive effort to reduce the cost of generating electricity using solar power .

beyond supplying electricity to the existing infrastructure or grid ( i.e. , the electricity networks that carry electricity from the plants where it is generated to consumers , including wires , substations , and transformers ) , solar energy technologies have extensive defense and space applications .

for example , the department of defense ( dod ) has undertaken efforts to develop technologies that allow it to use solar energy in operational environments , such as the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan , to help reduce its reliance on conventional fuel , which is very difficult and costly to deliver and store .

in addition , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) is working to develop high - power solar electric propulsion systems to provide low - cost abundant power for deep - space missions .

as the availability and utilization of solar energy technologies have increased , so too has federal support to some of the agencies addressing challenges associated with further expansion of solar energy as an electricity source and to meet other mission - specific goals .

in february 2012 , we reported that 23 federal agencies had implemented nearly 700 renewable energy initiatives in fiscal year 2010 — and a number of these initiatives supported solar energy technologies .

the existence of such initiatives at multiple agencies has raised questions about the potential for duplication that , in this context , occurs when multiple initiatives support the same technology advancement activities and technologies , direct funding to the same recipients , and have the same goals .

as we have previously reported , unnecessary duplication can potentially result from fragmentation and overlap among government programs .

fragmentation occurs when more than one federal agency , or more than one organization within an agency , is involved in the same broad area of national need .

for the purposes of this report , overlap occurs when multiple initiatives support similar technology advancement activities , similar technologies , similar funding recipients , or have similar goals .

in this context , you asked us to review federal initiatives that supported solar energy technology — which we termed “solar - related initiatives.” our objectives were to identify ( 1 ) solar - related initiatives supported by federal agencies in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 and key characteristics of those initiatives and ( 2 ) the extent of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication , if any , among federal solar - related initiatives , as well as the extent of coordination among these initiatives .

to address these objectives , we collected and analyzed information from our previous work and conducted new work .

more specifically , to identify federal solar - related initiatives and to assess the extent of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication among these initiatives , we relied on data from our february 2012 report on renewable energy , which identified and collected information from solar - related initiatives active in fiscal year 2010 , as well as other renewable energy initiatives .

for the purposes of this report , we defined an initiative as a program or group of agency activities serving a similar purpose or function that involved solar energy technologies through a specific emphasis or focus , even if solar energy was only one part of a broader effort .

we restricted our analysis to those initiatives that supported research and development ( r&d ) on , or commercialization of , innovative solar energy technologies .

because initiatives often supported more than one type of technology advancement activity , some of the initiatives included in this report may also support deployment activities .

we eliminated initiatives that focused solely on the deployment of readily available solar energy technologies .

although not covered in this report , a range of federal , state , and other initiatives support such deployment activities .

these federal deployment activities facilitate or achieve widespread use of technologies — for example , by federal agencies' procurement of solar energy technologies or by federal tax or other incentives that encourage households and businesses to adopt these technologies .

we have ongoing work that looks at some of these deployment activities , including doe's loan guarantee and advanced technology vehicles manufacturing loan programs , and a review of wind energy technology initiatives , including those that support deployment activities .

we also recently issued reports on tax incentives for residential energy efficiency and on renewable energy deployment activities .

after using our february 2012 report to identify solar - related initiatives that supported r&d and commercialization , we developed a questionnaire and surveyed cognizant officials at each of the six agencies that had such initiatives to collect additional information on the initiatives' scope and key characteristics — dod , doe , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , nasa , the national science foundation ( nsf ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

specifically , we asked questions to ascertain the number of projects , funds obligated , type of technology advancement activities supported , recipients funded , funding mechanisms , initiative goals , and efforts to coordinate across other solar - related initiatives .

to determine the extent to which agencies coordinated their initiatives , we used survey responses and interviews to identify coordination activities within and among the six agencies .

we also asked the agencies to provide us with any additional relevant initiatives that were implemented in fiscal year 2011 that were not on our initial list , and we sent a copy of the questionnaire to officials representing those initiatives as well .

 ( for further information on our questionnaire , see app .

i .

for a copy of our questionnaire , see app .

iii. ) .

we then analyzed the information collected for the february 2012 report and from our questionnaire for this report to determine the extent to which we could identify fragmentation , overlap , and duplication of solar - related initiatives .

in addition , we interviewed agency officials responsible for solar - related initiatives for follow - up information as needed .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2011 to august 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

solar energy can be used to heat , cool , and power homes and businesses with a variety of technologies that convert sunlight into usable energy .

examples of solar energy technologies include photovoltaics , concentrated solar power , and solar hot water .

solar cells , also known as photovoltaic cells , convert sunlight directly into electricity .

photovoltaic technologies are used in a variety of applications .

they can be found on residential and commercial rooftops to power homes and businesses ; utility companies use them for large power stations , and they power space satellites , calculators , and watches .

concentrated solar power uses mirrors or lenses to concentrate sunlight and produce intense heat , which is used to generate electricity via a thermal energy conversion process ; for example , by using concentrated sunlight to heat a fluid , boil water with the heated fluid , and channel the resulting steam through a turbine to produce electricity .

most concentrated solar power technologies are designed for utility - scale operations and are connected to the electricity - transmission system .

solar hot water technologies use a collector to absorb and transfer heat from the sun to water , which is stored in a tank until needed .

solar hot water systems can be found in residential and industrial buildings .

innovation in solar energy technology takes place across a spectrum of activities , which we refer to as technology advancement activities , and which include basic research , applied research , demonstration , and commercialization .

for purposes of this report , we defined basic research to include efforts to explore and define scientific or engineering concepts or is conducted to investigate the nature of a subject without targeting any specific technology ; applied research includes efforts to develop new scientific or engineering knowledge to create new and improved technologies ; demonstration activities include efforts to operate new or improved technologies to collect information on their performance and assess readiness for widespread use ; and commercialization efforts transition technologies to commercial applications by bridging the gap between research and demonstration activities and venture capital funding and marketing activities .

congressional budget office , federal financial support for the development and production of fuels and energy technologies ( washington , d.c.: march 2012 ) .

as a whole but not necessarily for the firms that invested in the activities .

for example , basic research can create general scientific knowledge that is not itself subject to commercialization but that can lead to multiple applications that private companies can produce and sell .

as activities get closer to the commercialization stage , the private sector may increase its support because its return on investment increases .

we identified 65 solar - related initiatives with a variety of key characteristics at six federal agencies .

over half of the 65 initiatives supported solar projects exclusively ; the remaining initiatives supported solar energy technologies in addition to other renewable energy technologies .

the initiatives demonstrated a variety of key characteristics , including focusing on different types of solar technologies and supporting a range of technology advancement activities from basic research to commercialization , with an emphasis on applied research and demonstration activities .

additionally , the initiatives supported several types of funding recipients including universities , industry , nonprofit organizations , and federal labs and researchers , primarily through grants and contracts .

agency officials reported that they obligated around $2.6 billion for the solar projects in these initiatives in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 .

in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , six federal agencies — dod , doe , epa , nasa , nsf , and usda — undertook 65 initiatives that supported solar energy technology , at least in part .

 ( see app .

ii for a full list of the initiatives ) .

of these initiatives , 35 of 65 ( 54 percent ) supported solar projects exclusively and 30 ( 46 percent ) also supported projects that were not solar .

for example , in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , doe's solar energy technologies program — photovoltaic research and development initiative , had 263 projects , all of which focused on solar energy .

in contrast , in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , doe's hydrogen and fuel research and development initiative — which supports wind and other renewable sources that could be used to produce hydrogen — had 209 projects , 26 of which were solar projects .

although initiatives support solar energy technologies , in a given year , they might not support any solar projects .

for example , nsf officials noted that the agency funds research across all fields and disciplines of science and engineering and that individual initiatives invite proposals for projects across a broad field of research , which includes solar - related research in addition to other renewable energy research .

however , in any given year , nsf may not fund proposals that address solar energy because either no solar proposals were submitted or the submitted solar - related proposals were not deemed meritorious for funding based upon competitive , merit - based reviews .

although more than half of the agencies' initiatives supported solar energy projects exclusively , the majority of projects supported by all 65 initiatives were not focused on solar .

as shown in table 1 , of the 4,996 total projects active in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 under the 65 initiatives , 1,506 ( 30 percent ) were solar projects , and 3,490 ( 70 percent ) were not solar projects .

agencies' solar - related initiatives supported different types of solar energy technologies .

according to agency officials responding to our questionnaire , 47 of the 65 initiatives supported photovoltaic technologies , and 18 supported concentrated solar power ; some initiatives supported both of these technologies or other solar technologies .

for example , nsf's che - dmr - dms solar energy initiative ( solar ) supports both photovoltaic and concentrated solar power technologies , including a project that is developing hybrid organic / inorganic materials to create ultra - low - cost photovoltaic devices and to advance solar concentrating technologies .

these initiatives supported solar energy technologies through multiple technology advancement activities , ranging from basic research to commercialization .

as shown in figure 1 , five of the six agencies supported at least three of the four technology advancement activities we examined , and four of the six supported all four .

our analysis showed that of the 65 initiatives , 20 initiatives ( 31 percent ) supported a single type of technology advancement activity ; 45 of the initiatives ( 69 percent ) supported more than one type of technology advancement activity ; and 4 of those 45 initiatives ( 6 percent ) supported all four .

for example , nasa's solar probe plus technology development initiative — which tests the performance of solar cells in elevated temperature and radiation environments such as near the sun — supported applied research exclusively .

in contrast , nasa's small business innovations research / small business technology transfer research initiative — which seeks high - technology companies to participate in government - sponsored research and development efforts critical to nasa's mission — supported all four technology advancement activities .

the technology advancement activities supported by the initiatives were applied research ( 47 initiatives ) , demonstration ( 41 initiatives ) , basic research ( 27 initiatives ) , and commercialization ( 17 initiatives ) .

the initiatives supported these technology advancement activities by providing funding to four types of recipients: universities , industry , nonprofit organizations , and federal laboratories and researchers .

the initiatives most often supported universities and industry .

in many cases , initiatives provided funding to more than one type of recipient .

specifically , our analysis showed that of the 65 initiatives , 23 of the initiatives ( 35 percent ) supported one type of recipient ; 21 of the initiatives ( 32 percent ) provided funding to at least two types of recipients ; 17 initiatives ( 26 percent ) supported three types ; and 4 initiatives ( 6 percent ) supported all four .

in two cases , agency officials reported that their initiatives supported “other” types of recipients , which included college students and military installations .

initiatives often supported a variety of recipient types , but individual agencies more often supported one or two types .

as shown in figure 2 , doe's initiatives most often supported federal laboratories and researchers ; dod's most often supported industry recipients ; nasa's supported federal laboratories and industry equally ; nsf's supported universities exclusively .

for example , nasa's small business innovations research / small business technology transfer research initiative provided contracts to industry to participate in government - sponsored research and development for advanced photovoltaic technologies to improve efficiency and reliability of solar power for space exploration missions .

nsf's emerging frontiers in research and innovation initiative provided grants to universities for , among other purposes , promoting breakthroughs in computational tools and intelligent systems for large - scale energy storage suitable for renewable energy sources such as solar energy .

federal solar - related initiatives provided funding to these recipients through multiple mechanisms , often using more than one mechanism per initiative .

as shown in figure 3 , the initiatives primarily used grants and contracts .

of the 65 initiatives , 27 awarded grants , and 36 awarded contracts ; many awarded both .

agency officials also reported funding solar projects via cooperative agreements , loans , and other mechanisms .

agency officials reported that the 65 initiatives as a group used multiple funding mechanisms , but we found that individual agencies tended to use primarily one or two funding mechanisms .

for example , usda exclusively used grants , while dod tended to use contracts .

doe reported using grants and cooperative agreements almost equally .

for example , doe's solar adept initiative , an acronym for “solar agile delivery of electrical power technology,” awards cooperative agreements to universities , industry , nonprofit organizations , and federal laboratories and researchers .

through a cooperative agreement , the initiative supported a project at the university of colorado at boulder that is developing advanced power conversion components that can be integrated into individual solar panels to improve energy yields .

according to the project description , the power conversion devices will be designed for use on any type of solar panel .

the university of colorado at boulder is partnering with industry and doe's national renewable energy laboratory on this project .

in responding to our questionnaire , officials from the six agencies reported that they obligated around $2.6 billion for the 1,506 solar projects in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 .

these obligations data represented a mix of actual obligations and estimates .

actual obligations were provided for both years for 51 of 65 initiatives .

officials provided estimated obligations for 12 initiatives for at least 1 of the 2 years , and officials from another 2 initiatives were unable to provide any obligations data .

those officials who provided estimates or were unable to provide obligations data noted that the accuracy or the availability of the obligations data was limited because isolating the solar activities from the overall initiative obligations can be difficult .

 ( see app .

ii for a full list of the initiatives and their related obligations. ) .

as shown in table 2 , over 90 percent of the funds ( about $2.3 billion of $2.6 billion ) were obligated by doe .

the majority of doe's obligations ( approximately $1.7 billion ) were obligated as credit subsidy costs — the government's estimated net long - term cost , in present value terms , of the loans — as part of title xvii section 1705 loan guarantee program from funds appropriated by congress under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( recovery act ) .

even excluding the loan guarantee program funds , doe obligated $661 million , which is more than was obligated by the other five agencies combined .

the 65 solar - related initiatives are fragmented across six agencies and many overlap to some degree , but agency officials reported a number of coordination activities to avoid duplication .

we found that many initiatives overlapped in the key characteristics of technology advancement activities , types of technologies , types of funding recipients , or broad goals ; however , these areas of overlap do not necessarily lead to duplication of efforts because the initiatives sometimes differ in meaningful ways or leverage the efforts of other initiatives , and we did not find clear evidence of duplication among initiatives .

officials from most initiatives reported that they engage in a variety of coordination activities with other solar - related initiatives , at times specifically to avoid duplication .

the 65 solar - related initiatives are fragmented in that they are implemented by various offices across six agencies and address the same broad area of national need .

in march 2011 , we reported that fragmentation has the potential to result in duplication of resources .

however , such fragmentation is , by itself , not an indication that unnecessary duplication of efforts or activities exists .

for example , in our march 2011 report , we stated that there can be advantages to having multiple federal agencies involved in a broad area of national need — agencies can tailor initiatives to suit their specific missions and needs , among other things .

in particular , dod is able to focus its efforts on solar energy technologies that serve its energy security mission , among other things , and nasa is able to focus its efforts on solar energy technologies that aid in aeronautics and space exploration , among other things .

as table 3 illustrates , we found that many initiatives overlap because they support similar technology advancement activities and types of funding recipients .

for example , initiatives that support basic and applied research most often fund universities , and those initiatives that support demonstration and commercialization activities most often fund industry .

almost all of the initiatives overlapped to some degree with at least one other initiative in that they support broadly similar technology advancement activities , types of technologies , and eligible funding recipients .

twenty - seven initiatives support applied research for photovoltaic technologies by universities .

for example , nsf's engineering research center for quantum energy and sustainable solar technologies at arizona state university pursues cost - competitive photovoltaic technologies with sustained market growth .

the air force's space propulsion and power generation research initiative partners with various universities to develop improved methods for powering spacecraft , including solar cell technologies .

sixteen initiatives support demonstration activities focused on photovoltaic technologies by federal laboratories and researchers .

for example , nasa's high - efficiency space power systems initiative conducts activities at nasa's glenn research center to develop technologies to provide low cost and abundant power for deep space missions , such as highly reliable solar arrays , to enable a crewed mission to explore a near earth asteroid .

doe's solar energy technologies program ( setp ) , which includes the photovoltaic research and development initiative , works with national laboratories such as the national renewable energy laboratory , sandia national laboratories , brookhaven national laboratory , and oak ridge laboratory to advance a variety of photovoltaic technologies to enable solar energy to be as cost competitive as traditional energy sources by 2015 .

seven initiatives supported applied research on concentrated solar power technologies by industry .

for example , doe's setp concentrated solar power subprogram , which focuses on reducing the cost of and increasing the use of solar power in the united states , funded a company to develop the hard coat on reflective mirrors that is now being used in concentrated solar power applications .

in addition , dod's fast access spacecraft testbed program , which concluded in march 2011 , funded industry to demonstrate a suite of critical technologies including high - efficiency solar cells , sunlight concentrating arrays , large deployable structures , and ultra - lightweight solar arrays .

additionally , 40 of the 65 initiatives overlap with at least one other initiative in that they supported similar broad goals , types of technologies , and technology advancement activities .

providing lightweight , portable energy sources .

officials from several initiatives within dod reported that their initiatives supported demonstration activities with the broad goal of providing lightweight , portable energy sources for military applications .

for example , the goal of the department of the army's basic solar power generation research initiative is to determine the feasibility and applicability of lightweight flexible , foldable solar panels for remote site power generation in tactical battlefield applications .

similarly , the goal of the office of the secretary of defense's engineered bio - molecular nano - devices and systems initiative is to provide a low - cost , lightweight , portable photovoltaic device to reduce the footprint and logistical burden on the warfighter .

artificial photosynthesis .

several initiatives at doe and nsf reported having the broad goal of supporting artificial photosynthesis , which converts sunlight , carbon dioxide , and water into a fuel , such as hydrogen .

for example , one of doe's energy innovation hubs , the fuels from sunlight hub , supports basic research to develop an artificial photosynthesis system with the specific goals of ( 1 ) understanding and designing catalytic complexes or solids that generate chemical fuel from carbon dioxide and / or water ; ( 2 ) integrating all essential elements , from light capture to fuel formation components , into an effective system ; and ( 3 ) providing a pragmatic evaluation of the system under development .

nsf's catalysis and biocatalysis initiative has a specific goal of developing new materials that will be catalysts for converting sunlight into usable energy for direct use , or for conversion into electricity , or into fuel for use in fuel cell applications .

integrating solar energy into the grid .

officials from several initiatives reported focusing on demonstration activities for technologies with the broad goal of integrating solar or renewable energies into the grid or onto military bases .

for example , doe's smart grid research and development initiative has a goal of developing smart grid technologies , particularly those that help match supply and demand in real time , to enable the integration of renewable energies , including solar energy , into the grid by helping stabilize variability and facilitate the safe and cost - effective operation by utilities and consumers .

the goal of this initiative is to achieve a 20 percent improvement in the ratio of the average power supplied to the maximum demand for power during a specified period by 2020 .

dod's installation energy research initiative has a goal of developing better ways to integrate solar energy into a grid system , thereby optimizing the benefit of renewable energy sources .

some initiatives may overlap on key characteristics such as technology advancement activities , types of technologies , types of recipients , or broad goals , but they also differ in meaningful ways that could result in specific and complementary research efforts , which may not be apparent when analyzing the characteristics .

for example , an army official told us that both the army and marine corps were interested in developing a flexible solar substrate , which is a photovoltaic panel laminated onto fabric that can be rolled up and carried in a backpack .

the army developed technology that included a battery through its initiative , while the marine corps , through a separate initiative , altered the army's technology to create a flexible solar substrate without a battery .

other initiatives may also overlap on key characteristics , but the efforts undertaken by their respective projects may complement each other rather than result in duplication .

for example , doe officials told us that one solar company may receive funding from multiple federal initiatives for different components of a larger project , thus simultaneously supporting a common goal without providing duplicative support .

while we did not find clear instances of duplicative initiatives , it is possible that there are duplicative activities among the initiatives that could be consolidated or resolved through enhanced coordination across agencies and at the initiative level .

also , it is possible that there are instances in which recipients receive funding from more than one federal source or that initiatives may fund some activities that would have otherwise sought and received private funding .

because it was beyond the scope of this work to look at the vast number of activities and individual awards that are encompassed in the initiatives we evaluated , we were unable to rule out the existence of any such duplication of activities or funding .

officials from 57 of the 65 initiatives ( 88 percent ) reported coordinating with other solar - related initiatives .

coordination is important because , as we have previously reported , a lack of coordination can waste scarce funds and limit the overall effectiveness of the federal effort .

we have also previously reported that coordination across programs may help address fragmentation , overlap , and duplication .

officials from nearly all initiatives that we identified as overlapping in their broad goals , types of technologies , and technology advancement activities , reported coordinating with other solar - related initiatives .

in october 2005 , we identified key practices that can help enhance and sustain federal agency coordination , such as ( 1 ) establishing joint strategies , which help align activities , core processes , and resources to accomplish a common outcome ; ( 2 ) developing mechanisms to evaluate and report on the progress of achieving results , which allow agencies to identify areas for improvement ; ( 3 ) leveraging resources , which helps obtain additional benefits that would not be available if agencies or offices were working separately ; and ( 4 ) defining a common outcome , which helps overcome differences in missions , cultures , and established ways of doing business .

agency officials at solar - related initiatives reported coordination activities that are consistent with these key practices , as described below .

some agency officials reported undertaking formal activities within their own agency to coordinate the efforts of multiple initiatives .

for example: establishing a joint strategy .

nsf initiatives reported participating in an energy working group , which includes initiatives in the agency's directorates for mathematical and physical sciences and for engineering .

officials from initiatives we identified as overlapping reported participating in the energy working group .

nsf formed this group to initiate coordination of energy - related efforts between the two directorates , including solar efforts , and tasked it with establishing a uniform clean , sustainable energy strategy and implementation plan for the agency .

developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report results .

dod officials from initiatives in the army , marine corps , and navy that we identified as overlapping reported they participated in the agency's energy and power community of interest .

the goal of this group is to coordinate the r&d activities within dod .

the group is scheduled to meet every quarter , but an army official told us the group has been meeting every 3 to 4 weeks recently to produce r&d road maps and to identify any gaps in energy and power r&d efforts that need to be addressed .

because of the information sharing that occurs during these meetings , the official said the risk of such duplication of efforts across initiatives within dod is minimized .

in responding to our questionnaire , agency officials also reported engaging in formal activities across agencies to coordinate the efforts of multiple initiatives .

for example: leveraging resources .

the interagency advanced power group ( iapg ) , which includes the central intelligence agency , dod , doe , nasa , and the national institute of standards and technology , is a federal membership organization that was established in the 1950s to streamline energy efforts across the government and to avoid duplicating research efforts .

a number of smaller working groups were formed as part of this effort , including the renewable energy conversion working group , which includes the coordination of solar efforts .

the working groups are to meet at least once each year , but according to a dod official , working group members often meet more often than that in conjunction with outside conferences and workshops .

the purpose of the meetings is to present each agency's portfolio of research efforts and to inform and ultimately leverage resources across the participating agencies .

according to iapg documents , group activities allow agencies to identify and avoid duplication of efforts .

several of the initiatives that we identified as overlapping also reported participating in the iapg .

leveraging resources and defining a common outcome .

doe's setp in the office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) coordinates with doe's office of science and the advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) through the sunshot initiative , which according to sunshot officials , was established expressly to prevent duplication of efforts while maximizing agencywide impact on solar energy technologies .

the goal of the sunshot initiative is to reduce the total installed cost of solar energy systems by 75 percent .

sunshot officials said program managers from all three offices participate on the sunshot management team , which holds “brain - storming” meetings to discuss ideas for upcoming funding announcements and subsequently vote on proposed funding announcements .

officials from other doe offices and other federal agencies are invited to participate , with coordination occurring as funding opportunities arise in order to leverage resources .

officials said meetings may include as few as 25 or as many as 85 attendees , depending on the type of project and the expertise required of the attending officials .

additionally , doe and nsf coordinate through the sunshot initiative on the foundational program to advance cell efficiency ( f - pace ) , which identifies and funds solar device physics and photovoltaic technology research and development that will improve photovoltaic cell performance and reduce module cost for grid - scale commercial applications .

the initiatives that reported participating in sunshot activities also included many that we found to be overlapping .

developing joint strategies ; developing mechanisms to monitor , evaluate , and report results ; and defining a common outcome .

the national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) an interagency program , which includes dod , doe , nasa , nsf , and usda , among others , was established to coordinate the nanotechnology - related activities across federal agencies that fund nanoscale research or have a stake in the outcome of this research .

the nni is directed to ( 1 ) establish goals , priorities , and metrics for evaluation for federal nanotechnology research , development , and other activities ; ( 2 ) invest in federal r&d programs in nanotechnology and related sciences to achieve these goals ; and ( 3 ) provide for interagency coordination of federal nanotechnology research , development , and other activities .

the nni implementation plan states that the nni will maximize the federal investment in nanotechnology and avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts .

nni includes a subgroup that focuses on nanotechnology for solar energy collection and conversion .

specifically , this subgroup is to ( 1 ) improve photovoltaic solar electricity generation with nanotechnology , ( 2 ) improve solar thermal energy generation and conversion with nanotechnology , and ( 3 ) improve solar - to - fuel conversions with nanotechnology .

in addition to the coordination efforts above , officials reported through our questionnaire that their agencies coordinate through discussions with other agency officials or as part of the program and project management and review processes .

some officials said such discussions and reviews among officials occur explicitly to determine whether there is duplication of funding occurring .

for example , setp projects include technical merit reviews , which include peer reviewers from outside of the federal government , as well as a federal review panel composed of officials from several agencies .

officials from setp also participate in the technical merit reviews of other doe offices' projects .

arpa - e initiatives also go through a review process that includes federal officials and independent experts .

doe officials told us that an arpa - e high energy advanced thermal storage review meeting , an instance of potential duplicative funding was found with an setp project .

funding of the project through setp was subsequently removed because of the arpa - e review process , and no duplicative funds were expended .

in addition to coordinating to avoid duplication , officials from 59 of the 65 initiatives ( 91 percent ) reported that they determine whether applicants have received other sources of federal funding for the project for which they are applying .

twenty - one of the 65 initiatives ( 32 percent ) further reported that they have policies that either prohibit or permit recipients from receiving other sources of federal funding for projects .

some respondents to our questionnaire said it is part of their project management process to follow up with funding recipients on a regular basis to determine whether they have subsequently received other sources of funding .

for example , doe's arpa - e prohibits recipients from receiving duplicative funding from either public or private sources , and requires disclosure of other sources of funding both at the time of application , as well as on a quarterly basis throughout the performance of the award .

even if an agency requires that such funding information be disclosed on applications , applicants may choose not to disclose it .

in fact , it was recently discovered that a university researcher did not identify other sources of funding on his federal applications as was required and accepted funding for the same research on solar conversion of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbons from both nsf and doe .

ultimately , the professor was charged with and pleaded guilty to wire fraud , false statements , and money laundering in connection with the federal research grant .

we provided dod , doe , epa , nasa , nsf , and usda with a draft of this report for review and comment .

usda generally agreed with the overall findings of the report .

nasa and nsf provided technical or clarifying comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

dod , doe , and epa indicated that they had no comments on the report .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of agriculture , defense , and energy ; the administrators of epa and nasa ; the director of nsf ; the appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

the objectives of our report were to identify ( 1 ) solar - related initiatives supported by federal agencies in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 and key characteristics of those initiatives and ( 2 ) the extent of fragmentation , overlap , and duplication , if any , among federal solar - related initiatives , as well as the extent of coordination among these initiatives .

to inform our objectives , we reviewed a february 2012 gao report that was conducted to identify federal agencies' renewable energy initiatives , which included solar - related initiatives , and examine the federal roles the agencies' initiatives support .

the gao report on renewable energy - related initiatives identified nearly 700 initiatives that were implemented in fiscal year 2010 across the federal government , of which 345 initiatives supported solar energy .

for purposes of this report , we only included those solar - related initiatives that we determined were focused on research and development ( r&d ) , and commercialization , which we defined as follows: research and development .

efforts ranging from defining scientific concepts to those applying and demonstrating new and improved technologies .

commercialization .

efforts to bridge the gap between research and development activities and the marketplace by transitioning technologies to commercial applications .

we did not include those initiatives that focused solely on deployment activities , which include efforts to facilitate or achieve widespread use of existing technologies either in the commercial market or for nonmarket uses such as defense , through their construction , operation , or use .

initiatives that focus on deployment activities include a variety of tax incentives .

we also narrowed our list to only those initiatives that focused research on advancing or developing new and innovative solar technologies .

next , we shared our list with agency officials and provided our definitions of r&d and commercialization .

we asked officials to determine whether the list was complete and accurate for fiscal year 2010 initiatives that met our criteria , whether those initiatives were still active in fiscal year 2011 , and whether there were any new initiatives in fiscal year 2011 .

if officials wanted to remove an initiative from our list , we asked for additional information to support the removal .

in total , we determined that there were 65 initiatives that met our criteria .

to identify and describe the key characteristics of solar - related initiatives implemented by federal agencies , we developed a questionnaire to collect information from officials of those 65 federal solar energy - related initiatives .

the questionnaire was prepopulated with information that was obtained from the agencies for gao's renewable energy report including program descriptions , type of solar technology supported , funding mechanisms , and type of funding recipients .

questions included the type of technology advancement activities , obligations for solar activities in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 , initiative - wide and solar - specific goals , and coordination efforts with other solar - related initiatives .

we conducted pretests with officials of three different initiatives at three different agencies to check that ( 1 ) the questions were clear and unambiguous , ( 2 ) terminology was used correctly , ( 3 ) the questionnaire did not place an undue burden on agency officials , ( 4 ) the information could feasibly be obtained , and ( 5 ) the questionnaire was comprehensive and unbiased .

an independent gao reviewer also reviewed a draft of the questionnaire prior to its administration .

on the basis of feedback from these pretests and independent review , we revised the survey in order to improve its clarity .

after completing the pretests , we administered the questionnaire .

we sent questionnaires to the appropriate agency liaisons in an attached microsoft word form , who in turn sent the questionnaires to the appropriate officials .

we received questionnaire responses for each initiative and , thus , had a response rate of 100 percent .

after reviewing the responses , we conducted follow - up e - mail exchanges or telephone discussions with agency officials when responses were unclear or conflicting .

when necessary , we used the clarifying information provided by agency officials to update answers to questions to improve the accuracy and completeness of the data .

because this effort was not a sample survey , it has no sampling errors .

however , the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors , commonly referred to as nonsampling errors .

for example , difficulties in interpreting a particular question , sources of information available to respondents , or entering data into a database or analyzing them can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results .

however , we took steps to minimize such nonsampling errors in developing the questionnaire — including using a social science survey specialist for design and pretesting the questionnaire .

we also minimized the nonsampling errors when collecting and analyzing the data , including using a computer program for analysis , and using an independent analyst to review the computer program .

finally , we verified the accuracy of a small sample of keypunched records by comparing them with their corresponding questionnaires , and we corrected the errors we found .

less than 0.5 percent of the data items we checked had random keypunch errors that would not have been corrected during data processing .

to conduct our analysis , a technologist compared all of the initiatives and identified overlapping initiatives as those sharing at least one common technology advancement activity , one common technology , and having similar goals .

a second technologist then completed the same analysis , and the two then compared their findings and , where they differed , came to a joint decision as to which initiatives broadly overlapped on their technology advancement activities , technologies , and broad goals .

if the two technologists could not come to an agreement , a third technologist determined whether there was overlap .

to assess the reliability of obligations data , we asked officials of initiatives that comprised over 90 percent of the total obligations follow - up questions on the data systems used to generate that data .

while we did not verify all responses , on the basis of our application of recognized survey design practices and follow - up procedures , we determined that the data used in this report were of sufficient quality for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2011 to august 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

tables 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , and 9 provide descriptions , by agency , of the 65 initiatives that support solar energy technologies and the obligations for those initiatives' solar activities in fiscal years 2010 and 2011 .

in addition to the individual named above , key contributors to this report included karla springer ( assistant director ) , tanya doriss , cindy gilbert , jessica lemke , cynthia norris , jerome sandau , holly sasso , maria stattel , and barbara timmerman .

