i am pleased to participate in this hearing on u.s .

postal service ( usps ) operations .

my statement will ( 1 ) update usps's financial condition and outlook and explain our recent decision to place usps's financial condition on our high - risk list , and ( 2 ) discuss the need for usps to restructure its mail processing , retail , and delivery networks and its efforts to improve their efficiency .

my statement is based upon on our past and ongoing work , including the report being released today on usps efforts to improve delivery efficiency , and our report adding usps to the high - risk list , as well as our continued monitoring of usps's financial condition and outlook .

we conducted our work from may 2009 to july 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product .

usps's financial condition and outlook continue to deteriorate with a worsening outlook for mail volume and revenue .

usps currently projects a mail volume decline of 13.7 percent for fiscal year 2009 , triple the 4.5 percent decline in fiscal year 2008 and the largest percentage decline since the great depression .

as a result , usps is projecting the following for fiscal year 2009: a net loss of about $7 billion , even if it achieves record cost savings of about $6 billion ; an increase in outstanding debt by the annual statutory limit of $3 billion ; and , despite this borrowing , an unprecedented $1 billion cash shortfall .

usps has reported that it does not expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to fully make its mandated payment of $5.4 billion for future retiree health benefits that is due by september 30 , 2009 .

further , usps recently reported to congress that — due to the need to maintain sufficient cash to cover costs — it will not fully make this payment , even if it receives $2 billion in relief from fiscal year 2009 retiree health benefits payments that would be provided by h.r .

22 , which has been reported out of the house committee on oversight and government reform .

usps also expects continued financial problems in fiscal year 2010 , with a similar deficit even if it achieves larger cost savings , and an even larger cash shortfall .

under this scenario , usps would increase its outstanding debt by an additional $3 billion , which would bring its total debt to $13.2 billion at the end of fiscal year 2010 — only $1.8 billion less than its $15 billion statutory limit .

usps's projected cost cutting of about $6 billion for this fiscal year is much larger than its previous annual cost - cutting targets that have ranged from nearly $900 million to $2 billion since 2001 .

however , usps projects cash shortfalls because cost cutting and rate increases will not fully offset the impact of mail volume declines and other factors that increase costs — notably semiannual cost - of - living allowances ( cola ) for employees covered by union contracts .

compensation and benefits constitute close to 80 percent of its costs — a percentage that has remained similar over the years despite major advances in technology and automating postal operations .

also , usps continues to pay a higher share of employee health benefit premiums than other federal agencies .

further , it has high overhead ( institutional ) costs that are hard to change in the short term , such as providing universal service that includes 6-day delivery and maintaining a network of 37,000 post offices and retail facilities , as well as a delivery network of more than 149 million addresses .

two days ago , we added usps's financial condition to the list of high - risk areas needing attention by congress and the executive branch to achieve broad - based transformation .

we reported that usps urgently needs to restructure to address its current and long - term financial viability .

usps's cost structure has not been cut fast enough to offset accelerated decline in mail volume and revenue .

in this regard , usps has high personnel costs , including those to provide 6-day delivery and retail services .

to achieve financial viability , usps must align its costs with revenues , generate sufficient earnings to finance capital investment , and manage its debt .

we noted that mail use has been changing over the past decade as businesses and consumers have moved to electronic communication and payment alternatives .

further innovations in , and use of , e - commerce and broadband are expected .

the percentage of households paying bills by mail is declining while the percentage of electronic payments is increasing ( see fig .

1 ) .

mail volume peaked in 2006 , and its decline has accelerated with the economic recession , particularly among major mail users in the advertising , financial , and housing sectors .

mail volume has typically returned after recessions , but usps's 5-year forecast suggests that much of the lost volume will not return .

for these reasons , we concluded that action is needed in multiple areas , including possible action and support by congress , as no single change will be sufficient to address usps's challenges .

the short - term challenge for usps is to cut costs quickly enough to offset the unprecedented volume and revenue declines , so that it can cover its operating expenses .

the long - term challenge is to restructure usps operations , networks , and workforce to reflect changes in mail volume , use of the mail , and revenue .

accordingly , we have called for usps to develop and implement a broad restructuring plan — with input from the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) and other stakeholders , and approval by congress and the administration — that includes key milestones and time frames for actions , addresses key issues , and identifies what steps congress and other stakeholders may need to take .

we stated that usps's restructuring plan should address how it plans to realign postal services , such as delivery frequency , delivery standards , and access to retail services , with changes in the use of mail by consumers and businesses ; better align costs and revenues , including compensation and benefit costs ; optimize its operations , networks , and workforce ; increase mail volumes and revenues ; and retain earnings , so that it can finance needed capital investments and repay its growing debt .

usps needs to optimize its retail , mail processing , and delivery networks to eliminate growing excess capacity and maintenance backlogs , reduce costs , and improve efficiency .

we recently reported that usps needs to rightsize its retail and mail processing networks and reduce the size of its workforce .

usps has a window of opportunity to further reduce the cost and size of its workforce through attrition and the large number of upcoming retirements to minimize the need for layoffs .

as the postmaster general testified this march , about 160,000 usps employees are eligible for regular retirement this fiscal year , and this number will grow within the next 4 years to nearly 300,000 .

usps has begun efforts to realign and consolidate some of its mail processing , retail , and delivery operations , but much more restructuring is urgently needed .

we recognize that usps would face formidable resistance to restructuring with many facility closures and consolidations because of concerns that these actions would impact service , employees , and local communities .

usps senior management will need to provide leadership and work with stakeholders to overcome resistance for its actions to be successfully implemented .

usps must use an open and transparent process that is fairly and consistently applied ; engage with its unions , management associations , the mailing industry , and political leaders ; and demonstrate results of actions .

in turn , these stakeholders and congress need to recognize that major changes are urgently needed for usps to be financially viable .

to its credit , usps recently began a national initiative to consolidate some of its 3,200 postal retail stations and branches in urban and suburban areas .

it has nearly completed an initial review to identify which facilities will be studied for consolidation , and expects the studies to take about 4 months , with final decisions made starting this october .

usps has processes for notifying its unions and management associations , soliciting community input , and notifying affected employees as it winnows the list of stations and branches it is considering for consolidation ( see fig .

2 ) .

on july 2 , 2009 , usps requested that prc provide an advisory opinion on usps's retail consolidation initiative , which has led to a public process that will provide stakeholders with opportunities for input .

in its request , usps stated it would identify opportunities to consolidate retail operations and improve efficiency , but only after concluding that such changes will continue to provide ready access to essential postal services .

usps noted that the branches and stations considered for consolidation are often in close proximity to each other .

usps stated that it could not estimate the savings because it had not made decisions on how many or which facilities would be closed .

going forward , issues may include whether stations and branches will be considered subject to statutory requirements for maintaining and closing post offices , and the similar question of whether any branches and stations are covered by the long - standing appropriations provision that restricts post office closures .

usps is required , among other things , to provide adequate , prompt , reliable , and efficient services to all communities , including a maximum degree of effective and regular services in rural areas , communities , and small towns where post offices are not self - sustaining .

usps is specifically prohibited from closing small post offices solely for operating at a deficit .

consistent with reasonable economies , usps is authorized to establish and maintain facilities as are necessary to provide ready access to essential services to customers throughout the nation .

before closing a post office , usps must , among other things , provide customers with at least 60 days of notice before the proposed closure date , and any person served by the post office may appeal its closure to the prc .

however , usps plans state that customers will have 20 days to comment on a proposed closure of a station or branch and that no appeals will be permitted .

usps explained that stations and branches are different from post offices .

a recent congressional research service report discussed this matter and other issues related to the closure of these retail facilities .

to put usps's retail consolidation initiative into context , we recently testified before this subcommittee that usps can streamline its network of 37,000 post offices , branches , and stations — a network that has remained largely static despite expanding use of retail alternatives and shifts in population .

we have previously reported that the number of postal retail facilities has varied widely among comparable counties in urban areas , and a number of facilities we visited appeared to merit consideration for closure based on leading federal practices for rightsizing facility networks .

our report also noted that usps has a maintenance backlog for its retail facilities , and usps officials stated that usps has historically underfunded its maintenance needs .

usps has limited its capital expenditures to help conserve cash , which may affect its maintenance backlog .

fewer retail facilities would reduce maintenance needs .

usps has begun efforts to consolidate some mail processing operations , but much more needs to be done to restructure this network , particularly since usps has closed only 1 of its approximately 400 major mail processing facilities .

in the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 , congress encouraged usps to expeditiously move forward in its streamlining efforts , recognizing that the 400 processing facilities are more than usps needs and streamlining this network can help eliminate excess costs .

usps has substantial excess capacity in its processing network that is growing with declining mail volume .

according to usps , it has 50 percent excess capacity for processing first - class mail .

usps is using the area mail processing process to propose consolidating some mail processing operations ( see app .

i and http: / / www.usps.com / all / amp.htm ) .

usps is also consolidating processing and transportation operations from bulk mail centers and surface transfer centers into what it refers to as network distribution centers , which usps officials expect to be completed this november ( see http: / / www.usps.com / all / ndc.htm ) .

in the past decade , usps has closed some smaller facilities , such as 68 airport mail centers and 50 remote encoding centers .

in 2005 , we recommended that usps enhance transparency and strengthen accountability of its realignment efforts to assure stakeholders that such efforts would be implemented fairly and achieve the desired results .

we since testified that usps took steps to address these recommendations and should be positioned for action .

usps has ongoing efforts to increase the efficiency of mail delivery , which is usps's largest cost segment and includes more than 350,000 carriers that account for approximately 45 percent of salary and benefit expenses .

two key efforts are ( 1 ) realignment of city delivery routes and ( 2 ) installing new flats sequencing systems to automate the sorting of flat - sized mail — such as catalogs and magazines — into delivery order , so that time - consuming and costly manual sorting by carriers is no longer needed .

first , usps is realigning city carrier routes to remove excess capacity and improve efficiency , which is expected to generate nearly $1 billion in annual savings .

usps also expects this effort to result in reduced facility space needs , increased employee satisfaction , and more consistent delivery service .

route realignment has been made possible by collaboration between usps and the national association of letter carriers .

the parties agreed on the original realignment process , which resulted in eliminating 2,500 routes .

a modified process , which will cover all city delivery routes , has resulted in the elimination of an additional 1,800 routes through june 2009 ( see fig .

3 ) , and additional routes may be eliminated .

thus , route realignment should result in further savings next fiscal year .

usps has established policies and procedures to notify customers if they will be affected by route realignment and taken actions to keep affected stakeholders informed .

for example , usps has made updated route information available on the internet , which the mailing industry needs to prepare and organize the mail so usps can efficiently handle it .

second , usps has begun to install 100 automated sorting machines for its $1.5 billion flats sequencing system to sort flat - sized mail into delivery order , which is scheduled to be completed in october 2010 .

usps expects this to improve delivery accuracy , consistency , and timeliness .

usps has worked with the mailing industry to facilitate implementation , since the industry plays a major role in preparing , transporting , and addressing flat - sized mail for efficient usps handling .

mailer representatives have praised usps communications and coordination with them — a process that is continuing to address implementation issues .

usps and the two carrier unions ( the national association of letter carriers and the national rural letter carriers' association ) reached agreement on revised work rules and procedures to realign routes and capture work hour savings .

because of mail volume declines , to maximize program savings , usps is reconsidering where to deploy the machines and the number of delivery routes covered by the program .

on routes covered by the machines , city carriers , on average , will be manually sorting nearly 500 fewer flat - sized mail pieces each day .

finally , usps has proposed moving to 5-day delivery to help address its financial problems .

usps is studying how 5-day delivery could be implemented , potential savings , and impacts on its employees .

the study , which usps expects to complete this fall , will incorporate input from postal unions and management associations , the mailing industry , and consumer and market research .

cutting delivery frequency would affect universal postal service and could further accelerate the decline in mail volume and revenues .

considering the potential impact on cost , volume , revenues , employees , and customers , it will be important for usps to make its study publicly available so that congress and stakeholders can better understand usps's proposal and consider the trade - offs involved .

as usps has recognized , implementing 5-day delivery would require congressional action because a long - standing appropriations provision mandates 6-day delivery .

prc officials have stated that usps would be required to seek an advisory opinion from prc on such a change , which would lead to a public hearing with stakeholder input .

according to usps officials , usps would need about 6 months to prepare for and implement 5-day delivery , including moving employees to other locations , reprogramming payroll systems , and realigning operations .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information regarding this statement , please contact phillip herr at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or herrp@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this statement include shirley abel , teresa anderson , gerald p. barnes , josh bartzen , paul hobart , kenneth e. john , david hooper , hannah laufe , emily larson , josh ormond , susan ragland , amy rosewarne , travis thomson , and crystal wesco .

area mail processing ( amp ) study initiated 34 .

western nassau , ny , to mid - island , ny 35 .

wilkes barre , pa , to scranton , pa , and lehigh valley , pa nnonced on jne 6 , 2009 , tht it hd hlted the indstry , cliforni , stdy because it determined there were no significnt opportnities to improve efficiency or service t tht time .

nnonced on my 5 , 2009 , tht it hd hlted the plttsbrgh , new york , stdy because of nresolved service isses .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

