i am pleased to be here today to discuss the internal revenue service's ( irs ) efforts to monitor and improve taxpayer authentication .

in fiscal year 2017 , irs issued approximately $383 billion in individual tax refunds , including overpayment refunds and refundable tax credits , an increase of about $16 billion from the previous fiscal year .

in an environment with an increasing risk of fraud , identity theft ( idt ) , and cyberattacks , irs must ensure that its preventative security controls provide the agency with reasonable assurance that it is interacting with the legitimate taxpayer .

authentication — the process by which irs verifies taxpayers are who they claim to be — is a critical step in both protecting sensitive taxpayer information and preventing potentially billions of dollars of refunds from being paid to fraudsters each year .

according to irs's most recent data , it estimates that in 2016 , at least $12.2 billion in idt tax refund fraud was attempted ; of this amount , at least $1.6 billion was paid out to fraudsters .

irs's ability to continuously monitor its current authentication methods while also looking ahead to new identity verification technologies is critical to keeping ahead of fraudsters , who constantly adapt their schemes to thwart irs's defenses .

the agency must also strike a balance in designing its authentication programs .

authentication must be strong enough to prevent fraudsters from gaining access to irs services using stolen personally identifiable information , without being overly burdensome on legitimate taxpayers who also must authenticate .

my remarks today highlight selected findings of our june 2018 report on irs's efforts monitor and improve taxpayer authentication .

specifically , this testimony addresses ( 1 ) irs's efforts to address its authentication challenges , ( 2 ) irs's progress in implementing its authentication strategy , and ( 3 ) additional steps we identified that irs could take to enhance its authentication programs and stay ahead of fraudsters .

to conduct the work for our june report , we reviewed irs documents and information related to taxpayer authentication including authentication policies , risk assessments , and performance metrics .

we compared irs's authentication efforts to applicable activities in the irs identity assurance strategy and roadmap ( roadmap ) , standards for internal control in the federal government , and relevant national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) guidance , among others .

we also interviewed irs officials knowledgeable about the agency's taxpayer authentication programs , as well as irs , state , and industry co - leads from two security summit workgroups to understand irs's collaborative efforts to improve taxpayer authentication .

to assess how irs can improve its authentication programs going forward , we met with knowledgeable officials from nist to discuss its guidelines for online identity - proofing and authentication .

we also compared irs's authentication programs and plans for future improvements to its roadmap , federal internal controls , guidance from nist and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , principles for project planning , and our prior work on information technology investment management and cost estimating .

we also interviewed officials from three other federal agencies and a nongeneralizable selection of representatives from state revenue offices , industry , and financial institutions to understand the range of authentication technologies other organizations are using .

our report includes a detailed explanation of the methods used to conduct our work .

the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in brief , madam chairman , our work found that irs has taken some steps to improve taxpayer authentication , including working with external partners to identify solutions for combating idt refund fraud and developing an authentication strategy to address its most pressing authentication challenges .

however , we also found that irs has not prioritized the initiatives supporting its authentication strategy nor identified the resources required to complete them .

further , we found that irs does not have clear plans and timelines to fully implement nist's new guidance for secure online authentication and also lacks a comprehensive process to evaluate potential new authentication technologies , which could provide taxpayers additional options to actively protect their identity .

we made 11 recommendations to address these and other weaknesses identified in our report .

irs agreed with all 11 recommendations and stated that it is taking action to address them .

our report noted that irs has established organizational structures essential to supporting its taxpayer authentication efforts .

specifically , irs created an identity assurance office ( iao ) in 2015 to work with stakeholders across irs to review and assess the agency's various authentication programs and efforts .

in 2016 , iao led an effort that identified over 100 interactions between irs and taxpayers that require authentication and categorized these interactions based on potential risks to the agency and taxpayers .

further , in december 2016 , iao released its roadmap for developing a modern and secure authentication environment for all taxpayers regardless of how they interact with irs — online , over the telephone , in person , or via correspondence .

we also found that irs is working to address its authentication challenges by collaborating with industry members and state partners via the security summit .

the security summit was established in 2015 as an ongoing effort between industry experts from tax software companies , paid preparers , financial institutions , and states to improve information sharing and fraud detection and to address common idt challenges .

the security summit's authentication workgroup leads several initiatives aimed at verifying the authenticity of the taxpayer and the tax return at the time of filing .

one initiative involves analyzing data elements — such as trusted customer requirements and other characteristics of the return — that are collected during the tax return preparation and electronic filing process .

in addition , in 2016 the authentication workgroup recommended improved account password standards to help protect taxpayers' accounts from being taken over by criminals .

overall , we found that officials — representing irs , industry , and states — expressed positive views about the level of commitment and cooperation guiding the group's authentication efforts .

officials with whom we spoke stated that they are dedicated to continuing to address authentication issues collaboratively because they have a mutual interest in improving authentication to reduce tax refund fraud .

in its roadmap , irs outlined six core authentication objectives , 10 high - level strategic efforts , and 14 foundational initiatives to help it address authentication challenges and identify opportunities for future investment .

while we found that irs has made progress on some efforts identified in its roadmap , it has not prioritized the initiatives supporting its strategy nor identified the resources required to complete them , consistent with program management leading practices .

for example , one of irs's foundational initiatives is to send event - driven notifications to taxpayers , such as when they file a return or request a tax transcript .

such notifications could help irs and taxpayers detect potentially fraudulent activity at the earliest stage and help improve authentication of tax returns .

the roadmap identifies seven supporting activities for this foundational initiative .

one is to provide taxpayers with greater control over their online accounts .

another supporting activity is to determine methods for sending notifications to taxpayers about activity on their account .

however , irs has not identified the resources required to complete these activities , and the roadmap notes that six of the seven activities will take between 6 months to 3 years to complete .

in december 2017 , irs officials stated that they had developed business requirements for the foundational initiative to give taxpayers greater control over their online accounts .

however , irs has not identified funding for the initiative's other supporting activities — such as developing requirements to send push notifications to taxpayers — and implementation will depend on the availability of future resources .

in december 2017 , irs officials stated that each of the strategic efforts and foundational initiatives identified in the roadmap are a high priority , and they are working to address them concurrently while balancing the availability of resources against the greatest threats to the tax environment .

as noted in our report , we recognize that a strategy is necessarily high - level and that irs must remain flexible and use available resources to respond to unexpected threats .

identifying resources and prioritizing activities in its roadmap will help irs clarify tradeoffs between costs , benefits , and risks and aid in decision making .

further , such efforts may also help irs establish clearer timelines and better respond to unexpected events .

as such , we recommended that irs estimate the resources ( i.e. , financial and human ) required for the foundational initiatives and supporting activities identified in its roadmap and prioritize its foundational initiatives .

irs agreed with our recommendations and is currently working to finalize its overall authentication approach .

given the widespread availability of personally identifiable information that fraudsters can use to perpetrate tax fraud , it is essential for irs to further strengthen taxpayer authentication to stay ahead of fraudsters' schemes .

in our report , we identified two additional areas that irs must address to better position the agency and protect taxpayers against future threats .

first , we found that irs has taken preliminary steps to implement nist's june 2017 guidance for secure online authentication , however it had not yet established detailed plans , including timelines , milestone dates , and resource needs to fully implement it .

among other things , nist's new guidance directs agencies to assess the risk for each component of identity assurance — identity proofing , authentication , and federation — rather than conducting a single risk assessment for the entire process .

according to nist officials , this approach gives agencies flexibility in choosing technical solutions ; aligns with existing , standards - based market offerings ; is modular and cost - effective ; and enhances individual privacy .

in short , following nist's new guidance will help provide irs with better risk - based assurance that the person trying to access irs's online services is who they claim to be .

as noted in our report , irs has taken preliminary steps to implement the new nist guidance .

these efforts include forming a task force to guide irs's implementation of nist guidance and working with the security summit to develop an implementation framework for state and industry partners .

irs has also begun analyzing gaps between irs's current authentication procedures and the new guidance .

in addition , in december 2017 , irs implemented a more secure online authentication option consistent with the new guidance through its mobile application , irs2go .

after taxpayers link their irs online account with the mobile app , they can use it to generate a security code to log into their account .

this option provides taxpayers with an alternative to receiving the security code via a text message , which nist considers to be less secure .

we recommended that irs develop a plan — including a timeline , milestone dates , and resources needed — for implementing changes to its online authentication programs consistent with new nist guidance , and also implement these improvements .

irs agreed with our recommendations , but noted that its ability to complete these efforts will depend on the availability of resources .

second , we found that irs lacks a comprehensive , repeatable process to identify and evaluate potential new authentication technologies and approaches .

our discussions with representatives from industry and financial institutions and with government officials indicate that there is no single , ideal online authentication solution that will solve irs's challenges related to idt refund fraud .

these representatives advocate an approach to authentication that relies on multiple strategies and sources of information , while giving taxpayers options for further protecting their information .

we identified several authentication options in our report that irs could consider , including the following: possession - based authentication .

this type of authentication offers users a convenient , added layer of security when used as a second factor for accessing websites or systems that would otherwise rely on a username and password for single - factor authentication .

for example , as noted in our report , according to an industry official , authentication using a trusted device or “security key” based on universal second factor standards complies with nist's new guidance for digital authentication .

while irs is not likely to provide the devices to taxpayers , it could enable its systems to accept these trusted devices as authenticators for taxpayers who elect to use them .

working with trusted partners .

irs could partner with organizations it trusts that are accessible to taxpayers and enable the partners to identity - proof and authenticate taxpayers .

trusted partners could include tax preparers , financial institutions , or other federal or state agencies .

in the course of our work , irs officials stated that they had been exploring such options with both the social security administration and the u.s .

postal service ; however , at the time of our report , the agencies had not yet made decisions about next steps .

expanding existing irs services to further protect taxpayers .

irs could expand the functionality of its online account to further protect taxpayers from idt refund fraud .

for example , irs could develop additional functionality that allows the taxpayer to designate a bank account or a preference for a paper check for receiving a tax refund .

if a fraudster filed a return with different information , the return would be automatically rejected .

irs officials told us the agency continually researches new identity assurance processes and technologies and has talked with other agencies , industry groups , and vendors to better understand how particular technology solutions could apply to irs's environment .

however , during the course of our work , irs could not provide us evidence of a repeatable , comprehensive process to identify and evaluate available authentication technologies and services .

such a process could compare options for in - house authentication solutions with off - the - shelf solutions based on estimates of cost , schedule , and benefits , as applicable .

to this end , we recommended that irs develop a process to identify and evaluate alternative options for improving taxpayer authentication , including technologies in use by industry , states , or other trusted partners ; and based on this approach , include and prioritize these options , as appropriate , in its roadmap .

irs agreed with these recommendations , but did not provide additional details on how it plans to address them .

in conclusion , irs's authentication environment is one component of a broad , complex information technology infrastructure , and we have previously reported on the many challenges the agency faces as it modernizes its tax systems .

taxpayer authentication has become more difficult with the wide availability of personally identifiable information and fraudsters' ability to develop more complex and sophisticated methods to commit fraud undetected .

addressing the issues we describe above could better position irs to identify and mitigate vulnerabilities in its authentication efforts and better protect taxpayers and the treasury .

chairman jenkins , ranking member lewis , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i look forward to answering any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact james r. mctigue , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or mctiguej@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

key contributors to this testimony include neil pinney , assistant director ; heather a. collins , analyst - in - charge ; dawn bidne ; and bryan sakakeeny .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

