with the goal of providing safe , decent , and affordable housing to low - income families , the elderly , and the disabled , the u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) supplements tenants' rental payments in privately owned housing chosen by tenants through its housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program .

this program is administered locally by approximately 2,200 public housing agencies ( pha ) around the country .

in fiscal year 2016 , hud received approximately $20 billion for the hcv program , providing rental assistance to approximately 2.4 million households .

local demand in the program may exceed voucher supply , and households may be on waiting lists for years before they receive a voucher .

in addition , after receiving a voucher , participants have a limited amount of time to secure a rental .

phas and others have issued alerts about criminals targeting hcv program participants ( including applicants , voucher holders , and landlords ) in potentially fraudulent schemes , such as individuals who fraudulently claim to offer vouchers for a fee .

you asked that we investigate possible fraud against hcv program participants and examine applicable federal oversight , including any preventive and educational measures taken to help identify and limit such fraudulent activity affecting hcv participants — including older adults and other vulnerable populations — and to provide information about fraudulent activity identified to date .

in this report , we describe ( 1 ) the types of reported fraud schemes committed against hcv participants ( including older adults ) , awareness by phas and other relevant organizations of fraud incidents and how often they occur , and indicators of such schemes online ; and ( 2 ) antifraud regulations , guidance , and informational materials , if any , that hud and phas have in place to identify and mitigate fraud against program participants .

for our first objective , we employed a number of methodologies .

specifically , to describe the types of fraud schemes reported as being committed against hcv participants in 2016 and 2017 , we searched for fraud alerts that a nongeneralizable sample of 60 phas publicly posted on the internet and reviewed the 22 alerts ( posted by 20 separate phas ) that we found .

we also reviewed complaints from the federal trade commission's ( ftc ) consumer sentinel database for calendar years 2011 through 2016 .

we reviewed complaint data to identify examples of housing and hcv - specific fraud , including schemes affecting older adults .

we assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing officials and reviewing related documentation , and found the data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

we also interviewed pha officials about fraud schemes against hcv participants .

finally , we identified key academic research that classified online rental fraud , and interviewed one of the authors of the research .

to determine awareness of incidents of fraud schemes among phas and other relevant organizations , we surveyed pha officials and conducted site visits to interview phas and other relevant organizations and experts .

in our survey of a nationally representative , random sample of executive directors of 278 phas , we asked about their awareness of fraud against participants , in the last year ( spring 2016 – spring 2017 ) , within the jurisdiction to which they provide oversight .

if the executive directors responded that they were aware of these schemes , we asked that they provide information on the number of incidents , within their jurisdiction , that they were aware of in the prior year .

examples of fraud types included in the survey were promising placement or a higher place on a voucher waiting list , selling fake vouchers , theft of security deposits , requiring side payments and favors , and offering suspect credit - report services .

we surveyed executive directors from all 83 phas that administered 5,000 or more vouchers as of the fourth quarter of 2015 , and a probability sample of 195 executive directors of phas with 1,000 to 4,999 vouchers .

the survey had a response rate of 84 percent and is generalizable to the full population of phas that administer at least 1,000 vouchers .

in addition , we interviewed eight phas in total , from locations in the midwest , northeast , and west coast regions of the united states .

these phas were selected using criteria to provide a range of phas across geographical locations and pha size , among other factors .

moreover , we also interviewed an hcv voucher holder about the holder's knowledge of fraud against participants .

we also interviewed industry experts — selected based on their expertise and experience with legal and financial issues affecting older adults and low - income individuals — about fraud affecting older adults , and about identity theft affecting low - income individuals .

finally , we interviewed officials from the hud office of inspector general ( oig ) .

to identify indicators of fraud schemes online , we used covert testing to investigate ( 1 ) a nongeneralizable sample of 350 rental advertisements in a selection of u.s. cities across several rental websites , and ( 2 ) a nongeneralizable sample of 26 commercial websites advertising information on , or assistance with , the hcv program .

for our sample of rental advertisements , we counted any communications with online advertisers as having an indicator of fraud if they contained requests such as asking for a wire transfer of a security deposit or first month rent without first offering to show the property .

for commercial websites , we used multiple search terms across two search engines to produce a list of target websites .

using undercover identities , we visited each website and input any requested information , including a name and e - mail address , and made a payment if the website requested payment for a service .

we also asked website operators whether they could place us on a waiting list .

because covert testing of advertisements and websites was carried out on a nongeneralizable sample , results of this effort are also nongeneralizable .

to describe antifraud regulations , guidance , and informational materials , we reviewed relevant hud regulations and policy documentation , as well as informational materials developed by the eight phas we interviewed , designed to educate hcv participants about the program .

we interviewed pha officials about the hcv program and about the information they provide to participants .

we also interviewed officials from ftc , the consumer financial protection bureau , the hud oig , the u.s .

postal inspection service , and the department of health and human services about practices used by federal agencies to inform the public about fraud - related issues .

for additional details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2016 to december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we conducted our related investigative work from january 2017 to july 2017 in accordance with investigative standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency .

the hcv program , administered by hud , subsidizes housing costs for low - income households in the private rental market .

because hud provides hcv assistance directly to the household , participants are able to find their own housing , including single - family homes , townhouses , and apartments .

if the household moves out of the unit , it can move with continued assistance to another private rental unit .

phas administer the hcv program at the local level , while hud administers funding and furnishes technical and professional assistance to phas in planning , developing , and managing the program .

approximately 2,200 phas across the country administer the voucher program on hud's behalf , managing day - to - day operations in the hcv program , including the application and voucher distribution processes , as well as housing inspection and approval .

phas are responsible for ensuring that rents are reasonable , determining households' eligibility , calculating and periodically redetermining households' incomes and rental payments , and making subsidy payments to landlords .

in addition , phas perform basic program functions , such as establishing and maintaining a waiting list , processing tenant moves , conducting landlord and tenant outreach , and reporting to hud .

local phas determine the eligibility of households , approve applications , and distribute vouchers .

in general , to be eligible to participate in the hcv program , households must have very low incomes — that is , incomes not exceeding 50 percent of the area median income .

moreover , at least 75 percent of new voucher program participants must have extremely low incomes , not exceeding 30 percent of the area median income .

once a household is approved by a pha to participate in the program and finds a rental unit , that household pays 30 percent of its monthly income , after certain adjustments , toward rent .

the remaining portion of the rent is paid through the hud - subsidized voucher .

phas can pay subsidies to cover between 90 percent and 110 percent of the fair market rent for their areas .

the hcv application and rental process is displayed in figure 1 .

the following applies in the hcv application process: households seeking to enter the hcv program may wait years for their local pha to announce an open application period .

phas may establish waiting lists if the number of applicants to the program exceeds available vouchers , and may close the waiting list if it contains more households than the pha can assist in the near future .

therefore , prospective applicants in some locations can wait years for a local pha to determine the eligibility of those already on the waiting list — and provide vouchers to eligible individuals — before reopening waiting lists to new applicants .

during open application periods , applicant households may encounter processes and requirements that vary amongst phas .

applying for a voucher from a local pha may take place in person or online , while phas may determine an applicant's priority to receive a voucher by varying methods , such as a random lottery amongst all applicants , or on a first - come - first - serve ordering of when applicants applied .

moreover , phas can establish local preferences for selecting applicants from their waiting lists .

for example , phas may give preference to a household that ( 1 ) is homeless or living in substandard housing , ( 2 ) is paying more than 50 percent of its income for rent , or ( 3 ) has an older - adult household member .

regardless of methods to determine eligibility , apply for , and obtain a voucher within the hcv program , it is free to participants .

when an open application period ends and before determining household eligibility , phas may initially put applicant households on a waiting list .

because the demand for vouchers may exceed the supply available to the local pha , households that have already waited to apply to the program may also wait years to receive a determination of eligibility and receive a voucher .

after receiving a voucher , households must find eligible private - market rental housing within a limited time frame .

a pha will make contact with and issue a voucher to a household that is determined to be eligible and is subsequently selected from the waiting list .

households receiving vouchers use them to subsidize their rents in private apartments or houses available in the rental market .

households must find housing quickly — generally within 60 days — unless the pha grants an extension .

in some cases , phas direct voucher holders to websites dedicated to rentals in the hcv program , where private landlords list available units .

when a voucher - holding household finds a unit that it wishes to occupy — and reaches an agreement with the landlord over the lease terms — the pha inspects the dwelling and determines whether the rent requested is reasonable .

to be eligible , a rental unit must meet hud minimum housing - quality standards , and must provide an acceptable level of health and safety .

after the unit is inspected and deemed eligible , the household signs a contract with hud , and both hud and the household sign contracts with the landlord .

the contract stipulates that the pha will make the housing - assistance payment to the landlord and the household will pay the difference between the housing - assistance payment and the rent .

landlord participation in the hcv program is free , and landlords do not pay to maintain compliance with the program .

moreover , the hcv program provides for the use of vouchers across locations .

once a household receives a voucher , it may use the voucher in any location in which a pha administers the voucher program , as long as it remains eligible .

reported fraud schemes against program participants — including prospective applicants , individuals on waiting lists , current voucher holders , and landlords providing rental units — can occur at each point in the hcv application and rental process , according to program officials and our analysis of ftc complaint data .

on the basis of our reviews of fraud alerts issued by phas and complaints submitted to the ftc , the type of fraud that participants , including older adults , may encounter depends on where they are in the process and whether they are landlords or renters .

fraudsters perpetrate reported schemes in a variety of ways , such as through in - person impersonation of pha staff or by manipulating telephone numbers to convince landlords to make unnecessary payments .

reported types of fraud schemes and when they could potentially occur in the hcv application and rental process are displayed in figure 2 .

as shown in figure 2 , various reported fraud types can be carried out against hcv participants .

while some fraud types are specific to the hcv program , participants may also be victims of general rental - housing fraud .

the reported fraud types , which we identified through interviews with phas and others and through an analysis of pha fraud alerts and consumer sentinel complaints , include the following: waiting - list placement fraud .

in online or in - person settings , fraudsters may claim they can provide a voucher , place applicants onto a waiting list , or move individuals to a higher position on the waiting list .

in exchange , fraudsters may request a payment , or may request information ( such as name , credit - card number , and e - mail address ) that may put participants at risk of credit - card fraud or identity theft .

waiting lists maintained by phas may open infrequently , and program application processes and requirements vary from location to location .

reported fraud schemes may take advantage of applicant unfamiliarity with program rules , and target those seeking to enter the program or awaiting a voucher .

rental - advertisement fraud .

because they rent in the private market , voucher holders are susceptible to online rental - fraud schemes .

those who place online rental advertisements may request wire transfers from prospective renters to secure fake rentals , or steer potential renters to suspect credit - reporting services that offer commissions to the scammers or realtor services that charge users a onetime or recurring monthly fee .

side - payment fraud .

officials from phas and other organizations characterized side payments as two distinct activities — alternatively , as landlord fraud against tenants on one hand , and mutually beneficial agreements between tenants and landlords on the other .

in exchange for property rental or successful inspection , landlords or building inspectors may fraudulently request additional payments or pressure participants for other favors from voucher holders .

landlords may ask tenants for a monthly payment above the agreed rent , or may require hcv participants to pay for utilities when not required to in their rental agreement .

for example , a midwest pha we interviewed reported being aware of coercive demands by landlords for side payments or sexual favors in exchange for a rental unit .

side payments may also be a mutual arrangement between landlord and voucher holders .

for example , voucher holders may make a payment above their monthly rent — in violation of program rules — and in exchange the landlord agrees not to report that there are unauthorized occupants living in the unit , again in violation of program rules .

a west coast pha we interviewed characterized most side payments it is aware of as mutual agreements of this type .

security - deposit fraud .

because they rent in the private market , voucher holders may encounter fraudsters advertising a rental and requiring a security deposit from one or several prospective renters even if there is no rental unit available or only one of the prospective renters will ultimately obtain the rental .

program - compliance fraud against landlords .

fraudsters may take advantage of landlord unfamiliarity with hcv program rules .

in calls to hcv program landlords , fraudsters mask their phone number with that of the local pha , and direct the landlords to make a credit - card payment over the phone to purchase materials or to make a payment in order to remain in compliance with program rules .

an overwhelming majority of surveyed phas did not report awareness of any occurrences of most fraud types that could affect hcv program participants , while those that were aware of fraud against participants reported few instances , according to our survey results and interviews .

we surveyed a nationally representative sample of phas representing approximately 1.9 million households .

we inquired about incidents occurring within their area of jurisdiction from spring 2016 through spring 2017 .

we asked about fraudsters promising placement onto or a higher place on a waiting list , selling vouchers , stealing security deposits , or offering suspect credit - report services ; voucher holders and landlords engaging in side payments ; and landlords and building inspectors illegally soliciting favors .

apart from incidents of side payments ( discussed in detail below ) , on the basis of pha responses to our survey we estimate that between 3 and 10 percent of all phas with 1,000 or more vouchers were aware of any occurrences of the types of fraud schemes included in our survey ( see fig .

3 ) .

further , when phas were aware of such fraud schemes , most reported between 2 to 5 cases in their local area of jurisdiction from spring 2016 through spring 2017 .

our other sources of evidence were consistent with our survey results .

for example , we interviewed officials with two pha associations — representing approximately 1,900 total phas — about fraud against hcv participants ( other than side payments ) .

the associations reported that they were unaware of widespread instances of these types of fraud against participants .

phas were much more likely to report awareness of incidents of side payments than the other types of fraud included in our survey , according to our analysis of survey responses .

as noted above , side - payment fraud involves agreements — mutual or compelled — in which the voucher holder pays additional rent or other payments to the landlord in return for benefits , to secure a rental , or to avoid eviction .

on the basis of survey responses , we estimate that 41 percent of all phas with 1,000 or more vouchers were aware of incidents of side payments in the prior year , as shown in figure 3 above .

of phas reporting side payments , we estimate that the vast majority ( 93 percent ) were aware of 1 to 10 instances of side payments in the prior year ( spring 2016 – spring 2017 ) , with most reporting between 2 and 5 incidents in the past year .

further , we estimate that 7 percent were aware of 11 or more instances in the prior year .

officials from all eight phas we interviewed similarly told us that they were aware of side payments , but some said that participants rarely report cases of side payments to them .

because violation of hvc rules could result in termination of a lease or loss of voucher for the recipient , it is possible that side payments are not always reported to phas .

two experts providing legal services to low - income individuals said that , in regard to fraud affecting hcv participants , landlord requests for side payments is relatively more common than other types of fraud .

in addition , a current voucher holder told us about personal experiences involving requests for such payments by landlords , but also said that he or she had not experienced any other types of fraud .

in response to our open - ended survey question on other fraud not specifically mentioned in the survey , three phas in two regions reported variations of a type of fraud that intends to convince landlords that they are not in compliance with hcv rules , and that they must make a payment over the phone .

although this type of fraud was not included explicitly in our survey and is therefore not included in figure 3 above , in survey comments one west coast pha and two phas in the southeast reported instances of this type of fraud .

in open - ended survey comments , a west coast pha reported being aware of two attempts of similar fraud , in which fraudsters called landlords and asked them to make a credit - card payment over the phone to maintain program compliance .

similarly , two southeastern phas also reported being aware of instances of similar fraud schemes in the last year , although neither provided the number of cases reported to them .

furthermore , another west coast pha that was not included in our survey issued an online alert about scammers calling landlords , masking their actual phone number with the pha's phone number , and stating that in order for the landlord to maintain program compliance , the landlord must make a credit - card payment over the phone to purchase a program manual .

in an interview , officials from this pha reported being aware of 36 attempts of this fraud type against landlords from september 2015 to april 2017 .

according to pha officials , fraud schemes generally have not targeted older - adult hcv participants .

in survey responses , a limited number of phas reported fraud against older adults .

for example , we estimate that of phas reporting awareness of side - payment schemes , very few phas ( about 8 percent ) were aware of instances in which landlords targeted older adults in side - payment requests .

moreover , an official from one pha we interviewed stated that because older adults are likely to have advocates helping them to find housing , they are less likely than other hcv participants to be victims of fraud .

similarly , one expert providing legal services to older adults in the hcv program indicated that project - based participants — who rent units only in specific buildings — are more likely than hcv participants to be targets of in - person fraud because they are located in identifiable properties .

several phas issued fraud alerts about schemes against participants , but officials at phas we interviewed about some of the alerts told us that incidents of these fraud types were limited .

specifically: a midwestern pha issued an alert about an individual promising a voucher for a fee and meeting victims in person to receive payment .

in a follow - up interview , pha officials stated that , in total , they received five to seven reports about this fraud .

each of these cases occurred while the pha's waiting list was open in 2015 .

a nearby pha also reported that when its waiting list was open in 2011 , an individual with fake pha credentials fraudulently took payment from individuals and promised to move them to the top of the waiting list .

the pha was aware of 10 individuals who were victims of the fraud , and estimated that they each paid about $200 to the perpetrator .

a west coast pha issued an alert about a website charging applicants to submit a program application .

however , in an interview the pha reported awareness of only one case over the last 3 years of fraud committed by outside parties against voucher participants .

although instances of fraud against hcv participants reported to phas appear relatively rare , participants who provide personal information to unknown individuals are still at risk for identity theft , according to some experts we interviewed .

two identity - theft experts stated that credit - card fraud is likely if individuals enter payment information in unverified sites .

furthermore , one expert stated that low - income individuals can be targets for identity theft because fraudsters can use stolen identities with low credit scores to obtain high - interest loans that they do not intend to pay off .

in covert testing using undercover tools and techniques , we found no indicators of fraud in rental advertisements posted online , and few indicators of fraud in commercial websites offering information to participants about the hcv program .

through our online covert testing , we found no indicators of potential fraud in 350 advertisements — selected using a random - selection methodology — posted in online marketplaces across six cities .

on the basis of an academic study of online fraud schemes on rental marketplaces and information provided by phas , we developed a list of indicators of potential fraud .

these indicators include requests for a wire transfer of security deposit or first month rent without offering to provide an in - person viewing of the property , or requesting an up - front or monthly side - payment agreement as a condition of rental .

in searches of one rental website , we came across a small number of advertisements that initially appeared to contain an indicator of potential fraud — specifically , links to a website for specialized realtor services ; covert testing of that link did not find further indicators of potential fraud .

none of the 26 commercial websites we covertly tested contained text explicitly stating that they would place or move someone up a waiting list for a fee .

further , in e - mail correspondence with every website , we asked whether they could help place us on a waiting list .

some website operators never replied and some stated they could not do so , with none agreeing to place us on a list .

however , some websites used hud's equal housing opportunity logo , which might make them appear to be associated with official government programs , while others requested payment for suspect services and products .

for example: one pha fraud alert specifically named one of the websites we tested covertly , and indicated that the website fraudulently offered to submit an application for the hcv program for a onetime registration fee .

our covert testing found that this website displayed hud's equal housing opportunity logo , and charges a fee for a “guide” about the voucher program , but at the time of our testing the website did not offer to submit an application for a fee .

payment to the website resulted in access to a guide and online forum containing a list of open pha waiting lists for the hcv program and links to publicly available pha websites .

one website we covertly tested requested payment for an e - book guide to assist with the hcv application process .

we made payment but never received the e - book .

one website subject to covert testing stated that landlords in the hcv program may deny or refuse to rent to a potential tenant based on his or her credit - report information , and referred us to a suspect website offering credit reports .

the website claimed to offer a “free credit report” and requested personal information including a social security number and credit - card number .

as part of our covert testing , we provided a credit - card number .

we also entered all zeroes as a social security number on the site , prompting the site to state that it could not provide us with a credit report , as we had not provided a valid social security number .

despite that fact , the site charged our credit card a recurring payment .

in a phone call , a representative of the website stated that , in the terms - of - use for the website , users are informed that they must explicitly request that recurring payments be terminated or that those payments would continue .

hud regulations and guidance and pha informational materials pertinent to fraud primarily focus on protecting the hcv program rather than protecting participants from fraud committed by external parties .

for example , where the regulations mention fraud explicitly , it is generally in relation to mitigating program violations by owners and voucher program participants , recovering program losses from fraud , and assessing participants , applicants , and owners for participation or continued participation in the program .

apart from requiring that phas inform participants about a prohibition against side payments to landlords ( a program rule violation ) , hud's antifraud guidance , as outlined in the housing choice voucher program guidebook , generally focuses on preventing fraud against the program , as opposed to fraud against participants .

for example , an applicant misrepresenting income and assets to obtain an hcv voucher and a landlord bribing a pha employee to approve substandard rental housing are types of program fraud .

see figure 4 for examples of hcv program - related fraud listed in the guidebook .

education and outreach requirements for phas specified in the hcv guidebook largely focus on providing adequate public notice of waiting - list openings ; an oral briefing when the pha selects a family to participate in the program ; and a written briefing packet for participants , which must include a variety of subjects related to program administration , leasing a unit , and family obligations .

consistent with the guidebook , written or online briefing materials from the eight phas we interviewed mention various types of program violations .

all but one specifically state that side - payment agreements between landlords and tenants are prohibited , which , as discussed above , can be viewed as both fraud affecting the participant and against the program .

hud directs phas to inform participants that landlord – participant side payments are prohibited .

hud provides guidance on how a pha should handle a situation in which the landlord is collecting side payments .

if the pha finds that the landlord is collecting side payments , the pha must notify the landlord to immediately cease collecting these payments and require repayment to the tenant of the full amount collected .

the pha must determine whether the landlord also collected side payments from other participants and follow up to require repayment .

the amount can be repaid by offsetting the amount due against future housing - assistance payments .

at its discretion , the pha may terminate the housing - assistance payments contract with the landlord immediately , even if the landlord has repaid amounts due the tenant , but the pha must cancel the contract if the landlord fails to repay .

although not required , several phas we visited or contacted voluntarily provided informational materials to program participants that included targeted messages and alerts notifying them of certain housing - assistance fraud by outside parties , such as voucher - sale fraud , or fraud involving being placed on or moved up a waiting list .

for example , in program briefing documents given to participants , a northeastern pha warns participants of housing - assistance scams , and specifically advises participants not to pay to , among other things , ( 1 ) be placed on or be moved up a waiting list or ( 2 ) receive an hcv voucher or voucher extension ; a different northeastern pha advises hcv participants not to give their voucher to anyone , including the apartment owner , agent , or property manager ; and not to give any money to the apartment broker , owner , or agent until the pha approves the selected apartment ; and a west coast pha advises hcv applicants and participants to be aware of fraud , particularly schemes that require a payment to file an application or to move up a waiting list .

in addition , phas share best practices that could include these and other issues .

for example , two industry associations representing approximately 1,900 phas provide mechanisms for phas to share information and best practices about hcv administration and issues affecting hcv program participants and their communities .

both regularly hold conferences , meetings , and other events that provide a venue for members to discuss relevant issues .

in addition , one of these associations has published reports on issues affecting older adults and connecting housing and community services , among other issues , while the other published a report on issues related to rental reform proposals .

we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to hud , ftc , the consumer financial protection bureau , the department of health and human services , and the u.s .

postal service .

we received e - mails from hud , the consumer financial protection bureau , and the department of health and human services in which liaisons to gao for those agencies stated they had no comments on the report .

we received technical comments from ftc and the u.s .

postal service , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of housing and urban development , the federal trade commission , the director of the consumer financial protection bureau , the secretary of health and human services , and the postmaster general of the u.s .

postal service .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or shear@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

in this report , we describe ( 1 ) the types of reported fraud schemes committed against housing choice voucher ( hcv ) participants ( including older adults ) , awareness by public housing agencies ( pha ) and other relevant organizations of fraud incidents and how often they occur , and indicators of such schemes online ; and ( 2 ) antifraud regulations , guidance , and informational materials , if any , that the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and phas have in place to identify and mitigate fraud against program participants .

to address our first objective we used a variety of methods ( see fig .

5 ) .

details on our use of these methodologies are described below .

some phas issue online alerts and post these on their websites to inform hcv applicants and participants about potential fraud schemes .

we initially identified pha fraud alerts by performing online searches about fraud in the hcv program .

we then developed a structured search method for identifying additional fraud alerts .

to do this , in 2016 and 2017 , we searched fraud alerts issued by a nongeneralizable sample of 60 phas ; in total , 20 phas published 22 alerts about fraud affecting hcv applicants and participants on their websites .

we identified our nongeneralizable sample of 60 phas using 2015 fourth - quarter picture of subsidized households data from hud , which contain information on subsidized housing units by several types of programs including the hcv program .

the initial population contained phas ordered by total number of hcv program vouchers available .

we selected our sample of phas based on those with the most vouchers .

we reviewed consumer complaint data from the federal trade commission's ( ftc ) consumer sentinel database from calendar years 2011 through 2016 .

the date range of the data represents the most - recent years available at the time of our request .

our review of the data focused on complaints related to the hcv program and companies that offer rental housing services .

we assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing officials and reviewing related documentation and found the data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

we developed several categories for reviewing complaints based on criteria on fraud schemes affecting hcv program applicants and participants .

to develop an initial list of categories , we selected a subsample of the first entries in the data and independently created categories that could be used to categorize the complaints in the subsample .

on the basis of this methodology , we identified a set of defined coding categories , which were as follows: 1 .

hcv - specific fraud , 2. housing - related fraud ( hcv not mentioned ) , 3. housing - related fraud involving the purchase of foreclosed property , 4. housing - related credit - report fraud , 5. housing - related fraud requesting electronic wire transfer of funds , 6 .

hcv - specific complaints where fraud is not mentioned or the nature of 7. housing - related complaints where fraud is not mentioned or the nature of fraud is unclear , and 8. complaints not related to the scope of the engagement .

we also separately coded whether the subject matter of each complaint specifically affected an older adult .

we applied a two - person data - coding process to ensure intercategorization reliability .

ftc delivered the data to us in batches organized along search terms we provided .

for several of the initial batches we received , as a first step in the coding process , a coder categorized each complaint into one of the categories above , and simultaneously identified any complaints that contained relevant housing - related or hcv - related fraud types that we had not already discovered .

as a second step , a reviewer assessed a nonrandomized sample of the data to determine whether coding was correct , and whether the coder had identified any previously unknown fraud types in the batch .

we repeated this process for three of the five batches that we received , and reviewed over 600 total complaints .

upon finding no new fraud types in the coded data , we ceased analysis and did not code the remaining two batches we received , which we deemed to contain complaint categories unlikely to reveal new types of fraud .

we also interviewed pha officials from eight phas ( selected using a methodology discussed below ) .

additionally , we reviewed an academic study describing fraud against prospective renters in online marketplaces , which allowed us to identify several fraud types that could be used against hcv participants searching for rental units .

the study used crawling and automated interaction to identify fraud types .

we interviewed an author of the study to clarify research techniques .

we assessed that the individual was sufficiently independent .

our methodological specialist assessed the study , and found its conclusions to be sufficiently valid and reliable for our purposes .

we conducted a web - based survey with a nationally representative stratified random sample of executive directors overseeing phas .

in the survey , we asked pha executive directors and their staffs to provide information on known fraudulent activities by fraudsters or impersonators , fraudulent activities by landlords and building inspectors , and any other information on fraudulent activities adversely affecting hcv program applicants and participants from spring 2016 through spring 2017 .

we administered our survey from april to may 2017 .

estimated percentages of the responses for all closed - ended questions from the survey are included in appendix ii .

we identified the population of pha executive directors using 2015 fourth - quarter picture of subsidized households data from hud , which contain information on subsidized housing units by several types of programs including the hcv program .

the picture of subsidized households data also contain the percentage of households using these programs by factors such as age , income , and disability .

we assessed the reliability of the data for use as our sampling frame by reviewing technical documentation , conducting electronic testing , and interviewing officials who oversee the data system ; we found the data sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

our initial population list contained a total of 2,243 pha executive directors , and our sample contained 278 pha executive directors .

we stratified the population by size of phas as follows: we drew ( 1 ) a certainty sample of 83 executive directors who oversaw at least one pha with 5,000+ vouchers ( “large” phas ) and ( 2 ) a probability sample of 195 executive directors who oversaw at least one pha with 1,000 – 4,999 vouchers ( “medium” phas ) .

for purposes of discussion , we refer to the experiences of phas in our analysis , although our sampling unit was the executive directors of the phas .

to formulate our survey questionnaire on the types of fraud potentially adversely affecting hcv program applicants and participants , we conducted research on the topic of fraud by interviewing pha officials , reviewing fraud alerts publicly posted on the internet by large phas , and reviewing consumer complaint data .

on the basis of the results of our research , we developed our survey questionnaire to include questions on external fraud such as ( 1 ) fraudsters or impersonators promising placement on a voucher waiting list , ( 2 ) fraud offering higher placement on voucher waiting lists , ( 3 ) fraud offering fake vouchers , ( 4 ) fraud offering suspect credit - report services , ( 5 ) landlords requiring prohibited side payments , ( 6 ) illegal solicitation of favors by landlords and building inspectors , and ( 7 ) illegal solicitation of rental - unit security deposits by landlords .

we pretested our survey instrument with four phas located in maryland , michigan , ohio , and virginia .

we revised our questionnaire language and format based on input received by officials in these four phas in order to improve the clarity of the questions .

an independent survey specialist within gao also reviewed a draft of the questionnaire prior to its administration ; it is available in appendix ii .

we administered a web - based questionnaire accessible through a secure server .

when we completed the final survey questions and format , we sent an e - mail announcement of the survey to 278 phas in april 2017 .

the pha points of contact were notified that the questionnaire was available online and were given unique passwords and usernames .

we sent follow - up e - mail messages twice in may 2017 to those who had not yet responded .

we contacted remaining nonrespondents by telephone , beginning in may 2017 .

the questionnaire was available online until mid - may 2017 .

we obtained a weighted overall response rate of 84 percent , and the response rate by stratum was 86 percent for our first stratum ( “large” phas ) and 83 percent for our second stratum ( “medium” phas ) .

because we followed a probability procedure on random selections , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn .

since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 95 percent confidence interval ( eg , plus or minus 10 percentage points ) .

this interval would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn .

confidence intervals are provided along with each sample estimate in the report .

all survey estimates presented in this report are generalizable to the population of large and medium phas , or to either the population of large phas or medium phas analyzed separately .

unless otherwise noted , estimates for the full population of large and medium phas have a margin of error for a 95 percent confidence interval within + / - 4.5 percentage points or less .

unless otherwise noted , estimates for the medium phas analyzed separately have a maximum margin of error for a 95 percent confidence interval of + / - 5.4 percentage points or less .

unless otherwise noted , estimates for the large phas analyzed separately have a maximum margin of error for a 95 percent confidence interval of + / - 4.5 percentage points or less .

some questions had too few respondents to generate reliable estimates .

in these cases , we report the raw frequencies of respondents to our survey .

to minimize nonsampling errors , and to enhance data quality , we employed recognized survey design practices in the development of our survey questionnaire and in the collection , processing , and analysis of the survey data .

to minimize errors arising from differences in how survey questions might be interpreted and to reduce variability in responses that should be qualitatively the same , we conducted pretesting of our survey questionnaire ; see discussion on pretesting above .

to reduce nonresponse , a source of nonsampling error , as mentioned above we followed up by e - mail and by telephone with phas who had not responded to the survey to encourage them to complete it .

to analyze open - ended comments provided by those responding to the survey , we conducted a content analysis for the purpose of identifying fraudulent activities against hcv program participants not addressed in our survey questionnaire .

we analyzed open - ended responses to identify fraud types not directly addressed in our survey .

we identified two additional types of fraud .

one type of fraud involved fraudsters posing as pha officials , calling landlords to convince them to make unnecessary payments .

this type of fraud against landlords is discussed in the report .

the other type of fraud identified was not related to participation in the hcv program , and so is not discussed in the report .

as part of our site visits , we interviewed officials from eight phas located in three u.s. regions .

on the east coast , we interviewed officials with the new york city department of housing preservation and development , the new york city housing authority , and new york state homes and community renewal .

in the midwest , we interviewed officials with the cuyahoga metropolitan housing authority , the detroit housing commission , and the flint housing commission .

on the west coast , we interviewed officials with the housing authority of the county of san bernardino and the housing authority of the city of los angeles .

we identified our interviewee selection on the basis of ensuring geographical representation , budgetary considerations , metropolitan cities with a large population , phas' issuance of fraud alerts , pha size — large , medium , and small , pha in states with a large number of older adults , and consideration for overlap of other gao ongoing work in the area of the hcv program .

our sample of pha interviewees is nongeneralizable .

moreover , we interviewed an hcv voucher holder about the voucher holder's knowledge of fraud against participants .

we also interviewed government and nongovernment officials and others based on their knowledge and expertise on the topic of fraud in general ; fraud education campaigns ; fraud adversely affecting hcv program applicants and participants ; fraud affecting older adults ; or identity theft .

specifically in reference to government agencies , we interviewed officials from the u.s. federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the consumer financial protection bureau , the u.s .

postal inspection service , and the department of health and human services about fraud types and about practices used by federal agencies to inform the public about fraud - related issues .

we also interviewed officials from the hud office of inspector general ( oig ) about any past or ongoing work related to the scope of our reporting objectives .

for our interviewee selection , we considered recommendations from other organizations such as phas and legal - assistance organizations and reviewed prior gao work on the issue of older - adult financial exploitation .

we also considered organizations' characteristics in terms of fraud prevention or work performed in assisting potential fraud victims .

these characteristics include whether the organization has an investigative unit that may have data on fraud schemes , posts fraud alerts on its internet websites , has data on fraud cases , collaborates with other groups on fraud awareness , has a fraud or complaint hotline , works on fraud prevention and provides support to victims of fraud , or works with vulnerable populations including low - income individuals or the older - adult population on social or legal issues .

on the basis of an academic study about fraud in online rental marketplaces ( discussed above ) and pha - provided information , we developed a list of indicators of potential fraud that might appear in online advertisements .

we used covert tools and techniques to test a nongeneralizable sample of advertisements posted on commercial websites commonly used by hcv voucher holders and landlords for rental property listings , counting advertisements as potentially fraudulent if the originator of the advertisement did any of the following: requested a wire transfer of security deposit or first month's rent , or both , without offering to provide an in - person viewing of the property .

for example , the person who posted the advertisement might state that the rental is available , but that the person is currently not in the country .

provided a link to a suspect credit - report site within the advertisement or subsequent correspondence .

while requiring a credit report is a normal part of the rental process , fraudsters may post a fake rental advertisement and redirect victims to a credit - score company .

if the victim pays for the credit score , the credit - score company will pay the fraudster a commission .

stated in correspondence that the rental unit is no longer available , but recommended a suspect site providing rental search , broker services , or monthly payments toward purchase of a foreclosed property .

requested an up - front or monthly side - payment agreement as a condition of rental .

included an e - mail address directly in the text of the ad .

according to one academic expert on fraud , it was rare to see a legitimate advertisement poster embed an e - mail address in a post , because most people do not want to expose that information on the internet .

advertisements or correspondence containing an indicator of fraud do not necessarily reveal the presence of a fraud scheme .

for example , the presence of an e - mail address directly in the text of an advertisement may also indicate that the advertisement was posted by a realtor service .

we selected 6 geographically diverse cities nationwide for covert testing of online rental advertisements .

to generate a list of cities for possible selection , we identified cities containing the 20 phas with the largest number of hcv vouchers .

we identified one commonly used online housing - rental marketplace for the general public and another online rental marketplace specifically dedicated to hcv rentals .

we then determined the total number of advertisements available across the two rental websites in those cities .

we used the following criteria to select cities for covert testing: from the 20 cities described above , we selected 3 cities with the most available advertisements across the two online rental marketplaces .

from the 20 cities described above , we selected 2 cities where a nearby pha had closed its hcv waiting lists in the last half of 2016 .

outside of the 20 cities described above , we also selected 1 city with a large number of available advertisements where we had previously completed a site visit .

in each metropolitan area selected for covert testing , we identified relevant online rental marketplaces operating in the area .

we then used a random - selection methodology to identify advertisements for testing from amongst all current advertisements on each marketplace .

in total , we responded to 350 advertisements .

on sites specifically dedicated to hcv rentals , we generally sampled from among all current ads .

on sites featuring a mix of private rental ads , we developed a list of search keywords and sampled only among ads that explicitly stated that they would accept an hcv voucher .

by e - mail , we contacted the originator of each of the 350 advertisements we covertly tested and engaged in correspondence .

to determine the extent of detected potential fraud in online sites , we covertly tested websites identified as offering information or assistance with the hcv program ; note that this methodology is distinct from that described above to covertly test advertisements .

to discover sites for investigation , we performed web searches with a variety of relevant search terms using two popular search engines .

we clicked through the first few pages of each set of search results , and collected the names of commercial sites that appeared either within search results or in ads accompanying the results .

finally , we entered the address of each of the websites we found into a separate search portal .

this search portal suggests possible competitor and similar websites for the target website ; we added websites discovered through this method to our list of websites for investigation .

in total , we tested 26 websites .

if the website requested a payment of any kind , we made the payment .

we also corresponded with each website , asking explicitly whether it could place us on an hcv waiting list .

to address our objective regarding antifraud regulations , guidance , and informational material , if any , that hud and phas have in place to identify and mitigate potential fraud against program participants , we reviewed hud regulations on the hcv program and the section 8 management assessment program .

these regulations outline the requirements for phas to perform education and outreach on the hcv program .

we also reviewed hud's hcv program guidebook .

this guidebook provides direction to phas administering the hcv program on informing applicants about program - related fraud .

we also reviewed written or online briefing materials for participants developed by the eight phas we interviewed .

these briefing materials must include a variety of subjects , related to program administration , leasing a unit , and family obligations .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2016 to december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we conducted our related investigative work from january 2017 to july 2017 in accordance with investigative standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency .

to determine awareness of incidents of fraud schemes among phas , we conducted a web - based survey to a nationally representative sample of executive directors overseeing public housing agencies ( pha ) from april 2017 to may 2017 .

we solicited input on executive directors' familiarity with and awareness of fraud schemes against u.s. housing and urban development ( hud ) housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program applicants and participants .

we distributed the survey to 278 phas , of which 233 ( 84 percent ) responded .

we stratified the population by size of pha as follows: ( 1 ) a certainty sample of 83 executive directors who oversaw at least one pha with 5,000+ vouchers ( “large” phas ) ; and ( 2 ) a probability sample of 195 executive directors who oversaw at least one pha with 1,000 – 4,999 vouchers ( “medium” phas ) .

results of our survey are generalizable to the entire population of large and medium phas .

for a more - detailed discussion of our survey methodology , see appendix i .

the results of our survey provide the input of pha executive directors and their staffs at the time they completed the survey in april and may 2017 .

the questions we asked in our survey are presented below .

our survey comprises seven top - level , fixed - choice questions ; three subquestions for each “yes” response to top - level questions ; and one open - ended question .

in this appendix , we include all survey questions , and the estimated percentages for the responses to the top - level questions .

because of the limited number of respondents answering “yes” to the top - level survey questions , we could not generate reliable estimates for the survey subquestions ; therefore we present only raw frequency counts for all subquestions except those corresponding to survey question 5 where we present both estimated percentages and raw frequency counts for those responses .

in our survey open - ended question , we asked pha executive directors to provide information on fraudulent activities affecting hcv program participants other than those covered by the seven fixed - choice questions .

this element was our attempt at identifying fraud types not directly addressed in our survey .

while we are not providing the responses to the open - ended question , our analysis of those responses identified two additional types of fraud .

one type of fraud involved fraudsters posing as pha officials , calling landlords to convince them to make unnecessary payments .

the other type of fraud identified was not related to participation in the hcv program , and so is not discussed in the report .

tables 17 – 23 below present results for phas that responded “yes” to question 5 .

because of the number of respondents answering “yes” to question 5 , we were able to generate reliable estimates for question 5 subquestions and present both estimates and raw frequency counts .

in addition to the contact named above , kathy larin ( director ) , tonita gillich ( assistant director ) , scott hiromoto ( analyst - in - charge ) , maurice belding , yue pui chin , colin fallon , dennis fauber , maksim glikman , ronald la due lake , jill lacey , won lee , robert letzler , barbara lewis , olivia lopez , maria mcmullen , anna maria ortiz , sabrina streagle , adam windram , and helina wong made key contributions to this report .

also contributing were marcus corbin , cory marzullo , wayne mcelrath , josephine perez , samuel portnow , and paul schmidt .

