i am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent work evaluating efforts to manage and store spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste in the united states .

nuclear energy generates about 20 percent of the nation's electric power and , as a domestic source of electricity with low emissions , is a critical part of our energy infrastructure .

in addition , military use of nuclear material — in nuclear weapons and nuclear - powered warships — plays a vital role in our national defense .

however , both of these activities generate nuclear waste — referred to as spent nuclear fuel in the case of fuel removed from a reactor and as high - level waste for material that is a by - product of weapons production and other defense - related activities .

this nuclear waste has been accumulating since the mid - 1940s and currently totals over 75,000 metric tons at 80 sites in 35 states , enough to fill a football field about 15 feet deep .

furthermore , this waste is expected to increase by about 2,000 metric tons per year , more than doubling , to 153,000 metric tons by 2055 .

although these nuclear technologies have been in use for decades , the united states has yet to implement a plan for permanently disposing of its nuclear waste .

since the publication of a 1957 report by the national academy of sciences , a geological repository has been considered the safest and most secure method of disposing of nuclear waste .

during the 1960s and 1970s , the united states embarked on several efforts to evaluate potential disposal sites for a permanent repository but no repository resulted from these efforts .

then , in the 1980s , the nuclear waste policy act of 1982 ( nwpa ) established a federal policy for the disposal of spent nuclear fuel and high - level waste .

under nwpa , the department of energy ( doe ) was directed with investigating sites for a federal deep geologic repository to dispose of spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste .

in 1987 , congress amended nwpa to direct doe to focus its effort solely on yucca mountain — a site about 100 miles northwest of las vegas , nevada .

after more than 2 decades and spending nearly $15 billion , in 2008 , doe submitted a license application to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) seeking authorization to construct a high - level waste repository at yucca mountain .

doe planned to open the repository in 2017 , although it later delayed the planned opening date to 2020 ( see fig .

1 for the current storage sites and proposed repository ) .

in march 2009 , however , the secretary of energy announced plans to terminate the yucca mountain repository program and instead study other options for nuclear waste management .

the president's fiscal year 2011 budget proposed eliminating all funding for the program , including the doe office that managed it , the office of civilian radioactive waste management .

the administration directed doe to establish a blue ribbon commission of recognized experts to study nuclear waste management alternatives .

the commission is scheduled to issue a final report by january 2012 .

my testimony is based on three of our recently issued reports on the storage of spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste , updated with recent information from doe , nrc , federal court proceedings , and the blue ribbon commission's preliminary recommendations .

it addresses ( 1 ) the status of the yucca mountain repository and national policy for nuclear waste disposal , ( 2 ) options for storing spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste and the key benefits and challenges of each option , and ( 3 ) the principal lessons learned from past nuclear waste management efforts and how these lessons might be applied to future efforts .

a detailed description of our methodologies can be found in our published reports .

we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste are considered some of the most hazardous substances on earth .

without protective shielding , the intense radioactivity can kill a person immediately or cause cancer for those who receive smaller doses .

nuclear waste can remain radioactively dangerous for tens of thousands of years .

this waste is the result of both commercial and noncommercial activities .

the majority of spent nuclear fuel is generated from commercial power plant operations .

after the nuclear fuel is used , or “spent,” and removed from the reactors , operators must actively manage the spent nuclear fuel by isolating and continually monitoring it to keep humans and the environment safe .

most spent nuclear fuel is stored at operating reactor sites , immersed in pools of water designed to cool it and isolate it from the environment .

with no offsite storage or disposal option for the spent nuclear fuel , some of the racks in the pools holding spent nuclear fuel have been be rearranged to allow for more dense storage .

despite this re - racking , spent nuclear fuel pools in the united states are reaching their capacities .

even before the march 2011 earthquake and tsunami in japan that resulted in the release of radiation from the damaged reactors at fukushima daiichi nuclear power station , concerns had been expressed about the possibility of an accident involving radiation release .

the concerns were that an overcrowded spent nuclear fuel pool could release large amounts of radiation if an accident or other event caused the pool to lose water , potentially leading to a fire that could disperse radioactive material .

as u.s. reactor operators have run out of space in their spent nuclear fuel pools , they have turned in increasing numbers to dry cask storage systems , which generally consist of stainless steel canisters placed inside larger stainless steel or concrete casks and stored outside the pools on concrete pads .

without a final disposition pathway , this commercial spent nuclear fuel generally remains where it was generated , including nine sites where the reactors have been decommissioned .

in addition to spent nuclear fuel generated from commercial purposes , doe manages an inventory of about 13,000 metric tons of spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste at five doe sites .

from 1944 until the 1980s , the united states used nuclear reactors to produce plutonium and other materials for nuclear weapons .

as a result of these activities , after the shutdown of weapons production and of some reprocessing plants at the end of the cold war , doe retained an inventory of spent nuclear fuel that had not been reprocessed , as well as high - level nuclear waste — which is one of the byproducts of reprocessing .

weapons production and related defense activities — such as the reprocessing of the navy's spent nuclear fuel to produce new fuel , which also created high - level nuclear waste — are the source of about 87 percent of doe's inventory of spent nuclear fuel and almost its entire inventory of high - level waste .

because weapons production and reprocessing of the navy's spent nuclear fuel have ended , doe's inventories of this waste are largely fixed .

doe is also responsible for managing nuclear waste from a variety of other sources .

for example , doe is responsible for managing spent nuclear fuel from the navy through the naval nuclear propulsion program , which is jointly operated by doe and the navy .

the remainder of doe's inventory of nuclear waste comes from various nondefense sources , including research activities and foreign research reactors .

the united states operates a program to take custody of spent nuclear fuel from foreign research reactors , which supports a u.s. policy to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons ; this program is scheduled for completion in 2019 .

in general , doe stores this waste at five sites: the hanford site in washington state , the savannah river site in south carolina , idaho national laboratory in idaho , the fort st. vrain site in colorado , and the west valley site in new york .

as with commercial sites , doe currently stores spent nuclear fuel in either cooling ponds or dry cask storage .

much of the high - level nuclear waste is currently stored in liquid or semiliquid form in large underground tanks and requires further processing before it can be safely stored or disposed of .

uncertainties exist about the direction of the nation's policy for nuclear waste disposal .

under nwpa , as amended , yucca mountain is the only site that doe is to investigate for suitability as a permanent nuclear waste repository .

doe investigated yucca mountain ; in 2002 recommended the site to the president ; and in 2008 submitted a license application to nrc .

on march 3 , 2010 , however , doe submitted a motion to nrc's atomic safety and licensing board to withdraw its application with prejudice , which doe said would mean that the yucca mountain site would be excluded from further consideration as a repository .

doe did not cite technical or safety issues as the reason for its decision to withdraw the license application .

in a may 2010 reply doe filed before nrc's atomic safety and licensing board , the department explained that the secretary's judgment is not that yucca mountain is unsafe or that there are flaws in the license application , but rather that yucca mountain is not a workable option and that alternatives will better serve the public interest .

doe stated that a key aspect of the problem was the continuing lack of public support for the repository among the people of the state of nevada and that public acceptance is a key component of a workable solution to permanent disposal of nuclear waste .

on june 29 , 2010 , the licensing board denied doe's motion , ruling that doe was obligated under nwpa , as amended , to continue with the licensing effort .

on june 30 , 2010 , the day after the atomic safety and licensing board denied doe's motion to withdraw its license application with prejudice , the nrc commissioners issued an order inviting parties — including the state of nevada , local counties , and industry — to file briefs addressing whether the commissioners should review the board's decision and , if so , whether they should uphold or reverse it .

as of may 26 , 2011 , however , the commissioners have yet to announce whether they plan to review the board's decision .

separately , the states of south carolina and washington , aiken county in south carolina , and a private party have sued doe and nrc , arguing that doe had no authority to terminate the proposed yucca mountain repository .

the u.s. district court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , which is hearing the lawsuits , initially decided to stay its proceedings until the nrc commissioners ruled on the board's decision but agreed to hear oral arguments on march 22 , 2011 .

as of may 27 , 2011 , the court has not ruled on the case .

the atomic safety and licensing board , with no further input from the nrc commissioners or federal courts , announced its intention to continue with its consideration of the challenges to the license application .

in these proceedings , the board will consider approximately 300 contentions submitted by stakeholders questioning certain aspects of doe's license application and related participant filings and evidence .

it is not yet clear whether nrc or the court will rule that the license application review process should resume .

amid uncertainties about the status of the repository license , doe took steps to shut down the yucca mountain program and the office of civilian radioactive waste management by september 30 , 2010 , when funding would have ended under the president's budget proposal .

specifically , doe eliminated the jobs of all federal employees working on the program , terminated program activities by contractors , and disposed of office and other equipment .

doe took steps to preserve scientific and other data , including data stored in the licensing support network .

the data in this network had been maintained and made accessible to others through the nrc web site .

the network facilitates the exchange of documents among the parties involved in the review process by making the parties' documents publicly accessible over the internet .

however , nrc's licensing support network administrator stated that , under the administration's budget proposal for fiscal year 2012 , the nrc's licensing support network faces a shutdown on october 1 , 2011 , and would no longer be accessible by scientists and the public .

in response , the atomic safety and licensing board expressed concerns that the licensing support network might no longer be available as it considers challenges to the license application .

on april 11 , 2011 , the board ordered parties involved in the review process to preserve all the licensing support network documents in “pdf” format and submit them to nrc by august 31 , 2011 , for inclusion in its publicly accessible database called the agencywide documents access and management system or adams .

on april 21 , 2011 , nrc filed a motion to the board that asked the board to reconsider its order due to the unanticipated expense .

as of may 26 , 2011 , the board has not ruled on the motion .

separately , a doe official stated that it had already planned to make its licensing support network documents available to the public upon written request .

in our april 2011 report , we raised concerns about doe's lack of a formal approved plan to guide shutdown activities or assess related risks , given the uncertainty about whether doe will be compelled by either nrc or the courts to resume the license application review process .

both federal internal control standards and doe orders require that doe sufficiently plan for major activities — including shutdowns — and assess the risks of these activities .

doe officials stated that they held frequent meetings and focus groups to help guide the shutdown .

doe's inspector general , in a report , also expressed concern about the lack of a formal plan , given the scope and complexity of the shutdown and the possible effects on areas such as the preservation of intellectual , scientific , and technological information and on the disposition of property .

in addition , as we reported , the loss of staff with experience at yucca mountain could hinder the license review if the process is resumed .

furthermore , several doe and nrc officials and industry representatives said that ending the license review process before allowing nrc to review the merits of the application represented a loss of potentially valuable information that might have been useful in the search and licensing of an alternate site .

doe plans to wait for the blue ribbon commission's final recommendations , before deciding on a direction for future nuclear waste storage efforts .

in the meantime , it is not clear whether or how the nation's nuclear waste policy will change .

the commission has taken steps to identify alternatives to meet the nation's nuclear waste storage needs .

after receiving input from numerous experts and sources , on may 13 , 2011 , at a public meeting , the commission subcommittees released draft recommendations for public comment .

at this meeting , each of the three subcommittees — disposal , reactor and fuel cycle technology , and transportation and storage — presented preliminary recommendations from its draft report to the rest of the commission and the public .

the disposal subcommittee's preliminary recommendation stated that geologic disposal is the most promising and technically accepted option available for safely isolating high - level nuclear wastes for very long periods of time and will be needed under all reasonably foreseeable scenarios , a recommendation that echoes a 1957 national academy of sciences study .

until geologic disposal is available , the transportation and storage subcommittee's preliminary recommendation was to establish one or more centralized interim storage facilities .

according to the commission's web site , the subcommittees will now revisit their draft reports as necessary and will issue those draft reports for public comment by the end of may .

the three primary nuclear waste storage and disposal options we have reported on — continued on - site storage , interim storage at a centralized facility , and permanent disposal in a geologic repository — offer benefits as well as challenges , including significant costs .

two of the options — which could be used in the interim before permanent disposal is available — provide the nation with additional time to seek approaches to nuclear waste management and disposal that might achieve broader acceptance than the yucca mountain permanent repository .

nrc has stated that continued on - site storage is safe for up to 60 years beyond the life of a reactor , and at doe sites storing spent nuclear fuel regulated by nrc .

interim storage in general comes with benefits and challenges .

doe has stated that recent advances in dry cask storage systems allow spent nuclear fuel to be stored above ground for as long as 300 years .

another benefit is that nuclear waste in continued on - site storage or interim centralized storage is more easily retrievable .

easy retrieval is important when considering approaches , such as reprocessing , a process that could eventually be used to recycle parts of the spent nuclear fuel for further power production .

an important challenge , however , is that interim storage is not a permanent solution and would require active controls , such as continued monitoring and security measures to prevent human and environmental exposure .

in addition , nuclear waste in interim storage may need to be repackaged after 100 years , at a cost of $180 million to $500 million .

furthermore , interim storage , if used for a long time period , would pass responsibility for a permanent solution to future generations , who may not be willing or able to either maintain the interim storage facilities or to develop and implement some permanent waste management solution .

continued on - site storage .

we have reported on the following benefits of continued on - site storage: requires minimal near - term effort .

continued on - site storage is the de facto approach for managing nuclear waste .

reduces transportation risks .

the waste will only have to be transported once , to a final disposal site , and it will become cooler and less radioactive over time .

continued on - site storage also presents challenges , including the following: the continued on - site storage option , assuming geologic disposal in 100 years , would cost from $20 billion to $97 billion .

it would also result in costs to the federal government such as exposure to liabilities resulting from lawsuits against doe , which committed to take custody of commercial nuclear waste in 1998 , as required by nwpa , as amended .

the federal government has paid $956 million through the department of treasury's judgment fund , and doe estimates future liability to be about $15.4 billion through 2020 , plus $500 million every year after that .

potential penalties of $75,000 per day , or about $27.4 million per year if doe and the navy fail to meet commitments to remove their spent nuclear fuel from doe - sites in idaho and colorado by january 1 , 2035 .

doe will likely incur costs of $918 million to maintain storage at doe sites if its waste remained there through 2040 , and another $300 million for additional storage at the hanford site .

likely repackaging of spent nuclear fuel if it is stored in dry - casks for over 100 years , at a potential cost of $180 million to $500 million .

it could contribute to community opposition to license extensions of currently operating reactors or license applications for new reactors .

it could raise national security concerns , according to navy officials , if idaho can suspend further shipments of navy spent nuclear fuel to doe's idaho site until the agreement with the state for removal of such fuel is met , because the navy depends on this site as part of the process of refueling its nuclear warships .

interim storage at a centralized facility .

potential benefits of centralized interim storage include the following: nuclear waste from decommissioned reactors could be consolidated , decreasing the complexity of monitoring and securing the waste and freeing the land for other uses .

doe could fulfill its obligation to take custody of spent nuclear fuel until a long - term strategy is implemented , thus avoiding additional liabilities as the result of lawsuits .

reactor operators may choose to thin out spent nuclear fuel assemblies from densely packed pools , which could reduce risk and may save reactor operators the cost of building dry storage cask systems at each reactor location .

centralized interim storage also poses challenges , including the following: interim storage could take years to site and construct .

we have reported that a federal centralized storage option with two locations , assuming geologic disposal in 100 years , would take about 19 years to implement and would cost from $23 billion to $81 billion , although private industry could likely develop centralized interim storage in less time and for less cost .

provisions in nwpa , as amended , that would allow doe to arrange for centralized storage have either expired or are unusable because they are tied to milestones in repository development that have not been met .

a centralized storage facility will likely face intense state or local opposition , particularly if there is no final disposition pathway or other benefits that would accompany it .

even if a local community supported a centralized storage facility , a state may not .

any nuclear waste stored at a centralized site could create increased safety concerns because it would have to be transported twice — once to the centralized site and from there to a repository .

permanent disposal in a geologic repository .

experts generally agree that , based on current technology , the only safe and secure permanent solution for nuclear waste is disposal in a geologic repository .

we drew this conclusion in our november 2009 report , as did the national research council in 2001 and the blue ribbon commission in 2011 in their respective publications .

other permanent disposal options — such as narrow shafts bored deep into the ground — could be feasible , but face cost or technical constraints .

technologies are available that could reduce the radioactivity or volume of spent nuclear fuel — namely , reprocessing and advanced reactors — but they do not eliminate the need for a geologic repository .

the national research council of the national academies reported that developing other alternatives is not likely for the foreseeable future .

key challenges to a geologic repository are the cost and time required to site and build it and the need to gain public acceptance for the project .

the nation has already spent nearly $15 billion on developing a repository and , as we reported in november 2009 , completing , operating , and closing the yucca mountain repository would likely have cost between $41 billion and $67 billion more .

if the nation halts the effort at yucca mountain , it will need to restart the search for an alternate repository or other solution and , based on past experience , this could take decades , cost billions of dollars , and face public opposition .

although some past efforts have had local community support , they have also faced public opposition , including yucca mountain .

our review of reports and interviews with doe and nrc officials and representatives of various national associations , local and state governments , and community organizations , suggest two broad lessons for future waste storage or disposal efforts .

first , overcoming social and political opposition and gaining public acceptance is crucial , and the federal government has several tools for doing so .

one important tool is cooperation with key stakeholders , as we reported and the blue ribbon commission stated in its most recent public meeting , on may 13 , 2011 .

specifically , in our april 2011 report , we cited the need for the federal government to involve stakeholders but also to be transparent and cooperative .

similarly , in its preliminary recommendations for public comment , the blue ribbon commission stated that all affected levels of government must have , at a minimum , a meaningful consultative role in important decisions .

as state government officials told us , if local communities or states feel that the federal government is not willing to address their concerns in a transparent way , they will be less inclined to work cooperatively with the federal government .

another important factor is allowing states to have an oversight role .

one reason for the success of the waste isolation pilot plant — a permanent repository for transuranic waste in new mexico — was that doe conceded some of its authority to the state and worked collaboratively with state officials .

states are important partly because they have broader constituencies than local communities and are more likely to raise objections .

other considerations for overcoming social and political opposition include long - term incentives and education .

substantial , long - term federal investments in the host community and state can help win support by keeping key parties committed to a repository over the several decades of development .

education has also helped foster public acceptance .

for example , doe's contractor at the waste isolation pilot plant gained public acceptance through education and training programs on the safe transportation of radioactive waste .

one important aspect of education has been to dispel the inaccurate perception that nuclear waste poses risks comparable to nuclear weapons .

a second broad lesson is that , in developing storage or disposal options , it is important to have consistent policy , funding , and leadership , since any such effort will take decades .

we reported in april 2011 that policies must be credible and consistent to be effectively implemented and that inconsistent policies may contribute to public opposition .

stakeholders told us that the siting process and safety standards changed over time at both the waste isolation pilot plant and yucca mountain , contributing to public opposition .

similarly , a program should also have consistent funding .

the office of civilian radioactive waste management budget was not predictable and varied by as much as 20 percent from year to year , with an average annual shortfall of appropriations from its budget requests of about $90 million each year .

stakeholders , including former doe officials , told us that this made long - term planning difficult .

finally , continuity in leadership can help address societal and public opposition to a repository .

in contrast , the office of civilian radioactive waste management operated with a revolving - door style of management ; it had 17 directors over 27 years , hurting relationships with local and state governments .

just as important , according to some former doe officials and industry representatives , the program was not always a high priority and the quality of managers running the program varied .

some stakeholders said this illustrated a lack of commitment and undermined public trust .

because the nation has not resolved how to manage spent nuclear fuel and high - level waste and because any future endeavor is likely to take decades and cost billions of dollars more , in our april 2011 report we raised matters congress may wish to consider to improve the success of future nuclear waste disposal efforts .

specifically , congress may wish to consider whether a more predictable funding mechanism and an independent organization , outside of doe , may be more effective in developing a permanent solution to nuclear waste management .

in addition , because doe shut down the yucca mountain repository without planning for continuing work on it , should it be compelled to do so , we recommended that the secretary of energy assess the risks of shutting down the repository and develop a preliminary plan for restarting work on it .

in addition , because doe had not planned for long - term storage , in our march 2011 report on doe - managed waste , we recommended that doe assess the condition of existing nuclear waste storage facilities and identify any gaps and actions that might be needed to address long - term storage requirements .

chairman shimkus , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you , ranking member green , or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information about this testimony , please contact mark gaffigan at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gaffiganm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

janet frisch , assistant director , and gene aloise , kevin bray , terry hanford , cristian ion , mehrzad nadji , robert sanchez , ben shouse , and kiki theodoropoulos made key contributions to this statement .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

