chairman larsen , ranking member graves , and members of the subcommittee: thank you for the opportunity to discuss our body of work on consumer protections for airline passengers .

each year , hundreds of millions of passengers rely on airlines to get them to their destination without incident — including some of the 57 million americans with a disability , who may require additional assistance from airline personnel .

while airlines maintain that operational performance and customer service are improving , citing better on - time performance and higher customer satisfaction scores , passengers may still experience a range of inconveniences , such as a delayed or canceled flight , lost or damaged wheelchair , or unsatisfactory experience with airline staff .

moreover , some non - discrimination advocacy organizations and others have questioned whether airlines treat all passengers equally and without bias , citing incidents where muslim passengers and passengers of color appear to be religiously or racially profiled .

the department of transportation ( dot ) is responsible for ensuring that airlines adhere to consumer protections afforded to passengers .

my testimony today is based on prior reports we issued from september 2017 through january 2020 on a variety of airline consumer protection issues — including airlines' denied boarding practices , impacts of airline it outages , and airlines' disability and nondiscrimination trainings , among others .

specifically , this testimony describes ( 1 ) trends in dot's data on airline operational performance from 2008 through 2017 and airlines' actions to improve such service , and ( 2 ) what is known about passenger complaints and airlines' practices related to accessibility and non - discrimination issues .

to conduct our prior work , we analyzed relevant dot data on airlines' operational performance and passenger complaints ; reviewed dot documents and guidance , and applicable statutes and regulations ; and conducted interviews with dot officials and representatives from selected airlines and consumer advocacy organizations , among others .

more detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology can be found in each of the reports .

for this statement , we updated our prior analyses on passenger complaints related to accessibility and discrimination issues and reviewed dot's recent rulemakings .

we conducted the work on which this testimony is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on audit objectives .

we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

while u.s. airlines' business practices were largely deregulated following the airline deregulation act of 1978 , a number of consumer protections are in place at the federal level .

for example , some consumer protections are required by federal statute , such as the air carrier access act of 1986 ( acaa ) , as amended , which prohibits airlines from discriminating against individuals based on a disability .

federal statutes have also authorized dot to regulate certain areas affecting passengers .

for example , dot has the authority to stop airlines from engaging in unfair or deceptive practices , or unfair methods of competition , and promulgates consumer protection regulations under its statutory authorities .

under these authorities , dot issued three final rules on enhancing airline passenger protections from 2009 through 2016 .

these rules have addressed long tarmac delays , increased compensation amounts for passengers who are involuntarily denied boarding , and required certain airlines to post information about their fees and on - time performance on their websites .

in 2018 , we found that airlines' operational performance — as measured by dot data on denied boardings ; mishandled baggage ; and late , cancelled , or diverted flights — generally improved from 2008 through 2017 , the most recent data available at the time of our review .

while rates of voluntary and involuntary denied boardings and mishandled baggage generally declined , airlines' on - time performance stayed about the same ( fig .

1 ) .

for example , over the 10-year period of our review , the lowest rate of involuntary denied boardings occurred in 2017 .

specifically , in 2017 , airlines involuntarily denied boarding to about .003 percent of all passengers ( or about 23,000 of more than 680 million passengers ) — a slight decrease from prior years .

our more recent work on airlines' denied boarding practices found that even fewer passengers were denied boarding involuntarily in 2018 .

rates of mishandled baggage also generally declined in recent years .

for example , in 2017 airlines posted a rate of 2.5 mishandled bags per 1,000 passengers ( a rate of .25 percent of mishandled bags per passenger enplanement ) , compared to a rate of 5.25 mishandled bags per 1,000 passengers in 2008 .

in 2019 , we identified a number of factors that can cause airlines' operational issues .

for example , passengers might be denied boarding when airlines overbook their flights ( i.e. , intentionally sell more seats than are available on a flight ) or have to substitute smaller aircraft than what was originally scheduled due to maintenance issues .

we also found that outages associated with airline it systems — which are used for flight and crew planning , passenger reservations or check - in , or for providing flight information to the federal aviation administration — can cause flight delays and cancellations .

while we found some outages caused minimal issues , the impact of others was more substantial .

for instance , in 2016 , an outage in one airline's system that is used to check in and board passengers resulted in the cancellation of 2,300 flights over 3 days .

while airlines' operational performance generally improved , we found in 2018 that the number of passenger complaints reported to dot , relative to passenger boardings , generally increased from 2008 through 2017 for 12 selected airlines , peaking in 2015 and declining somewhat in later years .

specifically , in that work we found that the rate of passenger complaints reported to dot , relative to passenger boardings , increased about 10 percent , from about 1.1 complaints per 100,000 passengers in 2008 to 1.2 complaints per 100,000 passengers in 2017 .

complaints about operational issues discussed above — which make up three of dot's 15 complaint categories — accounted for about half of all complaints for the 12 selected airlines from 2008 through 2017 .

more specifically , in 2018 we found: flight problems generally accounted for an average of about 33 percent of all complaints .

this category includes complaints related to delays , cancellations , and missed connections , among other things .

from 2008 through 2017 , the rate of complaints in this category generally increased .

baggage issues generally accounted for an average of about 15 percent of total complaints .

complaints were largely related to lost , delayed , or damaged bags .

the rate of baggage complaints generally decreased over our time period .

denied boardings generally accounted for an average of about 4 percent of total complaints .

complaints were related to airlines' failure to solicit volunteers or providing compensation below the required amount .

rates of complaints about denied boardings generally stayed constant over our time period .

two of the remaining 12 complaint categories tracked by dot accounted for about a quarter of passenger complaints .

one category related to reservations , ticketing , and boarding , and the other related to customer service — such as airline staff having a poor attitude or refusing to provide assistance , and unsatisfactory seat assignments .

each of these categories generally accounted for an average of about 13 percent of all complaints over the 10-year period .

our previous work identified actions taken by airlines or dot in response to such operational issues .

dot's actions are primarily related to establishing regulations about operational issues .

for example , while dot does not prohibit airlines from overbooking flights , it has set compensation amounts for passengers denied boarding involuntarily .

dot has also issued regulations related to returning mishandled baggage within 24 hours , tarmac delays , and prohibiting chronically delayed flights .

examples of airlines' actions are listed below .

reducing denied boardings .

in 2019 , we reported that selected airlines have taken a range of actions , aimed at reducing involuntary denied boardings .

some of these actions also provide additional incentives for passengers to volunteer to be denied boarding .

actions include reducing or eliminating overbookings ; improving software to better predict passenger no - shows ; requesting volunteers earlier ( eg , at check - in instead of at the gate ) ; increasing compensation for volunteers ; and conducting reverse auctions to solicit volunteers .

less mishandled baggage .

as we reported in 2018 , representatives from almost all airlines we interviewed reported investing resources to improve baggage - handling efforts and minimize the effects to passengers whose bags are lost or delayed .

among other actions , airline representatives told us they upgraded baggage technology ; modernized the claims process , so passengers could complete forms on - line ; and instituted replacement baggage programs , where passengers can get a replacement bag at the airport .

one airline also invested several million dollars to use radio frequency identification technology to track bags , as well as allowing passengers to track their baggage via an application on their smartphone .

efforts to minimize flight disruptions .

in 2018 , we also reported that selected airlines had taken numerous actions to improve on - time performance or mitigate challenges for passengers associated with flight delays and cancellations .

for example , one airline began tracking flights that were “at - risk” of meeting dot's definition of a chronically delayed flight , so it could , among other things , swap crews or substitute aircraft and avoid these types of delays .

other airlines told us they use technology , such as text - messaging updates , to communicate with passengers during delays and cancellations or increased the number of circumstances for which passengers are compensated during delays and cancellations .

our prior work has shown that passengers may be affected to varying degrees by airline operational issues , and that incidents can be costly and disruptive for some passengers .

airlines are required by dot regulations to provide compensation or certain amenities to inconvenienced passengers under certain circumstances .

for example , some passengers who are denied boarding involuntarily are entitled to compensation , with the amount varying based on certain factors .

airlines are also required by dot's interpretation of the statutory prohibition on unfair and deceptive practices to provide refunds for canceled and significantly delayed flights , if a passenger chooses to cancel his or her trip .

beyond those requirements , dot officials previously told us that airlines are not obligated to provide accommodations for flight disruptions , such as cancellations and delays , unless specified in an airline's contract of carriage , although as mentioned above , some voluntarily choose to do so in certain situations .

this may result in significant inconveniences for passengers , who may incur costs for lodging , meals and transportation .

however , according to our prior work , available information about the number and magnitude of these effects is largely anecdotal and cannot be quantified .

furthermore , our review of selected airlines' contracts of carriage in february 2019 showed variation in the types of accommodations airlines provide and circumstances in which they will be provided , when operational issues occur .

according to the 2010 u.s. census , 57 million americans ( roughly 1 in 5 ) have a disability , and more than half of those 57 million americans have mobility issues .

furthermore , older americans are representing an increasing share of the u.s. population .

as the population continues to age , the likelihood of this group needing assistance may increase .

without accommodations — such as effective communication of flight information , accessible seats , appropriate boarding assistance , and careful handling and stowage of wheelchairs and other assistive devices — people with accessibility or mobility issues may face challenges when flying , or they may be unable to fly altogether .

as previously mentioned , the acaa prohibits airlines operating in the u.s. from discriminating against individuals on the basis of disability in the provision of air transportation .

under this law , dot has promulgated regulations requiring that airlines provide passengers with disabilities ( 1 ) assistance in enplaning and deplaning ; and ( 2 ) compensation for lost , damaged , or delayed wheelchairs or other assistive devices .

in contrast to all other complaints that passengers submit directly to airlines , dot regulations require that airlines report annually to dot the number of all disability - related complaints they received .

in our may 2017 report , we provided information showing that disability complaints reported to airlines and dot generally increased from 2005 through 2015 .

more recent data shows that passenger complaints reported to u.s. airlines continued to increase ( see table 1 ) .

in particular , we found that complaints reported to airlines on disability issues increased by about 50 percent from 2010 ( 19,347 ) to 2017 ( 29,662 ) , the most recent year for which data are available .

based on our review , the vast majority of passengers chose to file their disability complaints directly to the airlines .

notably , the number of passenger complaints on disability issues reported to dot from 2010 through 2019 ranged from 572 to 944 and averaged about 780 complaints per year .

complaints reported to dot rose in 2019 , after peaking in 2015 and declining the three following years .

in 2017 , the last year data are available for both , complaints reported to airlines and dot were most commonly related to failure of airline staff to provide assistance , seating accommodation issues , and service animal issues .

as we have previously reported , the number of complaints may not fully reflect the inconvenience experienced by passengers or would - be - passengers with accessibility issues .

some may choose not to fly and others may have to take inconvenient or uncomfortable precautionary measures to avoid using the aircraft lavatory .

for example , in our recent work examining the accessibility of aircraft lavatories , stakeholders we interviewed told us that some passengers severely limit their food and fluid intake in advance of the flight , risking dehydration ; use a catheter ; or wear a protective undergarment .

furthermore , because lavatories accessible by the aircraft's onboard wheelchair are not required on most aircraft ( i.e. , single - aisle aircraft ) and there may not be an expectation that the lavatory be accessible by an onboard wheelchair , passengers may not see grounds to complain or may not take the time to submit a complaint .

more generally , in our prior work , we found that complaint data are inherently limited because a substantial portion of dissatisfied individuals do not submit complaints and are therefore not represented in the complaint data .

a number of federal statutes also prohibit or have been interpreted by dot to prohibit airline discrimination against airline passengers .

federal statute also allows airlines to refuse to transport any passenger if the airline determines that the passenger is , or might be , a threat to safety .

according to dot guidance , this determination is made by the pilot in command of the aircraft or certain other specified airline personnel and cannot be arbitrary , but must be based on specific facts and circumstances known at the time .

in its guidance , dot has unequivocally provided that a passenger's status in a protected class ( eg , race , ancestry , national origin , or religion ) cannot be the determinative factor in an airline's decision to deny boarding or remove a passenger from a flight .

our august 2019 report showed that the total number of passenger complaints reported to dot against u.s. airlines alleging discrimination generally declined from 2010 through 2015 , but began to increase starting in 2016 .

moreover , updated data for 2019 show a further increase , with 96 complaints filed ( table 2 ) .

according to our analysis , from 2010 through 2019 , dot received , on average , 80 discrimination - related complaints a year , most commonly about racial discrimination .

despite the recent increase in the total number of discrimination complaints , they account for a small percentage of total passenger complaints dot receives , as well as total passenger boardings .

for example , in 2019 , of the 9,547 complaints dot received against u.s. airlines , 96 alleged discriminatory treatment .

as noted above and previously reported , dot's discrimination complaint data does not capture passenger complaints reported directly to airlines .

in 2018 , we reported that dot officials estimated that , across all complaint categories , for every passenger complaint they receive , airlines receive about 50 .

while we have previously requested discrimination complaint data from selected airlines , they have generally declined , citing the proprietary nature of this information .

since 2017 , dot has disaggregated discrimination complaints into sub - categories , such as racial or religious discrimination , and published this data in its air travel consumer report .

we previously identified actions that dot and airlines have taken that are intended to ensure that no passengers are discriminated against on the basis of disability or other protected class .

our work primarily examined airlines' efforts to train staff and contractors .

however , our work also identified other airline actions ( both proactive and reactive ) taken to enhance compliance with consumer protections in these areas .

for example , one airline developed a wheelchair tracking system in response to a dot enforcement action to help reduce incidents of lost or mishandled wheelchairs .

dot requires that airlines provide their employees and contractor staff who interact with the traveling public training on the proper and safe operation of equipment used to accommodate passengers with a disability , as well as on boarding and deplaning assistance .

while not required , dot encourages airlines to implement comprehensive non - discrimination trainings to help prevent discrimination .

dot has also developed training materials , available on its aviation consumer protection website , for airline employees and contractor staff .

these materials include brochures , digital content , and videos on the rights of passengers with disabilities , as well as tips on providing wheelchair assistance at airports and onboard aircraft .

in 2017 , dot also developed guidance for airline personnel on non - discrimination topics .

the material included scenarios for recognizing discriminatory behavior and provided examples of how to ask additional questions or conduct additional screening in a non - discriminatory manner .

in 2017 we reviewed disability training programs for 12 selected airlines and found that they all had disability - related training requirements for their staff and contractors , with some variations in the content and format .

over the course of that work , each airline demonstrated that it had , as required , initial and recurrent training for its employees , contractors , and complaint resolution officers ( cro ) .

all 12 selected airlines used a mix of training , including classroom - based training , computer - based training , situational scenarios , and hands - on training , such as wheelchair handling and lifting passengers into aisle seats to assist in boarding for specific groups .

we also found that these selected airlines generally consulted with disability organizations when developing acaa training programs .

some airlines also voluntarily implemented quality assurance programs to improve and sustain their disability - training programs' performance .

another step some airlines have taken , though not required by the acaa or its implementing regulations , is the creation of a disability board , which serves as a forum for increasing awareness among their workforce about disability issues .

in 2019 , we reported that representatives from all six u.s. airlines we selected for review told us they provide non - discrimination training to employees , although not all contractor staff receive that training .

these representatives told us they provide initial non - discrimination training to newly hired employees who interact with passengers — including , for example , pilots , flight attendants , and customer service representatives — and that most regularly update the training based on current events or changes in policy .

airline representatives provided high - level examples describing the content of their trainings , but with one exception , they declined to provide more specific information , citing the sensitive or business proprietary nature of such materials .

we found some similarities and differences in what representatives reported their trainings covered .

for example , representatives generally stated that non - discrimination trainings — which were typically embedded in larger training programs and combined in - person and web - based modules — emphasized treating all individuals fairly and without bias , regardless of race , ancestry , or religion , among other things .

most also said trainings covered implicit bias — a term that refers to attitudes or stereotypes about groups of people that unconsciously affect a person's understanding , actions , and decisions — and half said they have used dot's guidance discussed above , with some airline - specific modifications .

in our recent work on aircraft lavatories , we found that some u.s. airlines voluntarily installed lavatories accessible by the aircraft's onboard wheelchair for some of their single - aisle aircraft .

however , we found that these aircraft only constituted about 4.5 percent of the eight selected airlines' combined single - aisle fleet .

according to airline representatives , providing lavatories accessible by the aircraft's onboard wheelchair may reduce the number of revenue generating seats in the aircraft cabin , which can increase airlines' costs and result in higher fares for consumers .

in lieu of lavatories accessible by the aircraft's onboard wheelchair , airline representatives said they have added certain features — such as assist handles or grab bars , and accessible call buttons or door locks — designed to increase access to certain lavatory functions .

dot has recently issued three notices of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) designed to improve the accessibility of aircraft lavatories , regulate service animals , and clarify dot's authority to stop airlines from engaging in unfair or deceptive practices .

for example , in january 2020 , dot issued an nprm to solicit comments on short - term accessibility improvements on single - aisle aircraft through the installation of accessibility features within the lavatory , such as those mentioned above , without changing the size of lavatories .

in addition , dot announced its intention to issue an advance nprm to address long - term accessibility improvements and to solicit comments and gather information on the costs and benefits of requiring airlines to increase the size of the single - aisle lavatory on new aircraft models to accommodate a wheelchair as well as an assistant .

in 2008 , dot noted that accessible lavatories on single - aisle aircraft would benefit passengers with disabilities , but also expressed concerns that revenue loss and other cost impacts could be too great for the airlines .

the faa reauthorization act of 2018 included a number of ongoing requirements for dot in the airline consumer protection area .

for example , dot is responsible for developing leading non - discrimination practices for airlines , in consultation with airlines and other consumer advocates .

in addition to our recently published work , we have ongoing work examining airport accessibility for passengers with disabilities , as well as dot's enforcement approach to consumer protections .

we anticipate issuing reports on the results of this work later this year .

chairman larsen , ranking member graves , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared remarks .

i look forward to answering any questions you may have .

if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or vonaha@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are jonathan carver , assistant director , geoffrey hamilton , delwen jones , josh ormond , amy suntoke , melissa swearingen , and elizabeth wood .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

