we appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's hearing to discuss the financial condition of u.s. airlines .

since 2001 , the u. s. airline industry has confronted financial losses of unprecedented proportions .

from 2001 through 2003 , the industry reported losses of $23 billion , and two of the nation's largest airlines went into bankruptcy .

following the tragic terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the u.s. government has provided struggling airlines with $7.0 billion in direct assistance and many billions more in indirect assistance in the form of loan guarantees , a tax holiday , and pension relief .

the most recent assistance to airlines came in april 2003 , under the 2003 emergency wartime supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

108-11 ) .

the federal government provided $2.4 billion to the airline industry , and congress mandated that the gao review measures taken by airlines to reduce costs , improve their revenues and profits , and strengthen their balance sheets .

subsequent to p.l .

108-11 , in december 2003 , congress provided a similar mandate under the vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act for gao to report on the financial condition of the u.s. airline industry .

later this year gao will provide a report to congress in response to these mandates .

although we are still gathering and analyzing information in response to these mandates , my statement today provides a preliminary look at some of our findings .

my remarks today address three main questions: ( 1 ) what have been the major challenges to the airline industry since 1998 ? .

 ( 2 ) what cost cutting measures have airlines reported taking to remain financially viable ? .

 ( 3 ) what is the financial condition of the airline industry ? .

my statement today focuses on the seven legacy and seven low - cost airlines that accounted for 90 percent of all domestic airline industry seat capacity in 2003 .

legacy airlines are essentially those airlines that were in operation before airline deregulation in 1978 and whose goal is to provide service from “anywhere to everywhere.” to meet this goal , these airlines support large , complex hub - and - spoke operations with thousands of employees and hundreds of aircraft ( of various types ) with service to domestic communities of all sizes as well as international points at numerous fare levels .

legacy airlines contract with , or separately operate , smaller regional airlines to provide service to smaller communities .

low - cost airlines , except southwest , entered the market after deregulation and generally operate point - to - point service using fewer types of aircraft .

these airlines typically offer a simplified fare structure and generally do not offer international service outside of canada , central america , and the caribbean .

although there is variation among the airlines in each of these groups , there are far more similarities than differences .

most importantly , the seven low - cost airlines consistently had lower unit costs than the seven legacy airlines between 1998 and 2003 .

to determine the major challenges that airlines have faced , we examined prior gao work and research by various industry experts .

to determine the cost - cutting measures airlines took and to assess the industry's financial condition , we analyzed financial and operating data reported by airlines to the department of transportation ( dot ) .

to assess the reliability of those data , we reviewed the quality control procedures that dot applies and subsequently determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

u.s. airlines , particularly legacy airlines , have faced a sweeping set of challenges since 1998 .

these challenges are both internal factors reshaping the airline industry and external events that sharply reduced the demand for air travel .

within the airline industry , even before september 11th , the growth of the internet as a means to sell and distribute tickets and the emergence of well - capitalized low - cost airlines as a powerful market force created tremendous competitive pressures on airlines .

at the same time , a series of largely unforeseen events — among them the september 11th terrorist attacks and associated security concerns , war in the middle east , the sars epidemic , global economic downturn , and a decline in business travel — - seriously disrupted the demand for air travel .

to overcome the many challenges of the last several years , the two groups of airlines undertook very different strategies .

legacy airlines sought to cut costs , while low - cost airlines took advantage of legacy airlines' retrenchment and expanded .

legacy airlines collectively reported a reduction in operating costs of $12.7 billion ( 14.5 percent ) between the october 1 , 2001 ( immediately after september 11th ) and the end of 2003 .

the reductions occurred in nearly all areas of operations , with the single largest reduction coming from labor costs that were reduced $5.5 billion .

during this time period , legacy airlines reduced their seat capacity by 12.6 percent by shifting traffic to regional airline partners and grounding aircraft .

conversely , low - cost airlines' operating expenses increased by just over $1 billion ( 9.8 percent ) ; and their seat capacity increased by 26.1 percent as they expanded their operations .

since 2000 , the financial performance and viability of legacy airlines has deteriorated significantly compared with low - cost airlines .

legacy airlines have collectively lost $24.3 billion over the last 3 years , while low - cost airlines made $1.3 billion in profits .

despite the cost - cutting efforts of legacy airlines over the last couple of years , legacy airlines are even less cost competitive relative to low - cost airlines than in 2000 .

low - cost airlines still maintain a significant unit cost advantage over legacy airlines despite legacy airline cost cutting .

meanwhile , neither legacy nor low - cost airlines have been able to significantly improve their revenues owing to weak fare growth .

as a result of their weak performance and mounting losses , legacy airlines' financial condition has also deteriorated , and they face considerable debt and pension obligations in the next few years .

at least one other legacy airline has announced that , like usairways and united airlines in 2002 , it may enter bankruptcy this year .

a series of significant changes and unforeseen events during the last several years has presented the airline industry with its most significant challenges since it was deregulated 25 years ago .

these challenges have come from within the industry as well as from external factors affecting the demand for air travel .

since the late 1990s , the u.s. airline industry , especially legacy airlines , has faced several internal challenges that have altered the way it operates .

foremost among these challenges is addressing declining yields brought on by price transparency and competition .

the airlines' increased use of the internet to reduce ticket distribution costs .

however , the price transparency the internet provides has empowered consumers searching for the lowest fares and depressed fare levels .

the emergence of well - capitalized low - cost airlines has also been a significant challenge .

although earlier new entrant airlines quickly disappeared , this recent group is better capitalized and offers a good overall product .

between 1998 and 2003 , these low - cost airlines increased their presence in the 5,000 largest city pair markets ( eg , new york – boston ) from 32 to 46 percent and increased overall market share of passenger enplanements from 23 to 33 percent .

demand for air travel began weakening in 2000 , well before the september 11th terrorist attacks .

an economic downturn that began in 2000 depressed airline revenues , and the terrorist attacks of september 11th , the iraq war , and the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) have compounded this trend .

these events have contributed to a change in the demand for air travel that is likely to suppress revenues for the foreseeable future , including the inability of airlines to charge premium business fares .

although it is impossible to isolate the effect of various events , demand as measured by revenue passenger miles ( rpms ) , was down 6.5 percent and 11.4 percent for 2001 and 2002 , respectively , from the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) june of 2001 forecasts .

airlines responded very differently to the challenges of the last few years .

legacy airlines faced with mounting losses and curtailed demand for air travel sought to reduce capacity and along with it their operating expenses .

low - cost airlines , already enjoying a cost advantage over legacy airlines , used their competitive cost advantage to grow .

legacy airlines cut operating expenses by $12.7 billion between october 1 , 2001 , and december 31 , 2003 .

this 14.5 percent reduction in operating expenses exceeds the percentage reduction in seat capacity of 12.6 percent during the same period .

according to airline financial reports to dot , legacy airline labor costs were reduced $5.5 billion annually , or about 16 percent during this time period ( see fig .

1 ) .

both usairways and united signed new labor agreements while in bankruptcy , and american airlines also achieved new agreements while on the verge of bankruptcy .

legacy airlines also achieved $2.1 billion savings from a 59 percent reduction in the commissions paid to travel agents , because those commissions were sharply reduced .

finally , legacy airlines reduced fuel costs by 18.7 percent during the period , although the recent upsurge in fuel prices has reversed these savings .

the only cost category to increase for legacy airlines was transport - related expenses , which doubled during the period , an increase of $3.9 billion .

increases in transport - related expenses for legacy airlines are largely because of fees paid to regional airline partners for providing regional air service .

in the aftermath of september 11th , legacy airlines shifted some of their routes over to regional airlines in an attempt to reduce seat capacity on these routes .

meanwhile , low - cost airlines used legacy airlines retrenchment as an opportunity to expand .

the seven low - cost airlines increased seat capacity by 26.1 percent during the same period that legacy airlines cut capacity by 12.6 percent , but total operating costs for low - cost airlines increased by a more modest 9.8 percent , or a little more than $1 billion .

low - cost airlines' labor costs , these airlines' largest single cost component increased over $750 million , or 21 percent ( see fig .

2 ) .

despite their growth , low - cost airlines were able to achieve small reductions in some of their other costs , including commissions , passenger food , depreciation and amortization , and transportation related expenses .

the financial performance of u.s. airlines since 2000 has followed two very different paths .

despite significant cost - saving initiatives and industry - wide traffic volumes approaching pre - september 11th levels , legacy airlines continue to lose money .

legacy airlines' unit costs ( cost to fly one seat 1 mile ) have increased since 2000 while fares have declined ; as a result , these airlines have yet to regain profitability .

meanwhile , low - cost airlines continue to expand market share , enjoy a greater unit cost advantage over legacy airlines than they did in 2000 , and in all but one quarter have collectively earned a profit .

the weak performance of the legacy airlines over the last 3 years has significantly diminished their financial condition ; as a result , some of these airlines are vulnerable to bankruptcy , especially if there are additional shocks to the industry .

legacy airlines , as a group , have been unsuccessful in sufficiently reducing their costs to make them more competitive with low - cost airlines .

unit cost competitiveness is key to profitability for airlines because airlines have found it extremely difficult to increase their revenues in the current environment .

while legacy carriers reduced their overall operating expenses over the last three years , these cuts largely paralleled legacy airlines' capacity reductions .

conversely , low - cost airlines have been able to reduce their unit costs through expansion .

low - cost airlines' ability to maintain lower labor costs and lower asset - related costs accounts for the majority of the unit cost differences between low - cost airlines and legacy airlines .

wall street analysts suggested that one of the best measure for examining airline unit cost performance is to compare airline unit cost curves .

these curves relate airlines' unit costs to the stage length ( distance ) flown .

figure 3 shows legacy and low - cost airline unit cost curves for 2000 and 2003 and shows that the gap between legacy and low - cost airline unit costs has widened across all distances .

for example , in 2000 , at a 1,000-mile stage length legacy airlines' unit costs were 45 percent higher than low - cost airlines ; by 2003 , legacy airlines' unit costs were 67 percent higher .

some of the legacy airline unit cost increase is due to the capacity purchased from regional airlines — an increase in operating expenses ( the numerator ) but without a corresponding increase in available seat miles ( the denominator ) in the unit cost calculation .

however , this does not account for all or even most of the gap between legacy and low - cost airlines' unit costs .

to account for this unit cost difference between legacy and low - cost airlines , we also examined legacy and low - cost airline unit costs over time and the various cost items that comprise total operating expenses .

overall , we found that the gap in aggregated ( for all stage lengths ) unit costs for legacy and low - cost airlines has widened since 2000 , from 2.1 cents per available seat mile to 3.8 cents at the end of 2003 .

figure 4 shows this widening gap and the cost components that account for the difference .

the two primary cost components that comprise the unit cost difference between legacy airlines and low - cost airlines are labor costs and asset - related costs .

legacy airlines have high labor costs owing to a highly tenured , unionized workforce , while low - cost airlines are able to keep labor costs down because of a younger and lower paid work force but also by achieving higher levels of labor productivity than legacy airlines .

legacy airlines have higher asset - related costs than low - cost airlines because legacy airlines generally have older fleets and more types of aircraft in their fleets than low - cost airlines .

legacy airlines also put their planes in the air fewer hours per day than low - cost airlines .

finally , some portion of this difference is due to legacy airlines' purchase of regional airline capacity during the period .

other costs that currently are part of the remaining unit cost difference between legacy airlines and low - cost airlines include expenses for fuel , passenger ticketing commissions , and passenger food .

both legacy and low - cost airlines have encountered weak revenues over last several years .

the internal and external factors cited earlier have depressed fares and demand for air travel .

overall , industry - wide demand has nearly returned to pre - september 11th levels , but fares have not .

unit revenue , or yield , the amount of revenue airlines collect for every mile a passenger travels , has fallen 19 percent from the first quarter of 2000 through the fourth quarter of 2003 , for the airlines examined in this study .

the trends are similar for both the legacy airlines and low - cost airlines ; legacy yields dropped about 19 percent , and low - cost airline yields dropped about 18 percent ( see figure 5 ) .

although nearly as many passengers are flying as before september 11th , they are paying less to do so .

in addition , legacy airlines are losing market share to the low - cost airlines .

demand , as measured in the number of miles paying passengers were transported , is down over 10 percent for the legacy airlines since 2000 ; demand for low - cost airlines has risen nearly 40 percent .

not only are legacy airlines collecting less fare revenue from the passengers they fly , they are also flying fewer passengers than they used to .

low - cost airlines are flying more passengers at lower prices .

low - cost airlines have been able to use their relative cost advantage to remain profitable at a time when fares are down throughout the industry .

as figure 6 demonstrates , legacy airlines have lost money in each of the last 3 years , for a total of $24.3 billion ; low - cost airlines have made money in every year .

since 2000 , the financial condition of legacy airlines has deteriorated .

both legacy airlines and low - cost airlines increased their cash balances following the events of september 11th ; legacy airlines did so primarily through borrowing , while low - cost airlines increased theirs by generating profits as well as borrowing .

since 2001 , legacy airlines have taken on more debt , relying on creditors for more of their capital needs than they have in the past .

increased debt increases interest expenses and can make raising additional capital more expensive .

low - cost airlines have acquired some debt , but their solvency ( or ability to repay the debt ) has not deteriorated to the same extent as it has for legacy airlines .

in the process of taking on additional debt , several legacy airlines have used all , or nearly all , of their assets as collateral , limiting their access to capital markets .

legacy airlines face large debt repayment and pension funding obligations during the next 4 years .

these fixed obligations greatly exceed the current cash balances for many of the legacy airlines .

for example , legacy airlines had a collective cash balance of $6.8 billion at the close of 2003 versus $19.2 billion of long - term debt and capital leases ( a fixed obligation similar to long - term debt ) coming due through 2007 .

in contrast , low - cost airlines had a collective cash balance of $3.5 billion versus long - term debt and capital lease obligations of $2.1 billion coming due through 2007 .

if legacy airlines' debt cannot be refinanced , some legacy airlines might be forced to enter bankruptcy .

in addition , legacy airlines have significant defined benefit pension funding obligations that low - cost airlines do not .

recent pension reform legislation postpones a portion of legacy airlines' requirements to make payments to their defined benefit pension plans in 2004 and 2005 , but are still required to fully fund these plans in the years beyond .

because legacy airlines' future access to capital markets appears to be limited , these airlines will need to begin generating cash from operations if they intend to fulfill their future financial obligations and avoid bankruptcy .

although the airline industry was deregulated more than 25 years ago , some of the most significant competitive changes are only now occurring brought about by a myriad of challenges over the last 4 years .

before 2000 , large legacy airlines , all of which predated deregulation , dominated the domestic airline industry .

these airlines competed on the basis of their networks and in - flight amenities as well as fares ; they earned profits by maximizing revenues from high value business travelers .

low - cost airlines competed in some markets , but as a whole did not account for much more than 10 percent of the market , and they rarely took on a legacy airline directly .

however , in recent years , this pattern has changed , perhaps permanently .

significant structural change combined with severe demand shocks has presented unprecedented challenges to the airline industry , especially for legacy airlines .

legacy airlines , burdened by significant costs of labor contracts and pension plans negotiated during profitable years and an extensive and costly network infrastructure , have found it difficult to reduce costs quickly enough to become cost competitive and restore profitability .

meanwhile , low - cost airlines are using their cost advantage to expand their market share and challenge legacy airlines like never before .

although airline industry traffic has recovered to pre - september 11th levels , profitability for legacy airlines has not , owing to higher costs and weak fare growth .

three years of losses have left legacy airlines in a weakened financial position with large debt and pension obligations looming in the next few years .

the potential for airlines to earn the large profits of 1995-2000 does not appear possible .

instead , the airline industry is being transformed into two industries , profitable low - cost point - to - point airlines that continue to grow and extend their reach into ever more markets and the major network legacy airlines that account for the vast majority of the industry's losses .

although legacy airlines still control two - thirds of all domestic traffic , possess profitable overseas routes , and have a valuable domestic route structure , until these airlines are able to bring their unit costs closer to those of low - cost airlines and align their services with fares that passengers are willing to pay for “anywhere to everywhere” networks , they are unlikely to be able improve their financial condition .

this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at heckerj@gao.gov .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include paul aussendorf , tom gilbert , grant mallie , steve martin , richard swayze , and pamela vines .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

