i am pleased to be here today to discuss the challenges that small employers face when sponsoring retirement plans for their workers .

about 42 million workers , or about one third of all private - sector employees , work for employers with less than 100 employees and recent federal data suggest many of these workers lack access to a work - based retirement plan to save for retirement .

an estimated 51 to 71 percent of workers at employers with less than 100 workers do not have access to a work - based retirement plan , compared to an estimated 19 to 35 percent of those that work for employers with 100 or more workers .

small employers face a number of barriers to starting and maintaining a plan for their workers .

certain characteristics associated with small employers may contribute to the challenges of sponsoring a plan .

for example , in 2008 , we reported on challenges that can limit small employer sponsorship of individual retirement arrangement ( ira ) plans , including administrative costs , contribution requirements , and eligibility based on employee tenure and compensation , among others .

additionally , federal data suggest that about half of all new businesses ( nearly all of which are small ) do not survive for more than 5 years .

my statement is based on our report released today that examines ( 1 ) the characteristics associated with small employers that are more or less likely to sponsor a retirement plan , ( 2 ) challenges small employers face in establishing and maintaining a retirement plan , and ( 3 ) options that exist to address those challenges and increase small employer sponsorship .

to answer these objectives , we combined and analyzed retirement plan data from the department of labor ( labor ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) employer data to produce a regression analysis and descriptive statistics on 5.3 million small employers .

we conducted literature reviews and interviewed groups of small employers in five cities as well as other stakeholders .

we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from october 2010 to march 2012 .

more complete information on our scope and methodology is available in our issued report .

in summary , we found that the likelihood that a small employer will sponsor a retirement plan largely depends on the size of the employer's workforce and the workers' average wages .

small employers , retirement experts , and other stakeholders also identified a number of challenges — such as plan complexity and resource constraints — to starting and maintaining retirement plans .

in addition , stakeholders offered options for addressing some challenges to plan sponsorship , which included simplifying federal requirements for plan administration and increasing the tax credit for plan startup costs .

although labor , irs , and the small business administration ( sba ) collaborate in conducting education and outreach on retirement plans , agencies disseminate information online through separate websites and in a largely uncoordinated fashion .

in addition , irs currently does not have the means to collect information on employers that sponsor a certain type of ira plan .

as a result of our findings , we are recommending efforts for greater collaboration among federal agencies to foster small employer plan sponsorship and more complete collection of ira plan sponsorship data .

to encourage employers to sponsor retirement plans for their employees , the federal government provides preferential tax treatment under the internal revenue code ( irc ) for plans that meet certain requirements .

in addition , the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , as amended , sets forth certain protections for participants in private - sector retirement plans , including fiduciary responsibilities that may apply to plan sponsors , which establish certain standards of conduct for those that manage employee benefit plans and their assets .

small employers may choose a plan for their employees from one of three categories: employer - sponsored ira plans ; defined contribution ( dc ) plans ; and defined benefit ( db ) plans ( often referred to as traditional pension plans ) .

employer - sponsored ira plans , which can be either savings incentive match plans for employees ( simple ) or simplified employee pension ( sep ) plans , generally allow employers and , in simple ira plans , employees , to make contributions to separate ira accounts for each participating employee .

employers generally have fewer administration and reporting requirements compared to other types of plans .

the second plan category — dc plans — which includes 401 ( k ) plans , allows employers , employees , or both to contribute to individual employee accounts within the plan .

dc plans tend to have higher contribution limits for employees than employer - sponsored ira plans ; however , they also have more reporting requirements and other rules ; for example , they may be subject to requirements for nondiscrimination testing or top - heavy testing .

the third category is db plans , which promise to provide a specified retirement benefit to employees ; the employer is generally responsible for funding the plan .

over the years , congress has responded to concerns about lack of access to employer - sponsored retirement plans for employees of small employers with legislation to lower costs , simplify requirements , and ease administrative burden .

for example , the revenue act of 1978 and the small business job protection act of 1996 established the sep ira plan and the simple ira plan respectively , featuring fewer administration requirements than other plan types .

the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ) also included a number of provisions that affected small employers , which were made permanent by the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ) .

the ppa also established additional provisions that support retirement plan participation by rank - and - file employees , such as automatic enrollment .

federal agencies also play a role in fostering retirement plan sponsorship by small employers .

to help encourage sponsorship , federal agencies conduct education and outreach activities and provide information about retirement plans for small employers .

labor , irs , and sba — which maintains an extensive network of field offices — have collaborated with each other and with national and local organizations to develop information on small employers retirement plans and conduct outreach with small employers .

various private - sector service providers — from individual accountants , investment advisers , recordkeepers , and actuaries to insurance companies and banks — assist sponsors with their retirement plans .

some sponsors hire a single provider that offers a range of plan services for one fee , sometimes referred to as a “bundled” services arrangement .

other sponsors hire different providers for individual services under an “unbundled” arrangement , paying a separate fee for each service .

plan services include legal , accounting , trustee / custodial , recordkeeping , actuarial ( for defined benefit plans ) , investment management , investment education , or advice .

service providers can also assist with plan administration functions , including any required testing and filing of government reports .

we found that the number of employees and average wages greatly influence the likelihood that a small employer will sponsor a retirement plan .

further , our regression analysis using labor and irs data found that small employers with larger numbers of employees were the most likely of all small employers to sponsor a plan , as were those paying average annual wages of $50,000-$99,999 .

conversely , employers with the fewest employees and the lowest average annual wages were very unlikely to sponsor a plan .

a separate analysis we conducted using labor and irs data found an overall small employer sponsorship rate of 14 percent in 2009. important to note , however , that this sponsorship rate does not include small employers that sponsor sep ira plans because irs currently does not have a means to collect data on employers that sponsor this plan type .

further examination found that small employers with 26 to 100 employees had the highest sponsorship rate — 31 percent — while small employers with 1 to 4 employees had the lowest rate — 5 percent ( see fig 1 ) .

the sponsorship rate cited in this testimony is limited to single employers that sponsor a plan .

consequently , the rate does not include small employers that participated only in multiple employer plans or multiemployer plans , which are outside the scope of this study .

we are currently conducting ongoing work on these plan types and their role in the private pension system .

according to our analysis of labor and irs data , 401 ( k ) and simple ira plans were overwhelmingly the most common types of plans sponsored by small employers .

out of slightly more than 712,000 small employers that sponsored a single type of plan , about 86 percent sponsored either a 401 ( k ) or a simple ira plan.types sponsored by small employers .

small employers and other stakeholders we interviewed identified various plan options , administration requirements , fiduciary responsibilities , and top - heavy testing requirements as complex and burdensome — often citing these factors as barriers to sponsoring retirement plans or as reasons for terminating them .

plan options and administration requirements: small employers and other stakeholders said that plan options and administration requirements are frequently complex and burdensome and discourage some small employers from sponsoring a plan .

for example , some small employers and retirement experts said that the broad range of plan types and features makes it difficult for small employers to compare and choose a plan that best meets their needs .

some stakeholders also described the administrative burden on small employers of plan paperwork , such as reviewing complicated quarterly investment reports or complying with federal reporting requirements — like those associated with required annual statements — as particularly burdensome .

fiduciary responsibilities: a number of stakeholders indicated that understanding and carrying out a sponsor's fiduciary responsibilities with respect to managing or controlling plan assets presents significant challenges to some small employers.found the selection of investment fund choices for their plans particularly challenging .

further , a number of stakeholders said some small employers may not have an adequate understanding of their fiduciary duties and are not always aware of all their responsibilities under the law .

top - heavy requirements: top - heavy requirements are more likely to affect smaller plans ( those with fewer than 100 participants ) than larger ones , according to irs .

a number of stakeholders said compliance with requirements is often burdensome and poses a major barrier to small according to some experts , some small employer plan sponsorship .

employers with high employee turnover may face an even greater likelihood of becoming top - heavy as they replace departing employees while key employees — such as business owners or executives — continue to contribute to the plan .

a number of stakeholders stated that compliance with top - heavy rules is confusing and can pose significant burdens on some small employers .

for example , some retirement experts said that small employers whose plans are found to be top - heavy may encounter a number of additional costs in the effort to make their plans compliant .

these plans can incur additional costs associated with hiring a plan professional to make corrections to plan documents and instituting a minimum top - heavy employer contribution for all participating rank - and - file employees .

while sponsors can avoid top - heavy testing by adopting a safe harbor 401 ( k ) plan that is not subject to top - heavy requirements , experts pointed out that the employer contributions required for such plans may offset the advantages of sponsoring such a plan .

federal agencies provide guidance that can assist small employers in addressing some of the challenges they face in starting and maintaining retirement plans .

labor and irs , often in collaboration with sba , have produced publications , conducted workshops , and developed online resources , among other efforts , to assist small employers .

however , a number of stakeholders , including the irs advisory committee on tax exempt and government entities , indicated that many small employers are unaware of federal resources on retirement plans , which may , in part , be due to difficulties in finding useful , relevant information across a number of different federal websites .

for example , irs's retirement plans navigator , a web - based tool designed to help small employers better understand retirement plan options , is located on a separate website from the rest of the agency's online plan resources for small employers .

furthermore , labor and irs each present retirement plan information separately on their respective websites .

neither agency maintains a central web portal for all information relevant to small employer plan sponsorship , though such portals exist for federal information resources in other areas such as healthcare .

small employers that lack sufficient financial resources , time , and personnel , such as smaller or newer firms , may be unwilling or unable to sponsor plans .

financial resources: small employers , especially those with lower profit margins or an unstable cash flow , could be less willing or less able to sponsor a retirement plan .

one - time costs associated with starting a plan and the ongoing costs involved with maintaining the plan — as well as any requirement to match employee contributions or make mandatory contributions to an employee's account — were cited as barriers to plan sponsorship .

further , small employers we interviewed stated that general economic uncertainty makes them reluctant to commit to such long - term expenses and explained that they needed to reach a certain level of profitability before they would consider sponsoring a plan .

time and personnel: some small employers stated they may not have sufficient time to administer a plan themselves or lacked the personnel to take on those responsibilities .

further , small employers may not have time to develop the expertise needed to investigate and choose financial products , select the best investment options , or track their performance .

for example , one small employer described how business owners without the financial expertise to compare and select from among different plan options would likely find the experience intimidating .

some small employers we interviewed stated that they may be less likely to sponsor a retirement plan if they do not perceive sufficient benefits to the business or themselves .

for example , several small employers stated that their firms sponsored plans in order to provide owners with a tax - deferred retirement savings vehicle and one employer described how the firm annually assesses the plan to determine if it continues to benefit the owners .

additionally , a number of small employers stated that employees prioritized healthcare benefits over retirement benefits .

some small employers , such as those who described having younger or lower paid workforces , stated that their employees were less concerned about saving for retirement or were living paycheck to paycheck and did not have funds left over to contribute to a plan .

as a result , both types of workers were not demanding retirement benefits .

a number of small employers indicated that they use plan service providers to address various aspects of plan administration , which enabled them to overcome some of the challenges of starting and maintaining a plan .

for example , one employer noted that her business would not have the time or the expertise to administer its plan without the help of a service provider .

while some service providers said they offer affordable plan options and some small employers said the fees service providers charge were affordable , others said they were too high .

further , some stakeholders pointed to other limitations of using service providers , such as the difficulties of choosing providers , setting up a new plan through a provider , switching from one provider to another , as well as the significant responsibilities that may remain with the sponsor , such as managing plan enrollments and separations and carrying out their fiduciary duties , where applicable .

stakeholders proposed several options to address some of the administrative and financial challenges that inhibit plan sponsorship .

these options included simplifying plan administration rules , revising or eliminating top - heavy testing requirements , and increasing tax credits .

simplify plan administration requirements: some stakeholders suggested options that could simplify plan administration requirements .

options included reducing the frequency of statements sent to plan participants and allowing some required disclosures to be made available solely online .

irs officials stated that the agency is also considering proposals to replace a requirement for some interim amendments which stakeholders have identified as a burden for some small employers — with a requirement for notices to be sent directly to employees , which would reduce the number of times plan documents must be amended and submitted to irs .

revise or eliminate top - heavy testing: a number of stakeholders proposed revising or eliminating top - heavy testing requirements to ease administrative and financial burdens .

for example , representatives of the accounting profession told us that top - heavy testing is duplicative because other plan testing requirements help detect and prevent plan discrimination against rank - and - file employees .

representatives of a large service provider told us that lack of plan participation or high turnover among a business' rank - and file employees frequently cause plans sponsored by small employers to become top - heavy .

when statutes and regulations change , some sponsors may be required to modify plan documentation and submit it to irs .

each year since 2004 , irs has published a cumulative list of changes in plan requirements that must be incorporated by plan sponsors .

see , for example , irs notices 2011-97 .

increase tax credits: some stakeholders believed that tax credits , in general , are effective in encouraging plan sponsorship , but other stakeholders said that the current tax credit for starting a plan is insufficient .

a national organization representing small employers cited tax credits as a top factor in an employer's decision to sponsor a plan , adding that an employer's willingness to start a plan depends , to some degree , on the extent to which the tax credit offsets plan - related costs.similarly , some small employers stated that larger tax credits could ease the financial burden of starting a plan by offsetting plan - related costs .

additionally , one small employer said the incentive needs to be larger as sponsorship costs can amount to $2,000 or more per year .

numerous stakeholders agreed that the federal government could increase education and outreach efforts to inform small employers about plan options and requirements ; however , opinions varied on the appropriateness of the federal government's role in these efforts .

officials of a service provider to small employers stated that , because clients are generally not aware of the retirement plan options available to them , the federal government should offer more education and outreach to improve awareness of the types of plans that are available and the rules that apply to each .

several small employers also offered ideas .

for example , a small employer said the federal government should focus education and outreach efforts on service providers instead of on small employers .

conversely , some small employers said the federal government should have a limited role or no role in providing education and outreach efforts .

domestic pension reform proposals from public policy organizations , as well as practices in other countries , include features such as asset pooling that could reduce the administrative and financial burdens of small employers .

for example , one domestic proposal calls for the creation of a federally managed and federally guaranteed national savings plan .

under this proposal , participation in the program would generally be mandatory for workers ; both employers and employees would contribute to the plan ; and plan funds would be pooled and professionally managed .

by pooling funds , plan administration would be simplified and administrative costs and asset management fees would be reduced .

in addition , automatic iras — which are individual iras instead of employer - sponsored plans — are another proposal that draws from several elements of the current retirement system: payroll - deposit saving , automatic enrollment , and iras .

such a proposal would provide employers who do not sponsor any retirement plans with a mechanism that allows their employees to save for retirement .

however , as we reported in 2009 , such proposals pose trade - offs .

for example , although a proposal that mandates participation would increase plan sponsorship and coverage for workers , employers might offset the resulting sponsorship costs by reducing workers' wages and other benefits .

retirement systems in other countries also use asset pooling and other features that help reduce administrative and financial burdens for small employers .

for example , as we previously reported , the predominant pension systems in the netherlands and switzerland pool plan assets into pension funds for economies of scale and for lower plan fees .

the united kingdom's national employment savings trust ( nest ) features low fees for participating employers and employees and default investment strategies for plan participants .

with a significant portion of the private - sector workforce not covered by a pension plan at any one time , retirement security remains a critical issue for our nation .

based on the limited data available , we found the rate of plan sponsorship among small employers , a segment of the economy which employs about one third of all private sector workers , was only 14 percent in 2009 .

although one would expect that the high churn rate of small business formation and dissolution would impede small employer plan sponsorship , it also means that many millions of workers in this sector are without access to an employer - sponsored retirement savings plan .

thus , while remaining sensitive to the financial challenges currently facing our nation , expanding coverage among small employers should be an important consideration of national strategies seeking to strengthen the pension component of retirement income security .

our discussions with small employers and other stakeholders identified a variety of challenges small employers face in sponsoring retirement plans .

one initial problem is the inability of small employers to easily obtain useful information on how to establish and maintain plans .

although labor and irs already provide small employers with considerable online information about retirement plans , information is scattered across multiple federal websites and portals in a largely uncoordinated fashion , making it difficult for busy employers to navigate and locate what they need .

however , even if federal information about retirement plans were more accessible to small employers , our interviews with small employers identified a number of other significant challenges to plan sponsorship , including plan administration requirements that are perceived to be unduly complicated and burdensome , not having sufficient financial and personnel resources to sponsor a plan , and insufficient incentives to create and maintain a plan .

these challenges , while very real , are also complex and in many instances may not lend themselves to easy answers .

because the expertise to address these issues is spread across multiple agencies and departments that may not always communicate or work together effectively on these issues , there is the potential that inertia and other competing priorities will push these issues onto the back burner .

the report we are issuing today recommends the creation of a multiagency task force , to be overseen by the department of labor , that would explore and analyze these challenges in greater detail , including ways to make information more accessible , to streamline reporting and disclosure requirements in a thoughtful manner , and to identify the appropriateness and effectiveness of existing and proposed tax incentives and plan designs to boost sponsorship among small employers .

such a task force could help jump - start sustained action on what we consider to be an essential element of our nation's retirement security challenge and initiate a national dialogue on the critical issues of pension coverage finally , federal agencies' ability to address the challenges to small employer plan sponsorship depends in part on the availability of relevant , timely , and complete data .

during our work in estimating the extent of small employer plan sponsorship , we found that complete data on small employer plan sponsorship did not exist because irs did not have the means to collect information on employers that sponsor sep ira plans .

although there are about 1.5 million sep iras , many of these may be sponsored by larger businesses , and we simply do not know the distribution of these plans across all employers .

without a complete picture of small employer plan sponsorship rates , agencies may find it difficult to effectively target their research and outreach efforts .

thus , in our report we also recommend that the secretary of the treasury direct the commissioner of the internal revenue service to consider modifying existing tax forms , such as forms w - 2 or 5498 , to gather complete and reliable information about these plan types .

although the challenges that small employers face in sponsoring plans are significant , they can be addressed and with appropriate federal action and cooperation , as well as assistance from the service provider community .

while the department of treasury , irs , labor , sba , and the department of commerce generally agreed with our findings and conclusions , labor disagreed with our recommendation to create a single web portal for federal guidance on retirement plans for small employers .

because federal resources are scattered across different sites , we believe consolidating plan information onto one web portal can benefit small employers .

a complete discussion of our recommendations , labor's comments , and our response are provided in our full report .

chairman kohl and ranking member corker , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i am happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have .

for further questions on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include edward bodine , kun - fang lee , david lehrer , and david reed .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

