i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on opportunities for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to reduce overlap and potential unnecessary duplication in its programs , save tax dollars , enhance revenue , and address crosscutting and management issues that have affected its mission implementation efforts .

last september , the nation passed the 10-year anniversary of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

the events of that day led to profound changes in government agendas , policies , and structures to confront the homeland security threats facing the nation .

given dhs's significant leadership responsibilities in homeland security , it is critical that its programs are operating as efficiently and effectively as possible , are sustainable , and continue to mature to address pressing security needs .

dhs began operations in 2003 with key missions that include preventing terrorist attacks from occurring within the united states , reducing u.s. vulnerability to terrorism , minimizing resulting damages , and helping the nation recover from any attacks that may occur .

dhs is now the third - largest federal department , with more than 200,000 employees , and has an annual budget of almost $60 billion .

we have evaluated numerous departmental programs and efforts since dhs began its operations , and issued more than 1,200 reports and congressional testimonies in areas such as border security and immigration , transportation security , and emergency management , among others .

we have made more than 1,600 recommendations to dhs designed to strengthen its operations , such as to improve performance - measurement efforts , strengthen management processes , enhance coordination and information sharing , and increase the use of risk information in planning and resource allocation decisions , as well as to address gaps and challenges in its mission operations that have affected dhs's implementation efforts .

as of september 2011 , dhs had implemented about half of these recommendations , had actions underway to address others , and had taken additional steps to strengthen its operations .

however , as we have previously reported , the department has more to do to ensure that it conducts its missions efficiently and effectively , while simultaneously preparing to address future challenges that face the department and the nation .

in march 2011 and february 2012 , we reported on areas across the federal government , including dhs , that had duplicative goals or activities to inform government policymakers as they address the rapidly building fiscal pressures facing our national government .

these reports included more than 100 areas , some of which related to homeland security , where agencies , offices , or initiatives had similar or overlapping objectives or provided similar services to the same populations ; or where government missions were fragmented across multiple agencies or programs .

we reported that overlap and fragmentation among government programs or activities can be harbingers of potential unnecessary duplication and that reducing or eliminating potential unnecessary duplication , overlap , or fragmentation could potentially save billions of tax dollars annually and help agencies provide more efficient and effective services .

these reports also included opportunities for federal departments , including dhs , to consider taking action that could either reduce the cost of government operations or enhance revenue collections for the treasury .

moreover , in september 2011 , we issued a report summarizing progress made by dhs in implementing its homeland security missions 10 years after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001.had implemented key homeland security operations and achieved important goals in many areas to create and strengthen a foundation to reach its potential .

we also reported , however , that as dhs continues to mature , more work remains for it to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of those efforts to achieve its full potential .

as part of this work , we identified three key themes that affected dhs's implementation efforts .

my statement today , as requested , is based on these reports and addresses ( 1 ) opportunities for dhs to reduce overlap and potential unnecessary duplication in its programs , save tax dollars , and enhance revenue , and ( 2 ) crosscutting and management issues that have affected dhs's program - implementation efforts .

for these past reports , among other things , we analyzed dhs documents ; reviewed and updated our past reports , supplemented by dhs office of inspector general ( ig ) reports , issued since dhs began its operations in march 2003 ; and interviewed dhs officials .

we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

more detailed information on the scope and methodology from our previous work can be found within each specific report .

our march 2011 and february 2012 reports identified 6 areas across dhs where overlap or potential unnecessary duplication exists , and 17 specific actions that the department or congress could take to address these areas .

in our march 2011 report we suggested that dhs or congress take 11 actions to address the areas of overlap or potential unnecessary duplication that we found .

of these 11 actions , 1 has been fully addressed , 4 have been partially addressed , and the remaining 6 have not been addressed .

in many cases , the existence of overlap , potential unnecessary duplication , or fragmentation can be difficult to determine with precision due to a lack of data on programs and activities .

where information has not been available that would provide conclusive evidence of overlap , duplication , or fragmentation , we often refer to “potential unnecessary duplication.” in some cases , there is sufficient information available to show that if actions are taken to address individual issues , significant financial benefits may be realized .

in other cases , precise estimates of the extent of potential unnecessary duplication , and the cost savings that can be achieved by eliminating any such unnecessary duplication , are difficult to specify in advance of congressional and executive - branch decision making .

however , given the range of areas we identified at dhs and the magnitude of many of the programs , the cost savings associated with addressing these issues could be significant .

tables 1 and 2 summarize the areas of overlap and potential unnecessary duplication that we identified at dhs , the actions we identified for dhs and congress to consider to address those areas , and the status of those actions .

our 2011 and 2012 annual reports also identified 9 areas describing other opportunities for dhs or congress to consider taking action that could either reduce the cost of government operations or enhance revenue collection for the treasury .

we identified 23 specific actions that the department or congress could take to address these areas .

in our march 2011 report , we suggested that dhs or congress take 11 actions to either reduce the cost of government operations or enhance revenue collection .

of these 11 actions , 1 has been fully addressed and 10 have been partially addressed .

in some cases , there is sufficient information to estimate potential savings or other benefits if actions are taken to address individual issues .

in other cases , estimates of cost savings or other benefits would depend upon what congressional and executive branch decisions were made , including how certain gao recommendations are implemented .

additionally , information on program performance , the level of funding in agency budgets devoted to overlapping or fragmented programs , and the implementation costs that might be associated with program consolidations or terminations , are factors that could impact actions to be taken as well as potential savings .

tables 3 and 4 summarize the cost - savings and revenue enhancing areas that we reported on in march 2011 and february 2012 .

our work at dhs has identified three key themes — leading and coordinating the homeland security enterprise , implementing and integrating management functions for results , and strategically managing risks and assessing homeland security efforts — that have impacted the department's progress since it began operations .

as these themes have contributed to challenges in the department's management and operations , addressing them can result in increased efficiencies and effectiveness .

for example , dhs can help reduce cost overruns and performance shortfalls by strengthening the management of its acquisitions , and reduce inefficiencies and costs for homeland security by improving its r&d management .

these themes provide insights that can inform dhs's efforts , moving forward , as it works to implement its missions within a dynamic and evolving homeland security environment .

dhs made progress and has had successes in all of these areas , but our work found that these themes have been at the foundation of dhs's implementation challenges , and need to be addressed from a department wide perspective to effectively and efficiently position dhs for the future and enable it to satisfy the expectations set forth by the congress , the administration , and the country .

leading and coordinating the homeland security enterprise .

while dhs is one of a number of entities with a role in securing the homeland , it has significant leadership and coordination responsibilities for managing efforts across the homeland security enterprise .

to satisfy these responsibilities , it is critically important that dhs develop , maintain , and leverage effective partnerships with its stakeholders , while at the same time addressing dhs - specific responsibilities in satisfying its missions .

before dhs began operations , we reported that the quality and continuity of the new department's leadership would be critical to building and sustaining the long - term effectiveness of dhs and achieving homeland security goals and objectives .

we further reported that to secure the nation , dhs must form effective and sustained partnerships between components and also with a range of other entities , including federal agencies , state and local governments , the private and nonprofit sectors , and international partners .

dhs has made important strides in providing leadership and coordinating efforts .

for example , it has improved coordination and clarified roles with state and local governments for emergency management .

dhs also strengthened its partnerships and collaboration with foreign governments to coordinate and standardize security practices for aviation security .

however , dhs needs to take additional action to forge effective partnerships and strengthen the sharing and utilization of information , which has affected its ability to effectively satisfy its missions .

for example , in july 2010 , we reported that the expectations of private - sector stakeholders have not been met by dhs and its federal partners in areas related to sharing information about cyber - based threats to critical infrastructure .

in 2005 , we designated information - sharing for homeland security as high risk because the federal government faced serious challenges in analyzing information and sharing it among partners in a timely , accurate , and useful way.failure to link information about the individual who attempted to conduct the december 25 , 2009 , airline bombing , prevented the individual from being included on the federal government's consolidated terrorist watchlist , a tool used by dhs to screen for persons who pose risks to the country .

the federal government and dhs have made progress , but more work remains for dhs to streamline its information sharing mechanisms and better meet partners' needs .

moving forward , it will be important that dhs continue to enhance its focus and efforts to strengthen and leverage the broader homeland security enterprise , and build off the important progress that it has made thus far .

in addressing ever - changing and complex threats , and with the vast array of partners with whom dhs must coordinate , continued leadership and stewardship will be critical in achieving this end .

gao , high - risk series: an update , gao - 11-278 , ( washington , d.c.: feb. 2011 ) .

acquisition and information technology management policies and controls , to provide enhanced guidance on investment decision making .

dhs also reduced its financial management material weaknesses and developed strategies to strengthen human capital management .

for example , in fiscal year 2011 , dhs moved from a disclaimer of opinion to a qualified audit opinion on its balance sheet and statement of custodial activity for the first time since 2003 .

however , dhs has not been able to obtain an unqualified audit opinion on its consolidated financial statements ( i.e. , prepare a set of financial statements that are considered fairly presented ) though its current goal is to receive an unqualified , or clean opinion , on the departmentwide consolidated financial statement for fiscal year 2013 .

dhs needs to continue to demonstrate sustainable progress in addressing its challenges , as these issues have contributed to schedule delays , cost increases , and performance problems in major programs aimed at delivering important mission capabilities .

for example , we reported on numerous cost , schedule , and performance risks , and concluded that dhs had not economically justified its investment in the secure border initiative network , dhs's border security technology program .

more specifically , dhs did not adequately define requirements , perform testing , or oversee contractors , delaying security enhancements on the southwest border .

after initiating a departmentwide assessment of the program , the secretary of homeland security froze program funding and , at the completion of the assessment in january 2011 , the secretary decided to end the secure border initiative network as originally conceived after investing nearly $1 billion in the program .

dhs also has not yet fully implemented its roles and responsibilities for developing and implementing key homeland security programs and initiatives .

for example , fema has not yet developed a set of target capabilities for disaster preparedness or established metrics for assessing those capabilities to provide a framework for evaluating preparedness , as required by the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 .

moreover , dhs does not yet have enough personnel with required skills to carry out activities in various areas , such as acquisition management ; and is in the process of modernizing its financial management system , impacting its ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making .

moving forward , addressing these management challenges will be critical for dhs's success , as will be the integration of these functions across the department to achieve efficiencies and effectiveness .

gao , aviation security: dhs and tsa have researched , developed , and begun deploying passenger checkpoint screening technologies , but continue to face challenges , gao - 10-128 ( washington , d.c.: oct. 7 , 2009 ) .

using nuclear and radiological materials through coordinated activities .

however , the strategic plan for the architecture did not include some key components , such as funding needed to achieve the strategic plan's objectives , or monitoring mechanisms for determining programmatic progress and identifying needed improvements .

further , dhs has made important progress in analyzing risk across sectors , but it has more work to do in using this information to inform planning and resource - allocation decisions .

risk management has been widely supported by congress and dhs as a management approach for homeland security , enhancing the department's ability to make informed decisions and prioritize resource investments .

since dhs does not have unlimited resources and cannot protect the nation from every conceivable threat , it must make risk - informed decisions regarding its homeland security approaches and strategies .

moreover , we have reported on the need for enhanced performance assessment , that is , evaluating existing programs and operations to determine whether they are operating as intended or are in need of change , across dhs's missions.programs is critical for helping the department , congress , and other stakeholders more systematically assess strengths and weaknesses and inform decision making .

in recent years , dhs has placed an increased emphasis on strengthening its mechanisms for assessing the performance and effectiveness of its homeland security programs .

for example , dhs established new performance measures , and modified existing ones , to better assess many of its programs and efforts .

however , our work has found that dhs continues to miss opportunities to optimize performance across its missions due to a lack of reliable performance information or assessment of existing information ; evaluation among possible alternatives ; and , as appropriate , adjustment of programs or operations that are not meeting mission needs .

for example , we reported that cbp had invested $2.4 billion in tactical infrastructure ( fencing , roads , and lighting ) along the southwest border , but could not measure the impact of this investment in tactical information on the performance of infrastructure on border security .

as the department further matures and seeks to optimize its operations , dhs will need to look beyond immediate requirements ; assess programs' sustainability across the long term , particularly in light of constrained budgets ; and evaluate trade - offs within and among programs across the homeland security enterprise .

doing so should better equip dhs to adapt and respond to new threats in a sustainable manner as it works to address existing ones .

given dhs's significant leadership responsibilities in securing the homeland , it is critical that the department's programs and activities are operating as efficiently and effectively as possible , are sustainable , and that they continue to mature , evolve , and adapt to address pressing security needs .

since it began operations in 2003 , dhs has implemented key homeland security operations and achieved important goals and milestones in many areas .

these accomplishments are especially noteworthy given that the department has had to work to transform itself into a fully functioning cabinet department while implementing its missions — a difficult undertaking for any organization and one that can take years to achieve even under less - daunting circumstances .

however , our work has shown that dhs can take actions to reduce overlap and potential unnecessary duplication to improve the efficiency of its operations and achieve cost - savings in several areas .

further , while dhs has made progress , additional actions are needed to strengthen partnerships with stakeholders , improve its management processes and share information , and enhance its risk management and performance - measurement efforts to enhance effectiveness and achieve efficiencies throughout the department .

chairman mccaul , ranking member keating , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared testimony .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact cathleen a. berrick at ( 202 ) 512-3404 or berrickc@gao.gov .

in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are chris currie , emily gunn , and taylor matheson .

key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed within each individual product .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

