millions of americans obtain health coverage by purchasing private health insurance plans in the individual market .

these americans purchase health insurance for a variety of reasons , including being self - employed or a small business owner , or because their own employer does not offer insurance .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , as of 2014 , changed how insurers determine health insurance premiums and how consumers shop for individual market health insurance plans .

for example , ppaca prohibited insurers from denying coverage to any individuals and from varying premiums based on consumer health status or gender .

it also established limits on premium variation based on age , geographic location , and other factors .

in addition , ppaca established requirements for the benefits that must be covered by health plans — referred to as essential health benefits — and required insurers to market their plans according to defined categories comparing the extent to which the plans would be expected to cover the costs of enrollees' medical care .

ppaca also required the establishment of health insurance exchanges in each state beginning in 2014 — marketplaces through which individual market consumers can compare and select health insurance coverage from among all the health plans participating in the exchange .

some states have established their own exchanges — referred to as state - based exchanges ( sbe ) .

for consumers in states that have not done so , a federal exchange has been established — which we refer to as the federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) .

in general , plans available on either an sbe or the ffe are also available for sale outside of the exchange .

the combination of all of these provisions allowed consumers to directly compare the individual market health insurance plans available to them based on premium costs , benefits covered , and plan generosity .

you asked us to examine the health plan options available to individual market consumers under this new paradigm , the extent to which plan options and premium costs available to consumers vary throughout the united states , and how the plan options available in 2014 compared to those in 2015 .

this report examines: ( 1 ) the numbers of health insurance plans available to individual market consumers and how they changed from 2014 to 2015 , and ( 2 ) the range of health insurance premiums in 2014 and 2015 and how they changed for individual market consumers in each state and county for selected consumers .

for both of our objectives we reviewed applicable statutes , regulations , guidance , and other documentation , and we analyzed two sources of data maintained by the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) , center for consumer information and insurance oversight ( cciio ) — the ffe and plan finder databases — which included information on health plans offered to consumers in calendar years 2014 and 2015 .

the ffe database included data on all of the plans that were offered through the ffe .

these data were publicly available to consumers shopping for ffe health plans using the healthcare.gov website .

the plan finder database included information on plans offered outside an exchange , including those offered exclusively outside the exchanges as well as those available on or off the exchanges .

these data were publicly available to consumers shopping for health plans through the plan finder online portal .

the premium amounts and supporting plan information in the ffe and plan finder data sources were self - reported by each insurer , and each insurer was required to comply with a data validation and attestation process .

using these data , we analyzed aspects of plans offered to certain categories of consumers at the state and county level , whether or not the plans were offered on or off of an exchange .

these included analyses of the numbers of plans and premium costs available to the consumers in each year and analyses of the changes in these numbers and costs between 2014 and 2015 .

we selected the consumer categories to represent the broad range of consumers who would shop for individual market insurance .

they included nonsmoking: individuals , aged 19 ; individuals , aged 30 ; families of four , parents aged 40 ; couples aged 55 ; and individuals , aged 64 .

we also conducted analyses at the state and county level that focused on plans offered through an exchange for these same categories of consumers .

our analyses focused on two categories of plans — exchange plans ( plans that were available on an exchange ) and all plans ( whether or not they were available on an exchange ) — for both 2014 and 2015 .

our analyses do not reflect the entire universe of insurers' premiums for plans sold on the sbes or plans not sold through exchanges , because the data for plans sold on the sbes or plans not sold through exchanges in the plan finder database were incomplete .

because of this , we made certain exceptions in our reporting and only reported data for states for which we had sufficiently reliable data , as follows: for our analysis of the numbers of health insurance plans available to individual market consumers and how they changed from 2014 to 2015 , we excluded from our analyses states where the percentage of plans that reported premium data was less than 70 percent of the universe of plans in either of the 2 years .

we also excluded the state of virginia from our analyses because the 2014 ffe data for that state included data that appeared to be erroneous .

after these exclusions , our analyses of all plans included data from 28 of the 50 states and the 1,886 counties within those states , and our analysis that was limited to exchange plans included data for 38 of the 50 states and the 2,613 counties within those states .

for our analysis showing the range of health insurance premiums in 2014 and 2015 by county and year , we applied the same exclusions noted above for all comparisons of data across years .

in an interactive graphic that reports the range of premiums by state and county , we reported all data that was deemed sufficiently reliable for each combination of plan category ( exchange or all plans ) and year .

as a result , we reported data for 49 states , including: complete sets of data for 25 states for which we had sufficiently reliable data for both plan categories in both years ; and partial sets of data for 24 states for which we had sufficiently reliable data only for certain elements .

for example , in a state where we had information for fewer than 70 percent of exchange plans in a given year , the interactive graphic does not include any values for exchange plans for that state in that year .

we did not include any data for one state ( washington ) or for the district of columbia because the data were not sufficiently reliable in either of the plan categories in either year .

see appendix i for details on the reliability of the data for each state .

to assess the reliability of the ffe data we interviewed cciio officials with knowledge of these data .

officials confirmed that because the data we obtained included all of the ffe health plan information that was publicly available to consumers shopping for ffe insurance plans using the healthcare.gov website , those data effectively represented the full universe of ffe plans and premium values available to consumers in each year .

to assess the reliability of the plan finder data , we reviewed the requirements for the data validation and attestation process ; reviewed documentation on the database that houses the information submitted to cciio ; and interviewed key cciio officials responsible for overseeing the submission and maintenance of the data .

this allowed us to determine that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from august 2014 to august 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

beginning january 1 , 2014 , ppaca required that health insurance plans , whether sold on or off an exchange , offer a comprehensive package of items and services — known as essential health benefits .

at the same time , ppaca required most individuals to maintain minimum essential coverage for themselves and their dependents or pay a tax penalty — this requirement is commonly referred to as the individual mandate .

individuals who do not have other insurance coverage , such as from an employer , may satisfy this requirement by maintaining coverage under health plans offered in the individual market .

certain ppaca provisions affected the way individual market plans are marketed for consumers .

in particular , ppaca standardized health insurance plans into four “metal” tiers of coverage — bronze , silver , gold , and platinum — which reflect out - of - pocket costs that may be incurred by an enrollee .

bronze plans tend to have the lowest premiums but leave consumers subject to the highest out - of - pocket costs when they receive health care services , while platinum plans tend to have the highest premiums and the lowest out - of - pocket costs .

the generosity of each metal tier is measured by the plan's actuarial value ( av ) .

av is expressed as the percentage of covered medical expenses estimated to be paid by the insurer for a standard population and set of allowed charges for in - network providers .

the higher the av percentage , the lower the expected enrollee cost sharing .

for example , for a plan with an av of 70 percent , it is expected that , on average , enrollee cost sharing under that plan will be 30 percent of the cost of care , while for a plan with an av of 80 percent , it is expected that , on average , enrollee cost sharing under that plan will be 20 percent of the cost of care .

ppaca includes standards related to av and assigns a specific actuarial value to each of the four metal tiers: bronze ( av = 60 percent ) ; silver ( av =70 percent ) ; gold ( av = 80 percent ) ; and platinum ( av = 90 percent ) .

if an insurer sells a plan on an exchange , it must at least offer one plan at the silver level and one plan at the gold level .

insurers are not required to offer bronze or platinum versions of their plans in order to participate on exchanges .

ppaca provisions also affected the way individual market plans are priced for consumers .

for example , ppaca prohibited health insurers from varying health insurance plan premiums on the basis of factors other than age , geographic location and tobacco use — for which limits were established .

for example , the age factor used to adjust premiums may vary by no more than a 3 to 1 ratio for adults aged 21 and older and must use a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across all adult age bands .

premium variation based on health status or gender was effectively prohibited .

ppaca does not require insurers to offer plans through the state or federal exchanges .

similarly , it does not require consumers to purchase plans through the exchanges ; however , there are incentives for many consumers to do so .

for example , certain consumers earning from 100 to 400 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible to receive premium tax credits that can reduce premium costs , but only for plans purchased through an exchange .

similarly , certain consumers earning from more than 100 percent to 250 percent of the federal poverty level are eligible to receive additional subsidies that help them pay for the out of pocket costs , but only for silver plans purchased through an exchange .

also , the sbes and ffe allow consumers to comparison shop for plans and enroll in a plan online , whether or not consumers are eligible for premium tax credits or cost sharing subsidies .

individual market consumers in every county in our analysis had access to a variety of plan options each year , and the number of plans available to consumers generally increased from 2014 to 2015 .

for example , in 28 states for which we had reliable data for all plans ( offered either on or off exchanges ) , the percentage of counties for which six or more plan options were available to consumers increased from 2014 to 2015 for three of the metal tiers — bronze , silver , and gold — and in 2015 consumers in every county in these states had access to six or more plans in each of these three metal tiers .

further , in 2015 , among the 38 states where we focused our analysis on plans offered on an exchange , we found that consumers in 88 percent of the counties had access to six or more bronze exchange plans , consumers in 94 percent of counties had access to six or more silver exchange plans , and consumers in 71 percent of counties had access to six or more gold exchange plans .

not all consumers had access to platinum plans , however , the availability of platinum plans generally also increased from 2014 to 2015 .

 ( see table 1. ) .

we also found that the lowest - cost plan options available in a county were available on an exchange in a majority of the counties included in our analysis .

for example , among the 1,886 counties in the 28 states for which we had sufficiently reliable data for plans both on and off an exchange , we found that the lowest - cost silver plan option for a 30-year old was available on an exchange in 63 percent of the counties in 2014 and in 81 percent of the counties in 2015 — an increase of 18 percentage points .

the premiums for the lowest - cost plan options available in each state included in our analysis varied significantly from state to state .

for example , in arizona ( a state for which the lowest - cost premiums were among the lowest in the country ) the lowest - cost silver plan options for a 30-year - old were $147 per month in both years for plans both on and off an exchange .

by contrast , in maine ( a state for which the lowest - cost premiums were among the highest in the country ) the lowest - cost silver plan options for a 30-year - old were $252 in 2014 and $237 in 2015 for plans both on and off an exchange .

based on the full premium costs , on an annual basis in 2015 a 30-year - old in arizona who was not eligible for a premium tax credit could have spent $1,082 less on the lowest - cost silver plan available to them compared to what the same consumer in maine could have spent on the lowest - cost silver plan available to them .

the findings were similar when we conducted our analysis of plans offered on exchanges in 38 states .

because each state in our analysis uses a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across all adult age bands , each state would have the same relative differences in premiums for all adult age categories .

 ( see table 2. ) .

the premiums for the median - cost plan options available in each state included in our analysis also varied widely .

for example , in both years hawaii had among the lowest median premium costs for silver plans offered to a 30-year - old either on or off the exchange — $217 per month in 2014 and $180 per month in 2015 .

by contrast , in both years colorado had among the highest median premium costs for such plans — $343 per month in 2014 and $369 per month in 2015 .

in most states , the costs for the minimum and median premiums for silver plans increased from 2014 to 2015 .

for example , in the 28 states included in our analysis , from 2014 to 2015 the minimum premium values for silver plans available to a 30-year - old increased in 18 states , decreased in 9 states , and remained unchanged in 1 state .

similarly , in these same states the median premium values for silver plans available to 30-year - old increased in 19 states , decreased in 8 states and remained unchanged in 1 state .

further , in general , states with higher than average minimum premiums in 2014 were more likely to have declines in 2015 premiums than the states with lower than average minimum premiums in 2014 .

for example , the average minimum monthly premium value for the silver plan option for a 30-year - old in 2014 in the 28 states included in our analysis was $193 for plans offered on or off an exchange .

of the 13 states with 2014 premiums for this group of consumers that were greater than $193 , eight had lower minimum premiums in 2015 .

of the 15 states with 2014 premiums for this group of consumers that were less than $193 , only one state had a lower minimum premium in 2015 .

when analyzing premium costs at the county level , we found that from 2014 to 2015 , premiums were more likely to increase than decrease .

for example , our analysis of the minimum premiums for silver plans in states where we analyzed data on plans offered either on or off exchanges found that premiums for a 30-year - old increased by 5 percent or more in 51 percent of the counties .

during the same time period , premiums for these plans decreased by 5 percent or more in nearly 17 percent of the counties , and increased or decreased by less than 5 percent in 32 percent of the counties .

the findings were similar when we repeated this analysis using the median premium value in each county and when we limited the analysis to plans offered on exchanges .

because each state in our analysis uses a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across all adult age bands , each state would have the same relative differences in premiums for all adult age categories .

 ( see table 3. ) .

we found that the range of premiums — from the lowest to highest cost — available to consumers differed considerably for the states included in our analysis .

for example , our analysis of premiums for silver plans available to a 30-year - old either on or off an exchange found that the ranges of premiums available were much more narrow in rhode island compared to arizona .

in rhode island , 2014 premiums for plans ranged from a low of $241 per month to a high of $266 per month , a difference of 10 percent , and in 2015 ranged from a low of $217 per month to a high of $285 per month , a difference of 32 percent .

by contrast , in arizona , 2014 premiums for these plans ranged from a low of $147 per month to a high of $508 per month , a difference of 244 percent , and in 2015 ranged from a low of $147 per month to a high of $545 per month , a difference of 270 percent .

in addition , between 2014 and 2015 , the range from the lowest - to highest - cost premiums available by state became wider in 18 out of the 28 states included in this analysis .

the findings were similar when we conducted our analysis for plans offered on exchanges in 38 states .

we also found that the percentage difference between the minimum and maximum premium in the states included in our analysis was generally higher in states where the average number of plans available per county was higher .

for example , in both years , states with an average of 30 or more plans per county had among the widest ranges between the lowest and highest premium amounts .

by contrast , states with an average of 15 or fewer plans per county had among the narrowest ranges between the lowest and highest premium amounts .

 ( see table 4. ) .

because each state in our analysis uses a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across all adult age bands , each state would have the same relative differences in premiums for all adult age categories .

when analyzing ranges at the county level , we found that among all the counties in our analysis , the range of premiums available for different plan options generally widened from 2014 to 2015 .

for example , among the 1,886 counties in the 28 states for which we had sufficiently reliable data on all plans offered on or off an exchange , we found that the range in silver plan premiums for a 30-year - old in 2015 was wider in 79 percent of the counties compared to 2014 .

the findings were similar when we conducted our analysis for plans offered on exchanges in 38 states .

in the interactive graphic linked to below , we provide files showing the range of health insurance premiums , by county , that were available to selected categories of consumers for exchange plans and all plans ( whether or not they were available on an exchange ) — for both 2014 and 2015 .

twenty - five states include complete sets of data for both years .

twenty - four states include partial data if certain date elements were not sufficiently reliable to report .

for example , in a state where we had information for fewer than 70 percent of exchange plans in a given year , we do not report any values for exchange plans for that state in that year .

we do not include any data for the state of washington or the district of columbia because the data were either not available or not sufficient in both years .

see figure 1 for an illustration of premium information available via the interactive map available at the website .

this graphic can be viewed by linking to the interactive map found at http: / / www.gao.gov / products / gao - 15-687 .

we received technical comments on a draft of this report from the department of health and human services and incorporated them as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

appendix i: states included and excluded from gao's analyses offered on an exchange for facilitated exchange ( ffe ) or state based “all plans” analyses exchange ( sbe ) exchange ( y or n ) ( y or n ) n offered on an exchange for facilitated exchange ( ffe ) or state based “all plans” analyses exchange ( sbe ) exchange ( y or n ) ( y or n ) we excluded 2014 data for virginia from our analyses because , even though the percentage of plans that reported premiums data was greater than 70 percent of the universe of plans in 2014 , there were several outliers that made the data unreliable for this year .

in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report include gerardine brennan , assistant director ; todd anderson ; george bogart ; matthew byer ; and laurie pachter .

