since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , the department of defense ( dod ) has increasingly relied on reservists to support military operations , such as the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

this has increased both the number of selected reserve members — reservists who are considered essential to wartime missions — supporting dod's current operations and the duration of their active duty service .

in recognition of this , congress has increased the health care benefits available to reservists and their dependents , which include spouses and dependent children .

specifically , the national defense authorization acts ( ndaa ) for fiscal years 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , and 2010 expanded the number of reservists ( including selected reserve members ) who qualify for tricare , the military health care program , and increased the period of time during which they qualify .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 also established the program that dod has named tricare reserve select ( trs ) , under which most members of the selected reserve who are not on active duty may purchase tricare coverage after the coverage associated with active duty expires .

trs is the same benefit as tricare standard , a fee - for - service option , and tricare extra , a preferred provider option .

all three programs cover health care provided at military treatment facilities and through civilian providers , both network ( tricare extra ) and nonnetwork ( tricare standard ) .

however , unlike tricare beneficiaries who use the standard and extra options , trs enrollees must pay a monthly premium to receive benefits through the program .

in recent years , members of congress have raised questions about whether reservists , including members of the selected reserve , and their dependents have adequate health insurance when they are not on active duty and whether they have difficulty using tricare when they are eligible for it .

in 2007 , we reported on several issues related to reservists , including dod's efforts to educate reservists and their dependents about tricare benefits , reservists' satisfaction with tricare , and the types of problems that reservists and their dependents experienced when using tricare .

we found that dod was challenged by the task of educating reservists and their dependents about tricare , and we recommended that dod provide additional briefings to reservists and their dependents at specific points in time .

we also found that although a majority of reservists reported that they were satisfied with their tricare benefits , some reservists reported experiencing difficulties when using the program , including difficulties understanding tricare and difficulties finding a health care provider who accepted tricare beneficiaries as patients .

subsequent to our report , the commission on the national guard and reserves reported to congress in 2008 that the tricare management activity ( tma ) — the dod entity responsible for overseeing tricare — and the military services have not undertaken a sufficiently aggressive educational campaign to help improve reservists' and their families' understanding of tricare .

more recently , groups representing military beneficiaries told us that they were concerned about low enrollment within the trs program , and they questioned whether these enrollment numbers are the result of inadequate education by dod .

according to dod officials , as of december 2010 about 392,000 of the more than 858,000 members of the selected reserve were eligible for trs .

of these , about 67,000 members ( 17 percent ) had purchased trs .

concerns have also been expressed about the ability of reservists , including members of the selected reserve , and their families to access health care .

in june 2007 , dod's task force on mental health reported that because reservists may not live near military installations like their active duty counterparts , they may not have convenient access to military hospitals and clinics and must instead rely more heavily on civilian providers for their care .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 directed us to review dod's efforts to educate members of the selected reserve about trs and access to care for trs beneficiaries .

this report examines ( 1 ) how dod ensures that members of the selected reserve are informed about trs and ( 2 ) how dod monitors and evaluates access to civilian providers for trs beneficiaries .

to examine how dod ensures that members of the selected reserve are informed about trs and how dod monitors and evaluates access to civilian providers for trs beneficiaries , we interviewed officials with tma , including officials with the warrior support branch , which oversees trs , and officials with the communications and customer service division , which develops educational materials for tricare .

we also interviewed officials from each of the three tricare regional offices ( north , south , and west ) and officials from each of the regional managed care support contractors ( contractors ) to discuss their responsibilities for educating members of the selected reserve about tricare , including trs , and for ensuring beneficiaries' access to civilian providers .

in addition , we interviewed officials from military coalition groups that represent reservists to obtain their perspectives on trs education and access to civilian providers .

to identify trs education requirements , we reviewed and analyzed policy guidelines and tricare managed care support contract requirements .

we interviewed officials with the office of reserve affairs as well as officials from each of the seven reserve components to identify their role in educating the selected reserve about tricare .

we also reviewed relevant standards for internal control in the federal government .

additionally , we evaluated two surveys conducted by dod that collected information on whether members of the selected reserve were aware of the trs program — the status of forces survey and the focused survey of tricare reserve select and selected reserve military health system access and satisfaction .

to determine how dod monitors and evaluates access to civilian providers for trs , we reviewed tma's beneficiary surveys on access to civilian providers under tricare standard , tricare extra , and trs .

we also reviewed the tricare regional offices' recent efforts to evaluate the adequacy of access to civilian providers under the tricare standard , tricare extra , and trs options .

additionally , we evaluated an analysis of claims conducted by tma — at our request — that compared claims filed by tricare standard and extra beneficiaries with those filed by trs beneficiaries for fiscal years 2008 through 2010 to identify demographic differences between these populations and to determine whether these populations used similar types of providers and obtained similar types of care .

we assessed the reliability of these data by speaking with knowledgeable officials and reviewing related documentation , and we determined that the claims analyses presented in this report are sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

 ( see app .

i for more detail about the claims analyses. ) .

we also reviewed efforts by tma to identify locations of the selected reserve members and analyze whether they resided within an area that was served by a tricare provider network .

finally , we reviewed tma's efforts to repeat its survey that is specific to the trs program ( focused survey of tricare reserve select and selected reserve military health system access and satisfaction ) .

we conducted this performance audit from july 2010 through june 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

reservists are members of the seven reserve components , which provide trained and qualified persons available for active duty in the armed forces in time of war or national emergency .

the selected reserve is the largest category of reservists and is designated as essential to wartime missions .

the selected reserve is also the only category of reservists that is eligible for trs .

as of december 31 , 2010 , the selected reserve included 858,997 members dispersed among the seven reserve components with about two - thirds belonging to the army reserve and the army national guard .

see figure 1 for the number and percentage of selected reserve members within each reserve component .

additionally , about two - thirds of the selected reserve members are 35 years old or younger ( 64 percent ) and about half are single ( 52 percent ) .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 authorized the trs program and made tricare coverage available to certain members of the selected reserve .

the program was subsequently expanded and restructured by the ndaas for fiscal years 2006 and 2007 — although additional program changes were made in subsequent years .

in fiscal year 2005 , to qualify for trs , members of the selected reserve had to enter into an agreement with their respective reserve components to continue to serve in the selected reserve in exchange for trs coverage , and they were given 1 year of trs eligibility for every 90 days served in support of a contingency operation .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2006 , which became effective on october 1 , 2006 , expanded the program , and almost all members of the selected reserve and their dependents — regardless of their prior active duty service — had the option of purchasing tricare coverage through a monthly premium .

the portion of the premium paid by the members of the selected reserve and their dependents for trs coverage varied based on certain qualifying conditions that had to be met , such as whether the member of the selected reserve also had access to an employer - sponsored health plan .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2006 established two levels — which dod called tiers — of qualification for trs , in addition to the tier established by the ndaa for fiscal year 2005 , with enrollees paying different portions of the premium based on the tier for which they qualified .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2007 significantly restructured the trs program by eliminating the three - tiered premium structure and establishing open enrollment for members of the selected reserve provided that they are not eligible for or currently enrolled in the fehb program .

the act removed the requirement that members of the selected reserve sign service agreements to qualify for trs .

instead , the act established that members of the selected reserve qualify for trs for the duration of their service in the selected reserve .

dod implemented these changes on october 1 , 2007 .

generally , tricare provides its benefits through several options for its non - medicare - eligible beneficiary population .

these options vary according to tricare beneficiary enrollment requirements , the choices tricare beneficiaries have in selecting civilian and military treatment facility providers , and the amount tricare beneficiaries must contribute toward the cost of their care .

table 1 provides information about these options .

selected reserve members have a cycle of coverage during which they are eligible for different tricare options based on their duty status — preactivation , active duty , deactivation , and inactive .

during preactivation , when members of the selected reserve are notified that they will serve on active duty in support of a contingency operation in the near future , they and their families are eligible to enroll in tricare prime , and therefore , they do not need to purchase trs coverage .

this is commonly referred to as “early eligibility” and continues uninterrupted once members of the selected reserve begin active duty .

while on active duty , members are required to enroll in tricare prime .

similarly during deactivation , for 180 days after returning from active duty in support of a contingency operation , members of the selected reserve are rendered eligible for the transitional assistance management program , a program to transition back to civilian life in which members and dependents can use the tricare standard or extra options .

when members of the selected reserve return to inactive status , they can choose to purchase trs coverage if eligible .

as a result of the tricare coverage cycle and program eligibility requirements , tma officials estimate that at any given time , fewer than half of the members of the selected reserve are qualified to purchase trs .

currently , to qualify for trs , a member of the selected reserve must not be eligible for the fehb program , have been notified that he or she will serve on active duty in support of a be serving on active duty or have recently , that is , within 180 days , returned from active duty in support of a contingency operation .

of the more than 390,000 members eligible , about 67,000 members were enrolled in trs as of december 31 , 2010 .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

a number of different dod entities have various responsibilities related to trs .

within the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , the office of the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs works with the seven reserve components to determine whether members of the selected reserve are eligible for trs and to ensure that members have information about tricare , including trs .

within tma , the warrior support branch is responsible for managing the trs option , which includes developing policy and regulations .

this office also works with tma's communication and customer service division to develop educational materials for this program .

the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs oversees tma and reports to the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness .

tma works with contractors to manage civilian health care and other services in each tricare region ( north , south , and west ) .

the contractors are required to establish and maintain sufficient networks of civilian providers within certain designated areas , called prime service areas , to ensure access to civilian providers for all tricare beneficiaries , regardless of enrollment status or medicare eligibility .

they are also responsible for helping tricare beneficiaries locate providers and for informing and educating tricare beneficiaries and providers on all aspects of the tricare program , including trs .

tma's tricare regional offices , located in each of the three tricare regions , are responsible for managing health care delivery for all tricare options in their respective geographic areas and overseeing the contractors , including monitoring network quality and adequacy , monitoring customer satisfaction outcomes , and coordinating appointment and referral management policies .

dod does not have reasonable assurance that members of the selected reserve are informed about trs for several reasons .

first , the reserve components do not have a centralized point of contact to ensure that members are educated about the program .

second , the contractors are challenged in their ability to educate the reserve component units in their respective regions because they do not have comprehensive information about the units in their areas of responsibility .

and , finally , dod cannot say with certainty whether selected reserve members are knowledgeable about trs because the results of two surveys that gauged members' awareness of the program may not be representative of the selected reserve population because of low response rates .

a 2007 policy from the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness designated the reserve components as having responsibility for providing information about trs to members of the selected reserve at least once a year .

when the policy was first issued , officials from the office of reserve affairs — who have oversight responsibility for the reserve components — told us that they met with officials from each of the reserve components to discuss how the components would fulfill this responsibility .

however , according to officials from the office of reserve affairs , they have not met with the reserve components since 2008 to discuss how the components are fulfilling their trs education responsibilities under the policy .

these officials explained that they have experienced difficulties identifying a representative from each of the reserve components to attend meetings about trs education .

when we contacted officials from all seven reserve components to discuss trs education , we had similar experiences .

three of the components had difficulties providing a point of contact .

in fact , two of the components took several months to identify an official whom we could speak with about trs education , and the other one had difficulties identifying someone who could answer our follow - up questions when our original point of contact was no longer available .

furthermore , officials from three of the seven components told us that they were not aware of this policy .

regardless of their knowledge of the 2007 policy , officials from all of the reserve components told us that education responsibilities are delegated to their unit commanders .

these responsibilities include informing members about their health options , which would include trs .

all of the components provide various means of support to their unit commanders to help fulfill this responsibility .

for example , three of the components provide information about tricare directly to their unit commanders or the commanders' designees through briefings .

the four other components provide information to their unit commanders through other means , such as policy documents , web sites , and newsletters .

additionally , while most of the components had someone designated to answer tricare benefit questions , only one of the reserve components had an official at the headquarters level designated as a central point of contact for tricare education , including trs .

this official told us that he was unaware of the specific 2007 trs education policy ; however , he said his responsibilities for trs education include developing annual communication plans , providing briefings to unit commanders , and publishing articles in the air force magazine about trs .

designating a point of contact is important because a key factor in meeting standards for internal control in federal agencies is defining and assigning key areas of authority and responsibility — such as a point of contact for a specific policy .

without a point of contact to ensure that this policy is implemented , the reserve components are running the risk that some of their selected reserve members may not be receiving information about the trs program — especially since some of the reserve component officials we met with were unaware of the policy .

the tricare contractors are required to provide an annual briefing about trs to each reserve component unit in their regions , including both reserve and national guard units .

all three contractors told us that they maintain education representatives who are responsible for educating members of the selected reserve on trs .

these representatives conduct unit outreach and provide information to members of the selected reserve at any time during predeployment and demobilization , at family events , and during drill weekends .

the contractors use briefing materials maintained by tma and posted on the tricare web site .

in addition to conducting briefings , the three contractors have increased their outreach efforts in various ways , including creating an online tutorial that explains trs , mailing trs information to selected reserve members , and working closely with family program coordinators to provide trs information to family members .

however , the contractors are challenged in their ability to meet their requirement for briefing all units annually .

first , they typically provide briefings to units upon request because this approach is practical based upon units' schedules and availability .

for example , officials from one contractor told us that even though they know when geographically dispersed units will be gathering in one location , these units have busy schedules and may not have time for the contractor to provide a briefing .

each contractor records the briefings that are requested , when the briefing requests were fulfilled and by whom , and any questions or concerns that resulted from the briefings .

however , some unit commanders do not request briefings from the contractors .

for example , officials with one reserve component told us that they do not rely on the contractor to brief units because they were unaware that the contractors provided this service .

in addition , these officials as well as officials from another reserve component told us that they did not know if their unit commanders were aware that they could request briefings from the contractors .

all of the contractors told us that they conduct outreach to offer information to some of the units that have not requested a briefing , including both calling units to offer a briefing and providing materials .

they added that more outreach is conducted to national guard units because they are able to obtain information about these units from state officials .

the tricare regional offices also told us that they conduct outreach to units to let them know that the contractor is available to brief the units about trs .

however , even though the contractor and the tricare regional offices conduct outreach to a unit , it does not necessarily mean that the unit will request a briefing .

furthermore , while contractors are aware of some units in their regions , they do not have access to comprehensive lists of all reserve component units in their regions because the web site links containing unit information that tma originally provided to the contractors have become inactive .

as a result , the contractors are not able to verify whether all units in their regions have received briefings .

officials from the office of reserve affairs told us that reserve components report unit information to the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) , which maintains personnel information about all members of the military .

however , these officials raised concerns about the accuracy of this information because it could be about 3 to 6 months old and may not be comprehensive .

officials at the office of reserve affairs told us that the reserve components would likely have more up - to - date information about their units as they are responsible for reporting this information to dmdc .

however , officials from tma , the tricare regional offices , and contractors also told us that a comprehensive list of units would be difficult to maintain because the unit structure changes frequently .

despite the challenges contractors face , officials with tma's warrior support branch told us that they are satisfied with the contractors' efforts to provide trs briefings to the reserve component units in their regions .

however , because officials do not know which units have been briefed on the program , there is a risk that some reserve component members are not receiving sufficient information on trs and may not be taking advantage of coverage available to them .

dod has conducted two surveys that gauge whether members of the selected reserve are aware of trs , among other issues .

in 2008 , tma conducted the focused survey of tricare reserve select and selected reserve military health system access and satisfaction to better understand reserve component members' motivation for enrolling in trs and to compare trs enrollees' satisfaction with and access to health care services with that of other beneficiary groups .

in reporting the results of this survey to congress in february 2009 , tma stated that lack of awareness was an important factor in why eligible members of the selected reserve did not enroll in trs .

tma also reported that less than half of the eligible selected reserve members who were not enrolled in trs were aware of the program .

however , the survey's response rate was almost 18 percent , and such a low response rate decreases the likelihood that the survey results were representative of the views and characteristics of the selected reserve population .

according to the office of management and budget's standards for statistical surveys , a nonresponse analysis is recommended for surveys with response rates lower than 80 percent to determine whether the responses are representative of the surveyed population .

accordingly , tma conducted a nonresponse analysis to determine whether the survey responses it received were representative of the surveyed population , and the analysis identified substantial differences between the original respondents and the follow - up respondents .

as a result of the differences found in the nonresponse analysis , tma adjusted the statistical weighting techniques for nonresponse bias and applied the weights to the data before drawing conclusions and reporting the results .

dmdc conducts a quarterly survey , called the status of forces survey , which is directed to all members of the military services .

dmdc conducts several versions of this survey , including a version for members of the reserve components .

this survey focuses on different issues at different points in time .

for example , every other year the survey includes questions on health benefits , including questions on whether members of the reserve components are aware of tricare , including trs .

in july 2010 , we issued a report raising concerns about the reliability of dod's status of forces surveys because they generally have a 25 to 42 percent response rate , and dmdc has not been conducting nonresponse analyses to determine whether the surveys' results are representative of the target population .

we recommended that dmdc develop and implement guidance both for conducting a nonresponse analysis and using the results of this analysis to inform dmdc's statistical weighting techniques , as part of the collection and analysis of the status of forces survey results .

dod concurred with this recommendation , but as of january 2011 , had not implemented it .

dod monitors access to civilian providers under trs in conjunction with monitoring efforts related to the tricare standard and extra options .

in addition , during the course of our review , tma initiated additional efforts that specifically examine access to civilian providers for trs beneficiaries and the selected reserve population , including mapping the locations of selected reserve members in relation to areas with tricare provider networks .

because trs is the same benefit as the tricare standard and extra options , dod monitors trs beneficiaries' access to civilian providers as a part of monitoring access to civilian providers for beneficiaries who use tricare standard and extra .

as we have recently reported , in the absence of access - to - care standards for these options , tma has mainly used feedback mechanisms to gauge access to civilian providers for these beneficiaries .

for example , in response to a mandate included in the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 , dod has completed 2 years of a multiyear survey of beneficiaries who use the tricare standard , tricare extra , and trs options and 2 years of its second multiyear survey of civilian providers .

congress required that these surveys obtain information on access to care and that dod give a high priority to locations having high concentrations of selected reserve members .

in march 2010 , we reported that tma generally addressed the methodological requirements outlined in the mandate during the implementation of the first year of the multiyear surveys .

while tma did not give a high priority to locations with high concentrations of selected reserve members , tma's methodological approach over the 4-year survey period will cover the entire united states , including areas with high concentrations of selected reserve members .

in february 2010 , tma directed the tricare regional offices to monitor access to civilian providers for tricare standard , tricare extra , and trs beneficiaries through the development of a model that can be used to identify geographic areas where beneficiaries may experience access problems .

as of may 2010 , each of the tricare regional offices had implemented an initial model appropriate to its region .

these models include , for example , data on area populations , provider types , and potential provider shortages for the general population .

officials at each regional office said that their models are useful but noted that they are evolving and will be updated .

to determine whether jointly monitoring access to civilian providers for trs beneficiaries along with tricare standard and extra beneficiaries was reasonable , we asked tma to perform an analysis of claims ( for fiscal years 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 ) to identify differences in age demographics and health care utilization between these beneficiary groups .

this analysis found that although the age demographics for these populations were different — more than half of the trs beneficiaries were age 29 and under , while more than half of the tricare standard and extra beneficiaries were over 45 — both groups otherwise shared similarities with their health care utilization .

specifically , both beneficiary groups had similar diagnoses , used the same types of specialty providers , and used similar proportions of mental health care , primary care , and specialty care .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

specifically: seven of the top 10 diagnoses for both trs and tricare standard and extra beneficiaries were the same .

three of these diagnoses — allergic rhinitis , joint disorder , and back disorder — made up more than 20 percent of claims for both beneficiary groups .

the five provider specialties that filed the most claims for both beneficiary groups were the same — family practice , physical therapy , allergy , internal medicine , and pediatrics .

furthermore , the majority of claims filed for both beneficiary groups were filed by family practice providers .

both beneficiary groups had the same percentage of claims filed for mental health care and similar percentages for primary care and other specialty care .

 ( see app .

ii for additional details on the results of this claims analysis. ) .

based on this analysis , jointly monitoring access for trs beneficiaries and tricare standard and extra beneficiaries appears to be a reasonable approach .

dod has taken steps to evaluate access to civilian providers for the selected reserve population and trs beneficiaries separately from other tricare beneficiaries .

specifically , during the course of our review , tma initiated the following efforts: during the fall of 2010 , tma officials analyzed the locations of selected reserve members and their families , including trs beneficiaries , to determine what percentage of them live within tricare's prime service areas ( areas in which the managed care contractors are required to establish and maintain sufficient networks of civilian providers ) .

according to these data , as of august 31 , 2010 , over 80 percent of selected reserve members and their families lived in prime service areas: 100 percent in the south region , which is all prime service areas , and over 70 percent in the north and west regions .

tma officials told us that they are repeating the focused survey of tricare reserve select and select reserve military health system access and satisfaction , which had first been conducted in 2008 .

using results from its first survey , tma reported to congress in february 2009 that members of the selected reserve who were enrolled in trs were pleased with access and quality of care under their plan .

however , as we have noted , the response rate for this survey was almost 18 percent , although tma took steps to adjust the data prior to reporting the results .

officials told us that the follow - up survey will focus on whether access to care for trs beneficiaries has changed .

officials sent the survey instrument to participants in january 2011 .

officials told us that they anticipate results will be available during the summer of 2011 .

trs is an important option for members of the selected reserve .

however , educating this population about trs has been challenging , and despite efforts by the reserve components and the contractors , some members of the selected reserve are likely still unaware of this option .

most of the reserve components lack centralized accountability for trs education , making it unclear if all members are getting information about the program — a concern that is further exacerbated by the lack of awareness about the trs education policy among officials from some of the reserve components .

additionally , the contractors' limitations in briefing all of the units in their regions about trs make each component's need for a central point of contact more evident .

without centralized accountability , the reserve components do not have assurance that all members of the selected reserve who may need trs have the information they need to take advantage of the health care options available to them .

we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs to develop a policy that requires each reserve component to designate a centralized point of contact for trs education , who will be accountable for ensuring that the reserve components are providing information about trs to their selected reserve members annually .

in establishing responsibilities for the centralized points of contact , dod should explicitly task them with coordinating with their respective tricare regional offices to ensure that contractors are provided information on the number and location of reserve component units in their regions .

in commenting on a draft of this report , dod partially concurred with our recommendation .

 ( dod's comments are reprinted in app .

iii. ) .

specifically , dod agreed that the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs should develop a policy that requires each of the seven reserve components to designate a central point of contact for trs education that will be accountable for providing information about trs to their selected reserve members annually .

however , dod countered that each designee should coordinate the provision of reserve unit information through the tricare regional offices rather than communicating directly with the tricare contractors , noting that the tricare regional offices have oversight responsibility for the contractors in their respective regions .

we understand the department's concern about coordinating contractor communications through the tricare regional offices , and we have modified our recommendation accordingly .

dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense and other interested parties .

the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or williamsonr@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .

we asked the tricare management activity ( tma ) to conduct an analysis of claims filed for tricare reserve select ( trs ) beneficiaries and tricare standard and extra beneficiaries .

we requested claims data for the most recent three complete fiscal years — 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 — based on the fact that the program last experienced changes with eligibility and premiums in fiscal year 2007 .

for the purpose of this analysis , claims consist of all services provided by a professional in an office or other setting outside of an institution .

records of services rendered at a hospital or other institution were excluded from this analysis .

in addition , records for medical supplies and from chiropractors and pharmacies were also excluded .

we asked tma to conduct the following comparative analyses for trs beneficiaries and tricare standard and extra beneficiaries: 1 .

demographics , including age for each year and averaged over 3 years 2 .

percentage of claims filed for primary care , mental health , and other specialists each year for 3 years 3 .

the top 10 procedures in ranking order made each year and the 4 .

the top 10 primary diagnoses in ranking order made each year and the 5 .

the top five provider specialties in ranking order visited each year and the average over 3 years 6 .

percentage of claims filed for the top five provider specialties and the to ensure that tma's data were sufficiently reliable , we conducted data reliability assessments of the data sets that we used to assess their quality and methodological soundness .

our review consisted of ( 1 ) examining documents that described the respective data , ( 2 ) interviewing tma officials about the data collection and analysis processes , and ( 3 ) interviewing tma officials about internal controls in place to ensure that data are complete and accurate .

we found that all of the data sets used in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

however , we did not independently verify tma's calculations .

tables 2 through 5 contain information on claims filed for tricare reserve select and tricare standard and extra beneficiaries .

in addition to the contact named above , bonnie anderson , assistant director ; danielle bernstein ; susannah bloch ; ashley dean ; lisa motley ; jessica smith ; and suzanne worth made key contributions to this report .

