on september 6 , 2017 , hurricane irma's eyewall passed 50 nautical miles north of puerto rico as a category 5 hurricane , causing severe wind and rain inundation to the main island and significant damage to the island of culebra .

less than two weeks later , on the morning of september 20 , 2017 , hurricane maria made a direct hit as a category 4 storm on the main island of puerto rico .

although the storm moved offshore in the early afternoon of september 20 , 2017 , tropical storm - force winds continued into the late night hours , causing extensive damage to electrical utilities , roads , bridges , and other public infrastructure throughout puerto rico .

according to the national hurricane center , hurricane maria was the most intense hurricane to make landfall in puerto rico since 1928 .

in its recovery plan , puerto rico estimates that $132 billion in funding from 2018 through 2028 will be needed to repair and reconstruct the infrastructure damaged by the hurricanes .

this includes $30 billion to comprehensively modernize puerto rico's energy sector and improve its resiliency , nearly $5 billion to replace puerto rico's drinking water system , and between $8 to $12 billion to rehabilitate owner - occupied homes that were substantially damaged by the hurricanes , among other things .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , a component of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , leads the federal effort to mitigate , respond to , and recover from disasters , both natural and manmade .

among other responsibilities , fema administers the public assistance program in partnership with the government of puerto rico ( puerto rico ) , providing grant funding for a wide range of response and recovery activities .

these activities include , among other efforts , debris removal ; life - saving emergency protective measures ; and the repair , replacement , or restoration of disaster - damaged publicly - owned facilities .

in addition , fema coordinated with puerto rico to submit an economic and disaster recovery plan to congress , as required by the bipartisan budget act of 2018 .

fema also plans to work with puerto rico to ensure that it has effective internal controls in place to oversee federal recovery funds .

you asked us to review the federal government's response and recovery efforts related to the 2017 hurricanes .

as part of that effort , we have several reviews ongoing of fema's and puerto rico's disaster recovery planning , oversight , and execution efforts in puerto rico .

this report provides information on ( 1 ) fema public assistance program spending and actions fema and puerto rico have taken to provide oversight of federal recovery funds , ( 2 ) initial challenges identified by officials from fema and puerto rico with the recovery process , and ( 3 ) puerto rico's economic and disaster recovery plan .

we have another ongoing review that will examine disaster recovery efforts in puerto rico and we plan to issue that report in 2019 .

in addition , we are conducting a broader body of work covering various disaster response and recovery issues , including disaster recovery in the u.s. virgin islands and impacted states , and will also be reporting on those issues over the next year .

for this report , we reviewed relevant fema public assistance program documentation , and we obtained and analyzed data from fema's emergency management mission integrated environment ( emmie ) and integrated financial management information system ( ifmis ) databases .

these databases include data on public assistance program obligations and expenditures related to hurricanes irma and maria in puerto rico as of the end of fiscal year 2018 .

we assessed the reliability of emmie and ifmis data by reviewing existing information about these systems , interviewing data users and managers responsible for these data , and cross - checking data across disparate sources to ensure consistency .

based on these steps , we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing public assistance program obligations and expenditures for hurricanes irma and maria in puerto rico as of the end of fiscal year 2018 .

an obligation is a definite commitment that creates a legal liability of the government for the payment of goods and services ordered or received .

an expenditure is an amount paid by federal agencies , by cash or cash equivalent , during the fiscal year to liquidate government obligations .

for the purpose of this report , an expenditure represents the actual spending by puerto rico of money obligated by the federal government .

we interviewed officials from fema headquarters , as well as officials from fema region ii , the fema regional office with oversight for puerto rico .

further , in may , august , and september of 2018 , we conducted site visits to puerto rico to observe hurricane - damaged areas and interview relevant officials .

in puerto rico , we interviewed fema officials at the joint recovery office , a multiagency coordination center established in guaynabo , puerto rico to coordinate major disaster recovery efforts .

at this location , we interviewed the federal coordinating officer for puerto rico , officials from the public assistance program , and officials from fema's finance and administration section to understand fema's recovery operations in puerto rico .

in addition , we interviewed puerto rico government officials from the central office for recovery , reconstruction and resilience ( cor3 ) and ten selected municipal governments throughout puerto rico .

the results from our interviews cannot be generalized to all of puerto rico's 78 municipalities ; however , they provided important context about the status of recovery efforts in various locations throughout puerto rico .

we spoke with officials from the financial oversight and management board ( fomb ) , a board established in the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act with broad budgetary and financial control over puerto rico .

we also interviewed the comptroller of puerto rico to obtain her input on puerto rico's government structures and municipal issues .

lastly , we reviewed puerto rico government documents related to recovery planning and internal controls .

we conducted this performance audit from march 2018 to march 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

on september 6 , 2017 , the eye of hurricane irma traveled about 50 nautical miles to the north of the northern shore of puerto rico as a category 5 hurricane .

less than two weeks later , hurricane maria made landfall as a category 4 hurricane on the main island of puerto rico on the morning of september 20 , 2017 with wind speeds up to 155 miles per hour .

the center of the hurricane moved through southeastern puerto rico to the northwest part of the island , as shown in figure 1 below .

in response to the request of the governor of puerto rico , the president declared a major disaster the day after each hurricane impacted puerto rico .

major disaster declarations can trigger a variety of federal response and recovery programs for government and nongovernmental entities , households , and individuals , including assistance through the public assistance program .

under the national response framework , dhs is the federal department with primary responsibility for coordinating disaster response , and within dhs , fema has lead responsibility .

the administrator of fema serves as the principal adviser to the president and the secretary of homeland security regarding emergency management .

fema's public assistance program provides funding to state , territorial , local , and tribal governments to assist them in responding to and recovering from major disasters or emergencies .

as shown in figure 2 , public assistance program funds are categorized broadly as either “emergency work” or “permanent work.” within those two broad categories are separate sub - categories .

in addition to the emergency work and permanent work categories , fema's public assistance program includes category z , which represents indirect costs , administrative expenses , and other expenses a recipient or subrecipient incurs in administering and managing projects .

puerto rico's agencies , such as the department of housing ; public corporations , such the puerto rico electric power authority and the puerto rico aqueduct and sewer authority ; and puerto rico's 78 municipalities are eligible to apply for the public assistance program .

fema's public assistance program also provides funding for cost - effective hazard mitigation measures to reduce or eliminate the long - term risk to people and property from future natural and man - made disasters and their effects .

specifically , fema provides funding for hazard mitigation measures in conjunction with the repair of disaster - damaged facilities to enhance their resilience during future disasters .

for example , a community that had a fire station damaged by a disaster could use public assistance funding to repair the facility and incorporate additional measures such as installing hurricane shutters over the windows to mitigate the potential for future damage .

in puerto rico , the public assistance program is administered through a partnership between fema and the recipient ( puerto rico ) , which provides funding to eligible subrecipients ( local or territory - level entities ) .

under the standard public assistance program process , once the president has declared a disaster , public assistance staff work with the recipient or subrecipients to help them document damages , identify eligible costs and work , and prepare requests for public assistance grant funds by developing project proposals .

officials then review and obtain approval of projects prior to fema obligating funds to reimburse recipients or subrecipients for eligible work .

the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 authorized the use of alternative procedures in administering the public assistance program , thereby providing new flexibilities to fema , states , territories , and local governments for debris removal , infrastructure repair , and rebuilding projects using funds from this program .

the stated goals of the alternative procedures are to reduce the costs to the federal government , increase flexibility in the administration of the public assistance program , expedite the provision of assistance under the program , and provide financial incentives for recipients of the program for the timely and cost - effective completion of projects .

unlike the standard public assistance program where fema will fund the actual cost of a project , the public assistance alternative procedures allow awards for permanent work projects to be made on the basis of fixed cost estimates to provide financial incentives for the timely and cost - effective completion of work .

under these procedures , if the actual cost of the project exceeds the fixed cost estimate agreed upon by fema and the recipient , the recipient or subrecipient is responsible for the additional costs .

however , if the actual cost of completing eligible work for a project is below the estimate , the recipient or subrecipient may use the remaining funds for other eligible purposes , such as for additional cost - effective hazard mitigation measures to increase the resiliency of public infrastructure .

these funds may also be used for activities that improve the recipient's or subrecipient's future public assistance operations or planning .

although fema had approved alternative procedure grants in 30 states as of april , 2018 , in these cases , alternative procedures were used on a project - by - project basis .

puerto rico's recovery from the 2017 hurricanes is the first recovery to use alternative procedures for all large permanent work projects .

on october 30 , 2017 , puerto rico requested to use the alternative procedures process for all large - project funding for public assistance permanent work , categories c through g. according to fema guidance , as part of the alternative procedures process in puerto rico , fema and puerto rico must agree on a group of personnel with cost estimation expertise who will serve as part of a center of excellence .

this center of excellence will assist fema and puerto rico in developing cost estimating methodologies to be used for determining fixed cost estimates for public assistance permanent work projects .

fema officials stated that they are in the process of conducting inspections for public assistance projects for permanent work and , as of august 2018 , had a total list of 10,000 site inspections to complete .

fema officials stated that october 2019 is their target date for completing all alternative procedures fixed cost estimates for public assistance permanent work .

however , pursuant to 428 guidance published in april 2018 , this time frame may be adjusted on a project - by - project basis , based on extenuating circumstances .

amendment 5 to the president's disaster declaration imposed a number of grant conditions , including that puerto rico establish an oversight authority supported by third - party experts .

this authority is to act as the grant recipient for all public assistance and hazard mitigation funding to ensure sound project management and enhanced , centralized oversight over fema grant distributions .

in october 2017 , the governor of puerto rico established cor3 , a puerto rico government office , to plan , guide , and oversee recovery efforts , including administering and overseeing the public assistance program .

according to fema and cor3 officials , cor3 will fulfill the oversight requirements outlined in amendment 5 .

according to cor 3 officials , cor3 was also established to ensure coordination with fema .

the executive director of cor3 will act as the governor's authorized representative , which is the designated individual responsible for administering federal disaster assistance programs on behalf of puerto rico .

among other things , cor3 will: identify , procure , and administer all federal , territorial , and private resources available to puerto rico related to recovery ; provide oversight of subrecipients using risk - based monitoring ; and provide technical assistance and advise puerto rico's governmental agencies and municipalities regarding any matter related to recovery .

according to cor3 officials , they will also implement internal controls , policies , and procedures to appropriately manage recovery funds .

cor3 has also launched an online transparency portal intended to provide a breakdown of fema public assistance and other federal funding made available for disaster recovery in puerto rico .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bipartisan budget act ) required that puerto rico submit an economic and disaster recovery plan to congress by august 9 , 2018 , that defines the priorities , goals , and expected outcomes of puerto rico's recovery related to a number of sectors , including , among other things , infrastructure , housing , electric power systems and grid restoration .

the bipartisan budget act also directs the governor of puerto rico to develop the disaster recovery plan in coordination with fema , with support and contributions from other federal agencies having designated responsibilities in the national disaster recovery framework .

as of june 2015 , puerto rico had roughly $66.9 billion in outstanding debt .

according to the recovery plan , economic contraction in the years prior to the hurricanes contributed to a severe fiscal crisis and puerto rico's credit rating dropped below investment grade in early 2014 , followed by a series of defaults on debt payments .

in response to puerto rico's financial crisis , congress passed and the president signed the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act in june 2016 , which established the fomb with broad budgetary and financial control over puerto rico .

the bipartisan budget act also permits the fomb to review any federal funds over $10 million that are designated for puerto rico's response to or recovery from hurricanes irma or maria .

fema obligated nearly $4 billion in public assistance funds for puerto rico's emergency work projects , as well as the repair and restoration of its public infrastructure , among other things .

in order to provide financial oversight of these funds , puerto rico is developing an internal controls plan as well as management policies and procedures that will , in part , help provide financial monitoring .

in the interim , fema has instituted a manual reimbursement process to mitigate risk and ensure fiscal accountability .

as shown in figure 3 , fema has obligated $3.63 billion ( 93 percent ) for emergency work ( categories a and b ) , and $151 million ( 4 percent ) for permanent work ( categories c through g ) in puerto rico as of september 30 , 2018 .

an additional $136 million ( 3 percent ) was obligated for management and administrative costs .

as of the end of fiscal year 2018 , puerto rico expended about $1.7 billion ( about 43 percent ) of the almost $4 billion public assistance funds obligated by fema .

ninety - eight percent of this amount went toward emergency work projects in categories a and b .

for example , the puerto rico aqueduct and sewer authority expended almost $91 million to cover the costs of generator usage .

aside from generators , one category b project by the puerto rico emergency management agency repaired the emergency warning system for about $9.4 million .

a third project put a temporary roof on a puerto rico institute of culture facility in vieques for $4,000 .

as shown in table 1 , the majority of fema's obligations in puerto rico as of september 30 , 2018 , have been for emergency work categories because these projects began soon after the disasters struck and focused on removing debris and providing assistance to address immediate threats to life and property .

in contrast , permanent work projects take time to identify , develop , and ultimately complete as they represent the longer - term repair and restoration of public infrastructure .

funds expended by puerto rico for permanent work have been mostly limited to roads and bridges ( category c ) because impassable roads like the one shown in figure 4 below impede the provision of critical services to citizens .

they can also get in the way of other disaster recovery efforts .

expenditures for roads and bridges ( category c ) amount to approximately $32 million , while expenditures for other permanent work categories ( d - g ) total approximately $1 million .

according to fema officials , public assistance projects in categories d - g are still pending prioritization and formulation .

for example , figure 5 below shows a recreational public space along the edge of a river in maricao .

the dashed line indicates where the iron railing and concrete paving used to continue , overlooking the river , before hurricane maria .

as of september 2018 , the municipality was awaiting fema assistance to begin restoration fema categorizes puerto rico's subrecipients as commonwealth public corporations , commonwealth agencies , municipalities , and all other entities .

as shown in table 2 below , 89 percent of obligations , as of the end of september 2018 , for puerto rico were awarded to commonwealth public corporations and commonwealth agencies , with 47 percent awarded to the puerto rico electric power authority .

overall , about 43 percent of obligated funds have been expended .

as previously discussed , puerto rico designated cor3 to administer and manage the public assistance program in coordination with fema .

as part of cor3's recovery oversight role , cor3 officials stated that they are developing an internal controls plan and recovery management policies and procedures with fema .

according to cor3 , these oversight documents will provide detailed guidance on grant application , procurement , payment and cash management , and financial monitoring and reporting , among other things .

according to cor3 officials , they have held numerous meetings to coordinate with fema and have submitted drafts of the internal controls plan as well as management policies and procedures for fema's consideration .

in addition , according to cor3 officials , cor3 plans to provide direct technical assistance related to federal grants management to puerto rico's cabinet - level agencies , public corporations , municipalities and other eligible subrecipients .

as part of cor3's advisory role , cor3 is expected to help puerto rico's agencies , public corporations , municipalities , and some nonprofit entities formulate projects , draft cost estimates , and make funding requests , among other things .

federal grant award regulations allow fema to impose additional specific grant award conditions in specific circumstances , such as to mitigate risk and ensure fiscal accountability of the recipient or subrecipient .

according to fema , once fema obligates funds , the recipient is able to expend funds as necessary .

however , in november 2017 , according to fema officials , the agency instituted a manual reimbursement process for subrecipients in puerto rico for federal funds , including public assistance funds , to mitigate fiduciary risk and decrease the risk of misuse of funds .

specifically , fema officials stated that they decided to institute this process because the government of puerto rico had expended funds prior to submitting complete documentation of work performed .

according to fema officials , they also decided to institute the manual reimbursement process due to puerto rico's financial situation , weaknesses in internal controls , and the large amount of recovery funds , among other things .

this manual reimbursement process requires that cor3 fill out the office of management and budget's standard form 270 and submit supporting documentation before obligated funds can be withdrawn by puerto rico through cor3 and reimbursed to subrecipients .

subsequently , fema must review the submitted standard form 270 and all project documentation for completeness , compliance , and accuracy before disbursing funds to the recipient .

in cases where fema requires additional documentation to process a standard form 270 request , fema will submit requests for information asking cor3 to supply the information needed for fema to complete the review .

fema officials said that they aim to complete the entire process described above within ten calendar days , or 15-20 calendar days if fema needs to request additional information from cor3 .

additionally , fema officials stated that the manual reimbursement process is intended as a temporary measure .

they will cease the process once fema has reviewed the operational effectiveness of cor3's internal controls and approved the final internal controls plan , which are under review .

fema , cor3 , and puerto rico municipal government officials from ten municipalities we interviewed reported initial challenges with the recovery process , including with public assistance alternative procedures .

these concerns included ( 1 ) workforce capacity constraints , ( 2 ) a need for additional guidance , ( 3 ) delays related to choosing cost estimators , and ( 4 ) reimbursement for emergency work .

workforce capacity constraints .

fema and municipality officials cited concerns about fema staff turnover and lack of knowledge about how the public assistance alternative procedures are to be applied in puerto rico .

while several municipal officials we spoke to remarked positively on consistent communication with fema officials , municipal officials in six municipalities we visited cited high levels of turnover among fema staff as a challenge .

for example , officials in three municipalities said that discontinuity in fema personnel has caused them to have duplicative conversations with fema .

an official from one municipality described the disruption that had been caused by repeated changes in fema personnel , especially when their point of contact at fema changed at least six times since the hurricanes .

fema officials acknowledged that more personnel with expertise in the alternative procedures process are needed to administer the public assistance program and assist subrecipients .

according to fema officials , fema has leveraged existing expertise from personnel in the federal coordinating officer advisory group to train new employees to increase workforce capacity .

fema personnel from this group are rotating experts assigned to recovery issues to increase institutional understanding of alternative procedures and train local hires .

according to fema officials , these local hires can serve as fema staff for up to one year before they become reservists .

in addition , fema officials stated that they have identified contractors with previous experience regarding alternative procedures to provide additional assistance to subrecipients .

need for additional guidance .

municipal officials cited concerns about a lack of comprehensive guidance for the alternative procedures process .

specifically , officials in eight municipalities we interviewed cited problems with missing , incomplete , or conflicting guidance from fema .

in addition , officials in four municipalities stated that they are waiting on additional written instructions to establish more clear and consistent guidance .

officials from one municipality told us that the lack of written guidance has meant that the municipality has had to re - submit documents to fema multiple times to respond to changing guidance that they have received verbally .

additionally , four municipalities cited missing , incomplete , or conflicting guidance from cor3 as a challenge .

however , one municipality noted that the quality of communication with cor3 has improved over time as cor3 has become more established .

according to fema officials , they are drafting supplemental guidance for the alternative procedures process with the goal of incorporating lessons learned from prior iterations of the alternative procedures .

similarly , according to cor3 officials , cor3 is currently developing additional guidance and standard operating procedures to help subrecipients , including municipalities and puerto rico government agencies , better understand fema public assistance grant requirements .

delays related to choosing cost estimators for puerto rico .

as mentioned previously , fema's guidance for alternative procedures requires that fema and puerto rico , through cor3 , choose personnel with expertise in cost estimation to serve as a center of excellence , which will develop a cost estimating methodology .

fema has chosen personnel to staff the center of excellence .

however , in august 2018 , fema officials told us that cor3 had not yet finalized their choice of personnel , which had delayed the cost estimation process .

subsequently , cor3 officials told us that personnel have been identified to serve on the center of excellence and the final contracting process for these personnel is now in progress .

reimbursement for emergency work .

officials in nine municipalities we spoke to said that they had not been fully reimbursed for emergency work they completed .

further , officials in five municipalities we interviewed stated that the lack of full reimbursement has caused financial hardships .

for example , officials in three municipalities said that the lack of full reimbursement has meant that the municipalities have had to pause or delay recovery work due to lack of financial resources .

a mayor in one municipality stated that they have scaled back some essential services , such as the frequency of garbage pick - up , while waiting for full reimbursement .

according to fema officials , delays in providing reimbursement were due to several factors including a loss in fema personnel to process reimbursement requests and a significant increase in the volume of reimbursement requests submitted by cor3 to fema .

fema officials also stated an increasing need to make requests for information to cor3 due to a lack of documentation submitted at the time of the reimbursement request .

in response to these factors , fema officials told us that they have undertaken new procedures with cor3 .

for example , according to fema officials , cor3 adopted procedures to review the completeness of documentation prior to submitting a reimbursement request to fema .

fema officials stated that the agency is also holding weekly meetings with cor3 to increase coordination , and that fema increased the number of personnel devoted to reimbursement reviews .

according to officials from fema and cor3 , these steps have contributed to reduced delays .

in response to the bipartisan budget act , puerto rico submitted an economic and disaster recovery plan ( recovery plan ) to congress on august 8 , 2018 .

the recovery plan defines the priorities , goals , and expected outcomes of puerto rico's recovery related to building government capacity for the recovery and strengthening of puerto rico's infrastructure , among other things .

the recovery plan estimates infrastructure repair and recovery costs of $132 billion and total recovery costs of $139 billion for a time period starting in 2018 and ending in 2028 .

according to the recovery plan , cor3 will guide recovery investment and policy in the months and years ahead and is intended to serve as a focal point for strategic thought and management of puerto rico's recovery .

the recovery plan is generally responsive to the directives outlined in the bipartisan budget act .

for example , puerto rico submitted the plan to congress within 180 days of enactment of the bipartisan budget act .

the recovery plan defines priorities , goals , and expected outcomes for puerto rico's recovery effort based on damage assessments conducted by sector .

as mentioned earlier , puerto rico developed the recovery plan in coordination with fema and with support of the u.s. department of energy , the u.s. department of health and human services , and other federal agencies with responsibilities outlined in the national disaster recovery framework .

additionally , the fomb of puerto rico certified the recovery plan on august 28 , 2018 , as directed in the bipartisan budget act , but provided two caveats to its certification .

first , fomb expressed concern that the recovery plan lacks sufficient detail of funding sources and estimates a much greater amount of federal funding than the certified fiscal plan for puerto rico projects .

the recovery plan states that at the time of its release , puerto rico had not undergone eligibility reviews in various federal funding programs , and therefore the ability to identify accurate funding sources was limited .

cor3 officials confirmed that full recovery funding needs will not be known until all damage assessments are complete , and they will continue to identify and leverage all funding resources as they are made available .

second , fomb indicated that the recovery plan does not address oversight of federal funds and the recovery process .

while the bipartisan budget act does not require specific mechanisms for oversight of federal funding as part of the recovery plan , according to cor3 officials , they plan to implement internal controls , policies , and procedures to provide oversight .

puerto rico's recovery plan outlines 276 “courses of action” ( actions ) — defined by the plan as “a collection of potential activities , policies , and other actions that could contribute to recovery” — selected by puerto rico to align with its future recovery vision .

as shown in table 3 below , the actions reflect puerto rico's short - term and long - term recovery vision , organized into three areas .

first , the recovery plan proposes “precursor” actions — those that serve as a foundation for all future actions — that will be prioritized for implementation .

for example , the recovery plan includes actions to build capacity of municipalities to secure and manage recovery funds , and to improve the quality and volume of public data available to decision makers .

second , the recovery plan proposes a set of actions that aim to build the infrastructure and systems that support puerto rico's economy , society , and disaster resiliency , such as addressing vulnerabilities in puerto rico's electric grid .

finally , the recovery plan proposes a set of actions that address puerto rico's long - term recovery goals , such as developing and enhancing puerto rico's visitor economy .

most individual actions in the recovery plan include initial and recurring cost estimates for the time period from 2018 through 2028 .

the recovery plan describes all cost estimates as preliminary , and says that more specific cost estimates require completion of damage assessments and more details about the implementation of actions .

to develop puerto rico's disaster recovery plan , fema assisted cor3 in retaining the homeland security operational analysis center ( hsoac ) , a federally - funded research and development center operated by the rand corporation under contract with dhs .

according to fema officials , fema provided funding and technical assistance , through contractor support , for puerto rico to develop the recovery plan , but cor3 and puerto rico will be responsible for its implementation .

these officials also stated that puerto rico received input and technical assistance from other federal departments , such as those in the recovery support function leadership group led by fema .

hsoac developed the recovery plan in consultation with puerto rico by developing a preliminary sector - by - sector assessment of damages and needs caused by hurricanes irma and maria across puerto rico .

in conjunction with puerto rico's stated vision for the recovery process , hsoac's damage assessment report provided the baseline needed to define , compare , and prioritize actions .

hsoac worked in teams of sector - specific experts to develop and refine the actions by reviewing reports , proposals , best practices , and other literature .

for example , in june 2018 , the u.s. department of energy released a report on energy resilience for puerto rico's electric grid , containing recommendations for puerto rico to consider when developing the recovery plan .

hsoac sought feedback from various subject matter experts and stakeholders while developing the recovery plan .

according to fema officials , fema's joint recovery office delivered interim drafts of the recovery plan to federal agency partners and puerto rico for feedback .

hsoac also sought input from local - level stakeholders , including puerto rico's municipal governments .

for example , hsoac commissioned a survey of officials from municipalities to gauge the challenges they faced in the aftermath of the 2017 hurricanes .

according to fema and hsoac officials , the survey , along with other input provided by mayors led to the development of actions focused on building the capacity of municipal governments to support recovery efforts .

hsoac officials noted that while the final recovery plan was submitted to congress , they will continue to produce products that will assist puerto rico and their stakeholders in recovery implementation .

hsoac intends to release updated versions of the recovery plan , including updated damage and needs assessments .

other expected products include detailed descriptions and cost estimates for each action and a lessons learned report .

the bipartisan budget act also directs puerto rico to develop a public report on the progress made in achieving the recovery plan's goals every 180 days after submission .

fema officials explained that the recovery plan serves as a strategic , direction - setting plan for recovery , and does not provide step - by - step or site - by - site guidance on the recovery process .

fema officials also acknowledged that there may be some overlap between some of the actions in the recovery plan and some of the permanent work funded through fema's public assistance program , but that it is cor3's responsibility to merge and coordinate such recovery efforts .

we provided a draft of this report to dhs and the government of puerto rico for review and comment .

in its comments , reproduced in appendix i , dhs summarized the amount of public assistance funding provided to puerto rico through fiscal year 2018 .

dhs also described fema's temporary manual reimbursement process instituted to mitigate risk and ensure fiscal accountability of taxpayer dollars , and stated that fema is committed to supporting puerto rico as it finalizes internal controls , management policies and procedures to oversee disaster recovery funds .

dhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

the government of puerto rico provided comments that we reproduced in appendix ii .

in its comments , the government of puerto rico stated that in addition to what was discussed in this report , cor3 achieved progress and faced additional challenges .

this report is a part of an ongoing review of disaster recovery efforts in puerto rico .

the remainder of our ongoing work will continue to examine puerto rico's recovery process , including implementation of the public assistance alternative procedures process and efforts by fema and puerto rico to oversee disaster recovery funds , including the manual reimbursement process .

if you and your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679- 1875 or curriec@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

chris currie , ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , joel aldape ( assistant director ) , pedro almoguera , aditi archer , michelle bacon , sylvia bascope , lilia chaidez , taylor hadfield , danielle pakdaman , lorraine ettaro , eric hauswirth , heidi nielson , and kevin reeves made key contributions to this report .

