at least 200 million girls and women alive today have undergone female genital mutilation or cutting ( fgm / c ) in 30 countries where available data show fgm / c is concentrated.more than 3 million girls are estimated to be at risk for fgm / c annually in africa .

in 2015 , the united nations ( un ) general assembly adopted a set of 17 sustainable development goals for 2030 that includes the elimination of fgm / c as a target .

although many countries where fgm / c is known to be concentrated have passed laws banning this practice , enforcement is a challenge , according to u.s. and un studies .

the reasons why fgm / c persists include a mix of cultural , religious , and social factors within families and communities .

the department of state ( state ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) include fgm / c as part of their global strategy to respond to and prevent gender - based violence .

in addition , the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) carry out a joint program in 17 countries to work toward ending fgm / c .

you asked us to review u.s. government agencies' efforts to address fgm / c at home and abroad .

this is the first of two reports responding to your request .

in this report , we ( 1 ) summarize findings from recent u.s. and un studies about the factors contributing to fgm / c and approaches to addressing this practice internationally and ( 2 ) examine state's and usaid's current efforts to address fgm / c abroad .

a second report will review u.s. efforts to address fgm / c domestically .

to identify factors contributing to fgm / c and current approaches to address this practice , we reviewed recent u.s. and un studies of international efforts to accelerate the abandonment of fgm / c and respond to victims of this practice .

we selected studies published in 2010 or later .

we examined a usaid - funded population reference bureau ( prb ) study , reports on the first phase of the unfpa - unicef joint program on fgm / c , a unicef statistical overview of fgm / c , and a unicef review of efforts to accelerate fgm / c abandonment in five african countries .

to determine state's and usaid's current efforts to address fgm / c abroad , we analyzed applicable strategy and policy documents and interviewed state and usaid officials involved in issues related to fgm / c .

we collected information from usaid missions in countries where fgm / c is known to be prevalent to identify development assistance efforts related to this practice .

in addition , we examined a state - supported fgm / c prevention program in guinea and selected state - funded gender - based violence projects in refugee settings to determine if these projects had any fgm / c - related components .

we also reviewed u.s. contributions to unfpa and unicef .

additionally , we reviewed how state tracks fgm / c prevalence and countries' prevention efforts in its annual country reports on human rights .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

 ( see app .

i for more information on our scope and methodology. ) .

fgm / c comprises all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia , or other injury to the female genital organs for non - medical reasons .

the world health organization ( who ) classifies fgm / c into four major types: type i ( clitoridectomy ) partially or totally removes the clitoris and / or the skin around it ; type ii ( excision ) partially or totally removes the clitoris and the labia minora , with or without excision of the labia majora ; type iii ( infibulation ) narrows the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal formed by cutting and repositioning the labia minora and / or labia majora , sometimes through stitching , with or without removal of the clitoris ; and type iv ( other ) includes all other harmful procedures , including pricking , piercing , incising , and scraping the genital area for non - medical purposes .

according to the who , it is estimated that 90 percent of cases are types i , ii , or iv ; 10 percent are type iii , the most extreme form of fgm / c .

the type of fgm / c commonly practiced varies by country , according to survey data presented by unicef .

for example , survey data show that more than 20 percent of girls who underwent fgm / c in djibouti , eritrea , niger , senegal , and somalia , experienced type iii ( infibulation ) , whereas type iii represented 1 or 2 percent of cases in other countries , such as egypt .

appendix ii presents unicef data showing the percentage distribution of girls subjected to fgm / c by type of procedure in countries where data were available .

the who notes that in every society where it is practiced , fgm / c is a manifestation of gender inequality that is deeply entrenched in traditional social , economic , and political structures .

the practice is often considered a necessary part of raising a girl properly , and a way to prepare her for adulthood and marriage .

fgm / c is often motivated by beliefs about what is considered proper sexual behavior and is linked to premarital virginity and marital fidelity .

fgm / c has no health benefits and can have numerous short - and long - term adverse health consequences , according to the who .

short - term consequences can include severe pain , swelling , delayed or incomplete healing , and shock , as well as infections and excessive bleeding , which can lead to death .

long - term consequences may include chronic pain and infections , scar tissue , and menstrual and urinary tract problems .

in addition , fgm / c can lead to sexual problems and obstetric complications , which increase the need for caesarean sections and risks to the health of newborns .

transmission of hiv remains a longer - term risk because of increased risk of bleeding during intercourse as a result of fgm / c .

available data from nationally representative surveys show that fgm / c is concentrated in 30 countries and at least 200 million girls and women alive today have undergone some form of fgm / c , according to unicef ( see fig .

1 ) .

evidence suggests that fgm / c exists in some places in south america , such as colombia , and elsewhere in the world including in india , malaysia , oman , saudi arabia , and the united arab emirates ; however , no nationally representative data on fgm / c were available for these countries , according to unicef .

the practice is also found in europe , australia , and north america , which are destinations for migrants from countries where the practice still occurs .

unicef also estimates that more than 3 million girls annually are at risk for fgm / c in africa .

in some countries , including djibouti , guinea , and somalia , the percentage of girls and women , aged 15 to 49 , who have undergone fgm / c is over 90 percent .

in most of the countries with available data , the majority of girls are cut before the age of 5 , according to unicef .

however , in somalia , egypt , chad , and the central african republic , at least 80 percent of girls who have undergone fgm / c were cut between the ages of 5 and 14 .

unicef data show that the practice is becoming less common in many high - prevalence countries .

for example , in kenya and tanzania , women aged 45 to 49 are approximately three times more likely to have undergone fgm / c than girls aged 15 to 19 .

in most countries where fgm / c is practiced , the majority of girls and women think it should end , and the percentage of females who support fgm / c is substantially lower than the share of girls and women who have undergone the procedure , according to unicef .

in addition , unicef reported in 2013 that 24 countries where fgm / c is prevalent have enacted legislation related to fgm / c ( see app .

iii ) .

these laws reportedly vary in their scope .

unicef reports that some ban the practice only in medical facilities ; others ban the practice anywhere .

in 1993 , the world conference on human rights in vienna recognized violence against women as a human rights violation , and the un general assembly included fgm / c in the definition of violence against women , stating that it violates women's right to be free from cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment .

fgm / c also deprives girls and women from making the decision about a procedure that has a lasting effect on their bodies and infringes on their autonomy and control over their lives , according to the who .

in december 2012 , the un general assembly adopted a resolution urging member states to condemn and work to eliminate all harmful practices that affect women and girls , in particular fgm / c , and to take all necessary measures , including enacting and enforcing legislation to prohibit fgm / c .

two years later , the un general assembly adopted another resolution calling upon member states to develop , support , and implement comprehensive and integrated strategies for the prevention of fgm / c , including training of medical personnel , social workers , and community and religious leaders to ensure that they provide competent , supportive services and care to women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone fgm / c .

in september 2015 , the un general assembly formally adopted the 2030 agenda for sustainable development , along with a set of 17 sustainable development goals and 169 associated targets .

one of the 17 goals is “achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls” and one of the targets for this goal is to “eliminate all harmful practices , such as child , early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation.” in 2008 , unfpa and unicef established the joint program on fgm / c , which represents the largest international effort to accelerate abandonment of this practice .

the unfpa - unicef joint program brings together both agencies' expertise , often with grassroots community organizations , using a human rights - based approach to engage communities to act collectively to abandon the practice .

the joint program also supports health and protective services for those who have undergone fgm / c .

donor countries make annual contributions directly to the joint program .

during phase i of the joint program ( 2008-2013 ) , 15 countries participated ( see fig .

2 ) .

according to the 2013 evaluation of the joint program , funding limitations reduced the number of countries involved during phase 1 .

the overall budget for phase i was about $41 million over its 5 years .

phase ii ( 2014-2017 ) currently is under way in 17 countries — the original 15 countries , as well as yemen and nigeria .

phase ii aims for a 40 percent decrease in prevalence among girls 14 and younger in at least 5 countries , with at least 1 country declaring total elimination of the practice , by the end of 2017 .

the joint program estimated its budget for phase ii to be $54 million over 4 years .

under the u.s. foreign policy framework , fgm / c is identified as a form of gender based - violence .

in march 2012 , usaid released its gender equality and female empowerment policy , which provides guidance on incorporating gender issues — including gender - based violence — into development programming .

in addition , state and usaid jointly developed the u.s. strategy to prevent and respond to gender - based violence globally , released in august 2012 .

these two documents identify fgm / c as a form of gender - based violence but do not provide any specific guidance on assistance related to fgm / c .

in addition , the secretary of state announced in march 2016 the release of the united states global strategy to empower adolescent girls , which includes the goal of reducing girls' vulnerability to gender - based violence .

the strategy highlights fgm / c as a form of gender - based violence .

state's and usaid's set of standard indicators , developed to assess foreign assistance , includes nine standard indicators related to gender issues .

three of the nine indicators cover gender - based violence , which includes fgm / c ; however , the indicators do not specify the type of gender - based violence addressed .

in 2000 , usaid released guidance on fgm / c , incorporating this issue into its development agenda .

usaid updated the guidance in february 2016 , during the course of our review .

the guidance recognizes fgm / c as a harmful , traditional practice that reflects deep - rooted gender inequalities and constitutes an extreme form of discrimination against women .

the guidance states that usaid will support the integration of efforts to combat fgm / c into all aspects of the usaid program cycle where feasible and appropriate .

it also states that usaid will assist countries in implementing their laws prohibiting fgm / c and support community - based programming to raise awareness of the harmful effects of this practice to reduce demand .

usaid officials stated that the agency also plans to develop a resource guide on fgm / c that provides information for usaid missions and staff on how best to incorporate efforts to address fgm / c into their programming .

fgm / c has persisted into the 21st century despite un resolutions condemning this practice and the passage of laws banning it in many countries where it is prevalent , as unicef has reported .

recent u.s. and un studies of efforts to address fgm / c have identified several factors contributing to its prevalence , including its power as a social norm , the belief that fgm / c is a religious obligation , the medicalization of the practice , and challenges enforcing existing laws .

fgm / c is a powerful social norm — what communities believe and how they act and expect other members of that community to act — making its abandonment difficult , according to prb and unicef .

fgm / c is embedded in the culture and beliefs of many communities and ensures membership in these communities , according to prb .

if most families in a community practice fgm / c , it is difficult for an individual family to abandon the practice , according to unicef .

unicef also reported that , among surveyed girls and women aged 15 to 49 , the most commonly reported benefit of fgm / c is that it ensures social acceptance .

because some communities view fgm / c as a social norm , it is viewed as a caring act .

parents may believe that fgm / c is in the best interest of their daughter , despite the physical harm it causes , in order to avoid social exclusion , according to unicef .

in addition , the practice is exacerbated by poverty and poor education .

fgm / c may signal that a girl is ready for marriage , which can spare a family the girl's school expenses .

parents also may rely on the money received for marriages , according to an evaluation of the unfpa and unicef joint program on fgm / c .

in addition , prevalence is highest among daughters of women with no education and declines as the mother's education level rises , according to unicef .

the common belief that fgm / c is a religious obligation is a misconception , but one that contributes to its continued use , according to unicef .

unicef notes that fgm / c is not mandated in any religious texts and predates the birth of islam and christianity .

scholars and activists have concentrated on demonstrating the lack of support within scriptures .

however , the religious motivation for fgm / c is often intertwined with social norms and tradition , according to unicef .

in addition , some communities believe the practice is a religious requirement that makes a girl spiritually “pure,” according to unicef .

thus , many who continue practicing fgm / c often cite religion as their motivation .

in 4 of 14 countries surveyed , more than 50 percent of girls and women aged 15 to 49 regard fgm / c as a religious obligation , according to unicef .

these countries were mali , eritrea , mauritania , and guinea .

another challenge in encouraging abandonment of fgm / c is the medicalization of the practice , which contributes to its perceived legitimacy , according to prb .

medicalization refers to the performance of fgm / c by health care providers rather than traditional practitioners .

according to prb , 18 percent of girls and women worldwide who have been cut had the procedure performed by medical professionals .

unicef reports that this percentage can be much higher in certain countries ; for example , 77 percent of girls in egypt and 41 percent of girls in kenya who underwent fgm / c were cut by medical professionals .

unicef found that medicalization of fgm / c may have increased as a result of the assistance community's earlier focus on the harmful health risks of the practice to encourage abandonment of fgm / c without also framing it as a human rights issue .

thus , early fgm / c prevention campaigns may have inadvertently contributed to the perception that fgm / c would be acceptable if performed by medical professionals , thus institutionalizing the practice within the medical community , according to unicef .

although many countries have passed laws addressing fgm / c , enforcing these laws is a challenge , according to the joint program evaluation .

the evaluation found that in many countries , there is a lack of resources , difficulty reaching remote areas , and limitations on the capacities of law enforcement agents .

in addition , the implementation of anti - fgm / c laws may be undermined by a lack of awareness by local officials and law enforcement , and a lack of community buy - in , according to prb .

further , the threat of social exclusion from being uncut may be more influential than the threat of legal punishment , according to unicef .

u.s. and un studies have identified a variety of approaches to accelerating fgm / c abandonment .

these include efforts to increase awareness and enforcement of laws against fgm / c ; establish community education programs ; and provide outreach to a variety of community members , including religious leaders , elders , men and boys , and medical practitioners .

studies also highlight the importance of incorporating fgm / c into broader gender equality and human rights programs , and encouraging community actions such as alternative rites of passage and public declarations for abandonment .

the existence of a law can help abandonment efforts , but other interventions at the community level must also be undertaken for the law to be effective , according to prb and unicef .

prb noted that resources are needed after the adoption of anti - fgm / c policies to ensure awareness and enforcement of the law .

for example , in burkina faso , the joint program helped raise awareness of fgm / c laws for personnel in the justice sector , informing them about current policies and their implications for their work .

in addition , in uganda , the joint program supported six community policing sessions that provided communities with information on existing laws and helped ensure their implementation .

the growing interest and understanding of the law within the communities led to the arrest of two cutters , according to the program's focal point in uganda .

education is an important way to raise awareness about the dangers of fgm / c and its impact as a social norm .

community education programs play an essential role in encouraging communities to reconsider the practice , according to unicef .

a community education project could last for a number of years and include a wide range of participants such as government officials , media , health professionals , and at - risk girls .

communities are encouraged to reflect on the role of women and girls and how fgm / c affects their lives .

educational activities and community dialogues create a safe , non - threatening environment where people can evaluate their beliefs regarding fgm / c , according to the joint program evaluation .

events may focus on fgm / c specifically or may combine information on fgm / c with information on health , religion , or human rights .

efforts to abandon fgm / c are strengthened when a wide range of actors — including religious leaders , and boys and men — are included in community education , according to prb .

because religion is often cited as a reason for continuing the practice , engaging religious leaders in public education can be effective in encouraging abandonment , according to a joint program evaluation .

religious leaders often already have the community's respect and can be a powerful influence on dispelling the belief that there is a religious obligation .

religious leaders in one ethiopian community participated in public discussions about abandonment , according to a unicef study .

by the end of the sessions , six of seven villages pledged to abandon the practice , and religious leaders led a special prayer binding the decision .

working with religious leaders is a core strategy and a critical component of community engagement in the joint program as well .

for example , the joint program reported that , through its efforts , 304 religious leaders were educated about fgm / c in mauritania .

involving boys and men in outreach efforts is also essential in ending fgm / c .

in about half of the countries where fgm / c is prevalent , men outnumber women in their opposition to fgm / c , according to a joint program report .

for example , 42 percent of boys and men in guinea think fgm / c should stop , compared to 19 percent of girls and women , according to unicef .

the joint program increased its efforts to engage men and boys in 2014 , resulting in their voices against fgm / c becoming more prominent on social media , according to a joint program report .

for instance , male advocacy emerged in somalia where men have posted their support of uncut women on facebook , stating , “don't do it for us.” often , women are misinformed about their husbands' opinions on fgm / c .

men may not talk about fgm / c because it is considered a “women's issue.” open dialogue between the sexes could reduce this ignorance , according to unicef .

intergenerational dialogue is another approach to changing behaviors , according to prb .

this approach recognizes that the older generations' full engagement is needed , given their role as decision - makers and gatekeepers , and because they are likely to feel threatened by changing traditions .

for example , the grandmother project in senegal increased participants' appreciation of positive cultural traditions and changing attitudes towards harmful traditions , according to prb .

because senior women are viewed as valuable cultural resources and influential members of their communities , communities are more comfortable with an approach that includes dialogue between elders and youth , according to prb .

media campaigns can also educate the public on the harmful effects of the practice and can shape the public discourse around fgm / c , according to the joint program evaluation .

they can help spread information on decreasing support for fgm / c .

radio , in particular , enables the dissemination of information to remote villages and illiterate populations .

forums for discussion can include talk shows , documentaries , and educational tv .

social media is particularly effective with adolescents and can be instrumental in spreading information .

in all 15 countries in the joint program's first phase , programs used media to increase awareness of the practice's harmful effects and encourage abandonment .

media campaigns , like other approaches , have the greatest impact when they are part of a larger effort , according to prb .

figure 3 shows a road sign promoting the campaign against fgm / c in uganda .

education and training for medical professionals can encourage them to help prevent fgm / c and also prepare them to provide appropriate treatment for those who have undergone fgm / c procedures .

in response to medicalization , the joint program began working with the who to ensure medical professionals' support for fgm / c abandonment .

the joint program's first phase prioritized integrating fgm / c prevention into antenatal and neonatal care and immunization services in countries where a large portion of girls are cut between birth and age 5 .

specifically , during phase i , a total of 5,571 health facilities integrated fgm / c prevention into their antenatal and postnatal care , and more than 100,000 doctors , midwives , and nurses have participated in training on integrating fgm / c prevention , response , and care into their services .

in all 15 joint program countries , medical staff were trained on the negative consequences of fgm / c and , in many cases , how to treat medical complications from the practice .

such training has strengthened the medical community's capacities for preventing and responding to fgm / c .

in 2014 , about 200,000 girls and women received prevention , protection , or care services relating to fgm / c through the joint program , according to the joint program report .

the report also noted that , as a result of an initiative led by the joint program , djibouti is the first african country where girls are physically examined for evidence of fgm / c during routine check - ups .

fgm / c should be addressed as part of broader efforts to promote gender equality and female empowerment , according to prb .

in the joint program , fgm / c is approached as one of many forms of gender - based violence .

in addition , the joint program highlights the intersection between fgm / c , women's reproductive health , and girls' education .

by addressing the practice as part of broader issues , interventions are able to address how existing practices negatively affect opportunities for women and girls .

when fgm / c is incorporated into programming that challenges assumptions about gender relationships , it directly advances broader goals of reducing gender inequality and gender - based violence , according to unicef .

increasingly , discussions about fgm / c have been shaped within a human rights approach , which can lead to public declarations against fgm / c in thousands of communities , according to unicef .

human rights vocabulary needs to be adapted for use by its program participants and it should include relevant symbols , narratives , or religious language so that it resonates with the local community .

the joint program incorporates issues of gender equality and human rights in the design and implementation of its efforts .

it has simultaneously conceptualized fgm / c as an abuse of human rights and a form of gender - based violence while also seeking to be culturally sensitive to the value the practice holds in many communities .

a joint program report highlighted alternative rites of passage as an effective means of abandoning fgm / c .

in certain communities , rites of passage have for centuries marked the transition from child to adult , according to the joint program evaluation .

for girls , that rite of passage is often combined with fgm / c .

some communities may be reluctant to abandon fgm / c because they are reluctant to give up this rite of passage ceremony .

in kenya , thousands of girls have participated , since 2008 in alternative rites of passage to encourage abandonment while preserving this tradition , according to a joint program report .

the effort typically involves sending the girls away for a week to an orientation program that includes teaching about the harmful effects of fgm / c .

the joint program report noted that in kenya in 2014 , the joint program supported an alternative rites of passage program for more than 1600 girls .

this program involved final celebrations that included certificates of recognition for the commitment to stay uncut .

figure 4 shows an alternative rite of passage ceremony in kenya .

expressing public commitment to stop the practice of fgm / c is a promising approach to abandonment , according to several studies .

village - level declarations are one way to measure a program's impact on fgm / c , according to prb .

public declarations encouraged by the joint program are typically preceded by community discussions and engagement with community leaders and members .

public declarations do not guarantee a change in behavior , but they do have an influence on social norms , according to the joint program evaluation .

a public commitment applies social pressure that makes it difficult to return to old behaviors .

in egypt and senegal , public commitments to end fgm / c occurred only after human rights discourse was introduced into basic education curricula , according to unicef .

a 2008 unicef evaluation of a public declaration program in senegal found that prevalence dropped by more than half in villages that had taken public pledges to abandon the practice .

since 2008 , when the joint program was established , nearly 10,000 communities in 15 countries , representing about 8 million people , have renounced the practice .

state and usaid currently have limited international assistance efforts to address fgm / c .

in 2014 , state and usaid each had one active standalone project to address fgm / c .

in addition , we identified projects with broader goals that included components to address fgm / c but we were unable to determine the full extent of fgm / c - related efforts because state and usaid do not specifically track these efforts .

usaid has competing development priorities , which leaves little funding available for fgm / c - related efforts , according to usaid officials .

the largest current international assistance effort to address fgm / c is the unfpa / unicef joint program on fgm / c .

state provides funding to unfpa and unicef but , to date , has not contributed to this joint program .

however , if the general restrictions for unfpa funding are met , there are currently no specific legal restrictions that would prohibit u.s. funding provided to unfpa from being available for the joint program on fgm / c .

state's one standalone fgm / c program is in guinea , where 97 percent of girls and women aged 15 to 49 have undergone fgm / c .

this program is funded by about $1.5 million in grants from the full participation fund , an initiative created by state and funded through various appropriations accounts to support gender integration efforts .

it began in the fall of 2014 and will run through april 2016 , according to state officials .

through partnerships with the government of guinea , unicef , and 26 local civic and human rights organizations , the u.s. embassy in conakry established nationwide educational and media campaigns that engage policymakers , health professionals , traditional excisors , religious leaders , and the general public to abandon fgm / c .

activities include establishing a national strategic plan to abandon fgm / c in line with existing legal frameworks , capacity building and specialized training of institutions and individuals combating fgm / c , and support of multimedia information and communication awareness campaigns .

u.s. embassy staff are responsible for monitoring the project , which has 13 performance indicators .

examples of the performance indicators include the number of girls and women identified as abandoning fgm / c practices ; the reduction in the number of group excision ceremonies held in targeted districts and villages ; and the number of people trained by the u.s. - funded intervention providing gender - based violence services relating to fgm / c ( eg , law officers , judges , teachers , excision practitioners , health workers , religious leaders , policymakers , and potential victims ) .

state reported in july 2015 that the campaign had led to approximately 265 villages in guinea voluntarily and publicly denouncing this harmful practice since the start of 2015 .

state plans to conduct a separate impact evaluation in 2017 , according to state officials .

state provides funding to international organizations and non - governmental organizations to provide assistance to vulnerable populations in refugee settings overseas to meet their basic needs , including programs providing water and sanitation , shelter , and healthcare , as well as programs to prevent and respond to gender - based violence .

in fiscal year 2014 , state's bureau of population refugees and migration ( prm ) awarded about $35.7 million for 93 cooperative agreement awards to projects focused on or including gender - based violence activities .

state officials told us that some of these projects may include assistance related to fgm / c ; however , state does not capture this level of programmatic detail for these projects .

we contacted project implementers for nine of the largest gender - based violence projects in countries where fgm / c is prevalent and found that two of them provided assistance related to fgm / c .

one of these projects , which received $800,000 from state in fiscal year 2014 , provided gender - based violence assistance to central african republic refugees and chadian returnees in southern chad , including education and awareness - raising about fgm / c with project beneficiaries and local law enforcement authorities .

the project also provided specialist referral services to individuals who have undergone fgm / c .

the other project , which received $1,000,000 from state in fiscal year 2014 , was focused on prevention and response to gender - based violence for refugees in uganda .

this project included focus group discussions and interviews with selected members of the somali refugee community in uganda to raise awareness about the negative effects of fgm / c .

state provides annual funding to unfpa and unicef but , to date , none of this funding supports the joint program on fgm / c , the largest international effort to address fgm / c .

in fiscal year 2014 , the u.s. government provided funding to unfpa and unicef that included general contributions to be used at the un agencies' discretion in support of their overall missions , as well as contributions pledged to specific projects such as humanitarian relief efforts , according to state officials .

congress routinely places restrictions on u.s. funding in annual appropriations for unfpa .

however , if the general restrictions for unfpa funding are met , there are currently no specific legal restrictions that would prohibit u.s. funding provided to unfpa from being available for the joint program on fgm / c .

state and unfpa officials agree that the restrictions on unfpa funding would not stop the u.s. government from funding the joint program if it chose to devote funds to it .

state officials told us that the joint program , which is a long - term effort , may not have been considered for targeted contributions to unfpa because those funds are generally provided in response to short - term humanitarian appeals .

however , on march 15 , 2016 , the secretary of state announced that state intends to contribute to the unfpa – unicef joint program on fgm / c .

state depends on its embassies to use diplomacy to encourage abandonment of fgm / c , according to state officials .

state officials from the bureau of african affairs provided several examples in which u.s. embassies engaged diplomatically with local communities to raise awareness or provide training about fgm / c .

for example , in chad , central african republic , ethiopia , and niger , u.s. embassies hosted a screening of a film about fgm / c for student or women's groups to encourage abandonment of this practice .

some of these screenings were held to commemorate the international day of zero tolerance for fgm / c , which occurs every year on february 6th .

in eritrea , the embassy held a zero tolerance day event , displaying posters and distributing brochures on fgm / c .

since 2012 , state's annual country reports on human rights practices have included information on fgm / c , according to state .

state is required to report on the status of internationally recognized human rights for all countries receiving assistance and all united nations member states .

since 2012 , state has expanded the reports' coverage to include multiple forms of gender - based violence , including fgm / c and child , early , and forced marriage .

among other things , the 2014 human rights reports we reviewed identified countries' prevalence rates of fgm / c , common types of fgm / c , legal restrictions of fgm / c , and educational efforts undertaken to raise awareness about the dangers of this practice .

tracking host government actions and policies related to fgm / c as part of human rights reporting helps state build the knowledge necessary to diplomatically encourage actions to end this practice , according to state officials .

in addition , state officials noted that the department of the treasury relies on this information to advise the united states executive director of each international financial institution , such as the world bank , regarding whether they should support loans to countries where fgm / c is practiced .

usaid has competing development priorities , which leave little funding available for fgm / c - related efforts , according to usaid officials .

for example , all global health programs account funds are programmed to achieve outcomes in three priority areas in the health sector — ending preventable child and maternal deaths , creating an aids - free generation , and protecting communities from other infectious diseases .

in addressing these goals , funds are used first for programs expected to have the greatest impact in achieving them , according to usaid officials .

congressional reports accompanying appropriations laws for usaid funding included specific funding for fgm / c in 2000 and 2005 , but no such report language currently exists .

in 2000 , a conference report included language directing usaid to make $1.5 million available to develop educational programs aimed at eliminating fgm / c .

in 2005 , the senate committee on appropriations recommended that usaid spend $5 million to expand community - based efforts to combat fgm / c in high - prevalence countries .

recent congressional committee reports have directed that usaid provide funding to address obstetric fistula , which often occurs among populations of girls also at risk of fgm / c .

we identified one free - standing fgm / c program that was active during calendar year 2014 .

usaid supported the start - up of nairobi university's africa coordinating center for the abandonment of fgm / c ( accaf ) to advocate , educate , and create a supportive environment for cultural change ; support networking and knowledge exchange between researchers , health professionals , and community workers on the abandonment of fgm / c ; identify knowledge gaps and support and stimulate research in the field of fgm / c ; and improve health care for women and children who have undergone fgm / c .

the program runs from october 1 , 2013 , through september 30 , 2016 , and has a total funding level of $429,000 from the global health programs appropriations account , according to usaid officials .

it was funded as a subaward to the university of nairobi from an existing implementing partner in kenya .

the center carried out four community trainings in fiscal year 2014 involving 114 community leaders , community professionals , health care providers , fgm / c practitioners , fgm / c survivors , and youths , according to its 2014 annual report .

these 2-day training sessions addressed the different dimensions of fgm / c and helped prepare community members to advocate fgm / c abandonment to the broader community .

the center also supported advocacy of fgm / c abandonment in the media , as well as networking between researchers and health professionals , and has initiated studies of various aspects of the issue .

as required in the subaward agreement , the accaf developed a performance monitoring plan that included 20 indicators .

examples of these indicators include “number of advocacy teams created” and “number of community - based providers…trained or supported.” in addition , the award agreement requires the accaf to produce , among other things , an impact assessment within 90 days after the project end date , which includes a summary of lessons learned , success stories , and conclusions about areas in need of future assistance .

we found several examples of usaid projects — active in calendar year 2014 — addressing broader global health or democracy and governance objectives that had intervention elements related to fgm / c .

usaid officials told us , however , that they could not separate the level of funding for fgm / c efforts from other project activities .

in addition , usaid could not verify the extent to which these examples represented all fgm / c - related efforts undertaken by missions in high - prevalence countries .

usaid's systems for tracking funding and programming gender - based violence efforts do not capture subactivities as specific as fgm / c efforts , according to usaid officials .

for example , standard indicators developed by usaid and state to track the performance of assistance efforts include three indicators on gender - based violence prevention and response but do not specify the type of gender - based violence , such as fgm / c .

table 1 shows countries where usaid missions identified having projects active in calendar year 2014 with fgm / c - related efforts .

usaid created a publicly available e - learning course on fgm / c designed for those implementing interventions to address this practice , including the staff of u.s. government agencies and nongovernmental organizations .

the 2-hour and 30-minute course provides an overview of fgm / c , including definitions , medical risks from undergoing the procedure , prevalence , promising interventions , and lessons learned from studies of intervention efforts to prevent and respond to fgm / c .

the course was first published in october 2008 and was last updated in october 2015 .

we provided a draft of this report to state and usaid for their review .

state and usaid did not provide formal comments but each provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of the report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the report date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the usaid administrator .

we will also provide copies to others on request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

this is the first of two reports examining u.s. agencies' efforts to address female genital mutilation / cutting ( fgm / c ) at home and abroad .

this report ( 1 ) summarizes findings from recent u.s. and united nations ( un ) studies about the factors contributing to fgm / c and approaches to addressing this practice internationally and ( 2 ) examines the department of state's ( state ) and the united states agency for international development's ( usaid ) current efforts to address fgm / c abroad .

a second report will review u.s. efforts to address fgm / c domestically .

to identify factors contributing to fgm / c and current approaches to addressing this practice , we reviewed recent u.s. and un studies of international efforts to accelerate the abandonment of fgm / c and respond to victims of the practice .

we selected studies that examined assistance efforts to accelerate abandonment of fgm / c in countries where this practice is concentrated .

the studies were published in 2010 or later .

we examined a usaid - funded population reference bureau study , released in an evaluation of the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) - united nations children's fund ( unicef ) joint program on fgm / c , released in 2013 ; a summary report of the first phase of the unfpa - unicef joint program released in 2014 ; a unicef statistical overview of fgm / c , released in 2013 ; and a unicef review of efforts to accelerate fgm / c abandonment in five african countries , released in 2010 .

to determine state's and usaid's current efforts to address fgm / c abroad , we analyzed applicable strategy and policy documents and interviewed state and usaid officials involved in issues related to fgm / c .

these strategies and policies include: usaid's gender equality and female empowerment policy , march state's and usaid's united states strategy to prevent and respond to gender - based violence globally , august 2012 ; usaid's child , early , and forced marriage resource guide , usaid's usaid guidance on female genital mutilation / cutting , updated february 2016 ; and multiple agencies' united states global strategy to empower adolescent girls , march 2016 .

to identify state's efforts , we interviewed state officials in the office of global women's issues , and key bureaus including the bureaus of population , refugees , and migration ; democracy , human rights , and labor ; african affairs ; and near eastern affairs .

we reviewed documents related to a state - funded fgm / c prevention program in guinea .

we also reviewed a list of 54 projects addressing gender - based violence in refugee settings overseas that received state funding in fiscal year 2014 .

we identified the 10 largest of these projects ( with state funding of $500,000 or more ) in countries where fgm / c is prevalent .

for 9 of these projects , we contacted project implementers via e - mail to determine if the projects had any fgm / c - related components .

we were unable to contact the project implementers for 1 of the 10 projects .

we also met with officials from unfpa and unicef to discuss u.s. funding for these agencies and their joint program on fgm / c .

in addition , we reviewed state's country reports for human rights to determine how they addressed fgm / c issues .

to identify usaid's efforts , we interviewed usaid's senior coordinator for gender equality and women's empowerment and officials in key usaid bureaus including global health ; democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance ; africa ; and the middle east .

we also collected information on projects with fgm / c components from usaid's overseas missions in countries where fgm / c is prevalent .

to obtain this information , we worked with usaid staff in the office of the senior gender coordinator to ask relevant usaid missions via e - mail to identify any fgm / c - related programming that was active in calendar year 2014 .

while 12 missions reported having programs with fgm / c components in 2014 , we only presented information on the 5 projects that we were able to independently confirm as having fgm / c - related components through searches on websites of usaid's missions or implementing partners .

at the time of our request , indonesia had not been identified as a country where fgm / c was prevalent , and therefore , the usaid mission there was not included among those contacted .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to april 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the type of female genital mutilation / cutting ( fgm / c ) commonly practiced varies by country , according to data presented by the united nations children's fund , based on surveys of mothers about fgm / c performed on their daughters ( see table 2 ) .

for example , more than 20 percent of girls who underwent fgm / c in somalia , eritrea , niger , djibouti , and senegal experienced infibulation ( type iii ) — the most radical form of fgm / c .

in other countries , infibulation was uncommon .

for example , in egypt , mothers reported that infibulation represented 2 percent of cases .

the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) reported in 2013 that 24 countries where female genital mutilation / cutting ( fgm / c ) is prevalent have enacted legislation related to fgm / c .

these laws reportedly vary in their scope .

unicef reports that some ban the practice only in medical facilities ; others ban the practice anywhere .

in addition to the contact named above , leslie holen ( assistant director ) , ashley alley , lynn cothern , howard cott , jill lacey , and nancy santucci made significant contributions to this report .

