gao and others have long noted concerns about the design of medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) cost - sharing — the portion of costs for covered services that beneficiaries are responsible for when they receive care .

generally , health care insurers set three types of cost - sharing parameters: ( 1 ) deductibles — costs a beneficiary is responsible for before the health insurance plan will start to pay any costs ; ( 2 ) coinsurance or copayments ( per - service payments ) once the deductible is met ; and ( 3 ) caps — limits on the maximum cost - sharing amount a beneficiary can be responsible for during a year for covered services .

medicare ffs's cost - sharing is complicated and not well designed to discourage unnecessary use of services .

for example , medicare ffs's cost - sharing design includes two separate deductibles: a relatively high deductible for hospital services , which are usually not discretionary and are less likely to be influenced by cost - sharing requirements , and a relatively low deductible for outpatient services , which are more often discretionary and likely to be influenced by cost - sharing requirements .

in addition , medicare ffs lacks an annual cap , which can leave beneficiaries vulnerable to catastrophic costs .

to address these concerns , various groups have proposed revising medicare ffs's cost - sharing design , which has been largely unchanged from when medicare was enacted in 1965 .

specifically , groups have proposed that medicare ffs's cost - sharing design be simplified and include features found in private plans ( including in medicare advantage ( ma ) , the private plan alternative to medicare ffs ) , which have evolved over time to promote prudent use of health care services and protect beneficiaries from catastrophic care costs .

although the specifics of each proposal to revise medicare ffs's cost - sharing design have varied , the proposals have generally shared three features .

first , they have proposed establishing a single deductible to replace the current separate deductibles for hospital and outpatient services .

second , they have proposed modifying the per - service payments , with some proposals suggesting moving to a uniform coinsurance that would be the same for all services and others suggesting variable copayments tied to the clinical value of the service .

third , they have proposed adding an annual cap .

modernizing medicare's cost - sharing design would have both direct and indirect effects on beneficiaries' costs .

the direct effect would be how the revised design would change beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities for a given set of services .

the indirect effect would be that the altered incentives under a revised design would trigger behavioral responses , such as changes in beneficiaries' utilization of health care services , enrollment in supplemental insurance to help cover their medicare cost - sharing responsibilities , or enrollment in medicare ffs or ma .

the indirect and direct effects together would determine how a modernized design would affect beneficiaries' total out - of - pocket costs for covered services ( the amount of cost - sharing paid directly by the beneficiary plus the premiums ( monthly fees ) that beneficiaries pay for their medicare coverage and other supplemental insurance they may have ) .

some studies have examined how modernizing medicare's cost - sharing design would affect beneficiaries financially ; however , they have primarily focused on first - year effects and may have understated the advantages to beneficiaries of adding an annual cost - sharing cap .

over longer time horizons , the percentage of beneficiaries who would benefit from a catastrophic coverage cap in at least 1 year increases .

however , as the time horizon lengthens it becomes more difficult to predict beneficiaries' behavioral responses and their interactions with any degree of confidence .

analyzing the direct effect of a modernized cost - sharing design — the effect on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities , holding utilization and enrollment constant — over multiple years provides a baseline for understanding how the effect would vary depending on the parameters of the revised design and the time horizon examined .

in turn , discussing behavioral responses that might be triggered by this direct effect provides a fuller picture of how a modernized cost - sharing design might affect beneficiaries' total out - of - pocket costs .

you requested that we examine the potential annual and multiyear effects on beneficiaries' costs if the medicare ffs cost - sharing design were modernized to include a single deductible , uniform coinsurance above the deductible , and an annual cap .

this report describes 1. implications of the current medicare ffs cost - sharing design and options for modernizing while maintaining medicare's and beneficiaries' aggregate share of costs ; 2. how modernized cost - sharing designs could directly affect beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities ; and 3. how modernized cost - sharing designs could indirectly affect beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs .

to identify implications of the current cost - sharing design and options for modernizing , we reviewed relevant studies and analyzed summary medicare claims data .

in particular , we reviewed studies exploring implications of the current design and potential options for modernizing , as well as studies and documentation on cost - sharing design in private plans , including those in ma .

we also analyzed claims data from 2014 ( the most recent year of data available at the time we began our study ) to describe beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities under the current design .

we also used claims data to develop four illustrative options for modernized cost - sharing designs , each of which included a single deductible , uniform coinsurance , and an annual cap , while maintaining medicare's aggregate share of costs similar to the current design when holding health care utilization and beneficiary enrollment constant .

to do so , we first identified the approximately 28 million medicare ffs beneficiaries who were continuously enrolled in medicare ffs from january 2007 through december 2014 or their death .

we then calculated each beneficiary's annual cost - sharing responsibilities under the current design and what they would have been under a revised design , holding utilization and enrollment constant .

to identify the specific parameters for each illustrative design , we started with one of the four caps applicable to ma plans in 2014 and a uniform coinsurance of 20 percent ( the same level as the coinsurance for most part b services under the current design ) .

we then tested different possible levels of the deductible until we found a level that maintained medicare program spending and the split of costs between medicare and beneficiaries similar to the current design .

to illustrate how modernized cost - sharing designs could directly affect beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities , we used the same cohort of 28 million beneficiaries .

first , we calculated the distribution of these beneficiaries' 1-year , 4-year , and 8-year annual cost - sharing responsibilities — including the median and maximum responsibility — under the current cost - sharing design and each of the four illustrative designs , and compared these distributions .

second , we calculated the percentage of beneficiaries who would have experienced a change in their annual cost - sharing responsibilities in specified ranges — including at least $100 lower or at least $100 higher than their responsibilities under the current design — and the average change among these groups .

we also calculated how these changes were related to whether a beneficiary reached the cap at least once .

to assess the accuracy of the summary medicare claims data , we reviewed related documentation ; interviewed centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) officials knowledgeable about the data ; conducted checks for missing , duplicative , or erroneous data ; and compared our results with published data .

based on these activities , we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

to identify how modernized cost - sharing designs could indirectly affect beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs , we reviewed relevant studies and interviewed experts .

the experts we interviewed included staff from cms's office of the actuary ; organizations that conducted studies on modernizing the medicare ffs cost - sharing design ( the congressional budget office , kaiser family foundation , and medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) ) ; and other entities with insight on some of the potential effects of modernizing the medicare ffs cost - sharing design ( the american academy of actuaries and national association of insurance commissioners ) .

we conducted this performance audit from march 2016 to january 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in 2016 , medicare spent about $380 billion on health care services for beneficiaries enrolled in medicare ffs , which consists of two separate parts: medicare part a , which primarily covers hospital services , and medicare part b , which primarily covers outpatient services .

the majority of the 38 million medicare ffs beneficiaries were enrolled in both part a and part b , although about 5 million were enrolled in part a only and 0.3 million were enrolled in part b only .

the general design of medicare ffs cost - sharing has been largely unchanged since medicare's enactment in 1965 .

it includes separate deductibles for part a and part b services , a variety of per - service copayments and coinsurance after the deductibles are met , and no cap on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities ( see table 1 ) .

the current cost - sharing design leaves beneficiaries exposed to potentially catastrophic cost - sharing , and in part because of that , in 2015 , 81 percent of medicare ffs beneficiaries obtained supplemental insurance that covered some or all of their medicare cost - sharing responsibilities , often in exchange for an additional premium ( see table 2 ) .

for example , in 2015 , 31 percent of medicare ffs beneficiaries purchased a private medigap plan , the most common types of which fully insulated them from medicare cost - sharing responsibilities in exchange for an average annual premium of $2,400 .

another 20 percent of medicare ffs beneficiaries enrolled in medicaid , which generally covered most of their medicare cost - sharing responsibilities ; however , these low - income beneficiaries generally only paid a limited or no premium for this supplemental coverage .

the current medicare ffs cost - sharing design can be confusing , contribute to beneficiaries' overuse of services , and leave beneficiaries exposed to catastrophic costs .

modernizing the design could address these concerns , but would involve trade - offs .

for example , as shown in four illustrative designs that we evaluated , maintaining medicare's share of costs would involve a trade - off between the level of the cap and the deductible ( or other cost - sharing ) .

as noted by medicare advocacy groups and others , the current medicare ffs cost - sharing design , which includes multiple deductibles , can be confusing for beneficiaries .

in 2014 , 16 percent of medicare ffs beneficiaries were responsible for at least one part a deductible for an episode of inpatient care as well as the annual part b deductible .

 ( medicare ffs beneficiaries may be subject to more than one part a deductible during the year , as the part a deductible applies to each admission to an inpatient hospital or skilled nursing facility that occurs more than 60 consecutive days after the prior admission. ) .

the congressional budget office has cited the separate deductibles as one way in which medicare ffs cost - sharing is more complicated than private plans .

in 2016 , according to a survey conducted by the kaiser family foundation , only 1 percent of workers with employer - sponsored insurance had a separate deductible for inpatient services .

moreover , inpatient services tend to be nondiscretionary , and one or more deductibles for those services can create a financial burden for beneficiaries , while having minimal effect on their use of inpatient services .

the cost - sharing design also affects beneficiaries' utilization of services .

for example , as noted by the bipartisan simpson - bowles fiscal commission , the lack of a coherent cost - sharing system is a significant contributor to overuse and misuse of care .

this is particularly true for services such as home health and clinical laboratory services , which currently have no cost - sharing under medicare ffs and thus do not provide beneficiaries an incentive to decline care of negligible value .

because of these concerns , medpac recommended adding a cost - sharing requirement for home health services that were not preceded by hospitalization or post - acute care , noting that the current lack of cost - sharing has likely contributed to the significant rise in utilization for these services , which suggests some overuse .

at the same time , the lack of an annual cost - sharing cap prevents medicare ffs from fulfilling a key purpose of health insurance: protecting beneficiaries from catastrophic medical expenses .

while most beneficiaries had cost - sharing responsibilities under $2,000 in 2014 , 1 percent — over 300,000 beneficiaries — had responsibilities over $15,000 , including several hundred beneficiaries with responsibilities between $100,000 and $3 million .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

given the risk of catastrophic medical expenses , a focus group of current and future medicare beneficiaries convened by medpac indicated that an annual cap is the cost - sharing design feature they were most interested in seeing added to the medicare benefit .

annual caps are a common design feature of private plans , as most are required to have an annual cap , including those participating in ma .

specifically , since 2011 , cms has required most ma plans to have an annual cap of $6,700 or less and grants them additional flexibility in their cost - sharing design if they voluntarily set their cap at or below $3,400 .

the mandatory and voluntary caps for certain ma plans that provide both in - and out - of - network coverage are the same ( $6,700 and $3,400 ) for in - network services , and 1.5 times higher ( $10,000 and $5,100 ) for combined in - and out - of - network services .

in addition to these implications of the cost - sharing design itself , the american academy of actuaries and others have noted that the complexity and the possibility of unlimited responsibilities increases demand for supplemental insurance , which can lead to added costs for beneficiaries and the medicare program .

it is uncommon for beneficiaries enrolled in private health insurance to have supplemental coverage .

by insulating beneficiaries from some or all cost - sharing responsibilities ( and not just catastrophic costs ) , supplemental insurance further reduces the incentives for beneficiaries to evaluate the need for discretionary care .

in part because of these reduced incentives , we previously estimated that both beneficiaries' average total out - of - pocket costs and average medicare program spending were higher for medicare ffs beneficiaries with medigap than those with ffs only .

modernizing medicare ffs cost - sharing could address these concerns , but would involve design trade - offs .

specifically , as proposed by various groups , revising medicare's cost - sharing design to include a single deductible , modified cost - sharing requirements , and an annual cost - sharing cap could address concerns with the current cost - sharing design .

however , there are multiple options for revising within this broad framework , including two key design trade - offs that would affect the extent to which a modernized structure would address concerns about the current design ( and possibly also raise new concerns ) .

one trade - off centers on how to modify the existing complicated set of cost - sharing requirements for different services .

while the reform proposals have generally suggested moving to a single deductible , they have varied in how to modify the subsequent per - service payments .

some proposals have emphasized the value of simplicity and suggested replacing the complex set of per - service payments above the deductible with a uniform coinsurance .

a uniform coinsurance would simplify the cost - sharing design , provide beneficiaries insight into the total cost of each service , and introduce cost - sharing for certain potentially discretionary services , such as home health services .

however , as noted by the medicare payment advisory commission and congressional budget office , uniform coinsurance also has drawbacks , such as a fixed percentage of an unknown bill being harder for beneficiaries to understand and predict than copayments .

other proposals have emphasized the need to set cost - sharing based on the value of services , and have suggested moving medicare toward a value - based insurance design in which per - service cost - sharing would vary based on the clinical value of the service to an individual beneficiary .

while a value - based design would specifically target cost - sharing to promote prudent use of health care services , implementing it is challenging in practice and would be more complicated for beneficiaries to understand and for cms to administer , though cms is testing the feasibility of value - based insurance design in ma .

a second design trade - off centers on how to set the level of the deductible and the annual cap .

as shown in the four illustrative cost - sharing designs we evaluated , the lower the cap , the higher the deductible ( or other cost - sharing requirements ) would need to be to maintain medicare's and beneficiaries' aggregate share of costs similar to that of the current design .

for example , holding utilization and enrollment constant , we found that even without any deductible , a uniform coinsurance of 18 percent ( a level below the existing 20 percent coinsurance for most part b services ) would be sufficient to add a cap near $10,000 ( the mandatory cap for certain ma plans that allow beneficiaries to see any provider ) .

in contrast , it would take a deductible near $1,225 ( a level similar to the existing part a deductible for each inpatient episode ) and a uniform coinsurance of 20 percent to establish a cap of $3,400 ( the voluntary cap for most ma plans ) .

 ( see table 3. ) .

different levels of the deductible and cap would address certain concerns of the current design raised by gao and others but also could create new ones .

for example , as our analysis of four illustrative cost - sharing designs shows , designs with relatively high caps would provide some additional protection from catastrophic costs while maintaining a deductible and coinsurance near or below the current levels for part b services .

however , per an analysis conducted by kaiser family foundation and the urban institute , half of medicare beneficiaries in 2016 were living on less than $26,200 in income ; thus , caps of $6,700 or higher may still leave some beneficiaries vulnerable to costs that are catastrophic for them and may not significantly decrease the associated demand for supplemental insurance .

in contrast , designs with relatively low caps would provide greater protection from catastrophic costs .

however , as noted by the congressional budget office , beneficiaries who reached the cap would have less incentive to use services prudently .

in addition , the higher deductible needed to offset a lower cap while maintaining medicare's share of costs could present a financial barrier for some beneficiaries to obtain necessary care .

the direct effect of modernizing the medicare ffs cost - sharing design ( i.e. , the effect when holding utilization and enrollment constant ) on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities would depend on the specific revisions and the time horizon examined .

as we noted above , modernizing the ffs cost - sharing design while maintaining medicare's aggregate share of costs similar to the current design requires a trade - off between the level of the deductible and cap .

at the beneficiary level , this design trade - off affects beneficiaries' annual cost - sharing and the degree to which beneficiaries would be protected from catastrophic costs .

one way of viewing how the design trade - off affects beneficiaries is to compare across different designs the median annual cost - sharing responsibility with the level of the cap ( see fig .

2 ) .

in examining the direct effect of the four illustrative modernized designs we analyzed , we found the following: during year 1 , cost - sharing designs that feature relatively low deductibles and relatively high caps would result in a median annual beneficiary cost - sharing responsibility close to or below that of the current design .

in contrast , designs with relatively low caps — and therefore greater beneficiary protection from catastrophic costs — would result in a median annual beneficiary cost - sharing responsibility above that of the current design .

for example , during year 1 of a design with no deductible , 18 percent coinsurance , and a cap near $10,000 , we found that the median annual cost - sharing responsibility would be $479 , which is below that of the current design ( $621 ) , despite the addition of a cap .

in contrast , during year 1 of a design with a $1,225 deductible , 20 percent coinsurance , and a cap near $3,400 , the median annual cost - sharing responsibility would be $1,486 , which is 2.4 times higher than that of the current design .

however , in exchange for this higher median annual cost - sharing responsibility , beneficiaries would have much greater protection from catastrophic costs , as their annual cost - sharing responsibilities would be capped near $3,400 .

by the end of 8 years , there would still be differences in the median annual beneficiary cost - sharing responsibility across different designs , but they would become less pronounced — despite the significantly different levels of catastrophic protection .

as beneficiaries age and become more likely to have catastrophic costs in at least one year , the median annual cost - sharing responsibility would increase , regardless of the cost - sharing design .

however , by the end of 8 years the differences in the median annual cost - sharing responsibility across different designs would become less pronounced .

for example , the median annual cost - sharing responsibility under the design with a cap near $10,000 would increase from below that of the current design in year 1 to 1.1 times higher than the current design by the end of 8 years .

in contrast , the median annual cost - sharing responsibility under the design with the cap near $3,400 would decrease from 2.4 times higher than the current design in year 1 to only 1.6 times higher by the end of 8 years .

 ( see app .

i table 4 for more details , including results on our other two illustrative designs and results over 4 years. ) .

the same patterns held when looking at how the design trade - off affects beneficiaries in another way: the percentage of beneficiaries with cost - sharing responsibilities lower and higher than under the current design ( see fig .

3 ) .

in examining the direct effect of our four illustrative designs , we found the following: during year 1 , designs that feature relatively low deductibles and relatively high caps would result in a minority of beneficiaries having cost - sharing responsibilities that are at least $100 higher than under the current design .

in contrast , designs with relatively high deductibles and relatively low caps would result in the majority of beneficiaries having cost - sharing responsibilities that are higher than under the current design .

for example , during year 1 of a design with no deductible , 18 percent coinsurance , and a cap near $10,000 , 16 percent of beneficiaries would have cost - sharing responsibilities at least $100 higher than their responsibilities under the current design .

in contrast , during year 1 of a design with a $1,225 deductible , 20 percent coinsurance , and a cap near $3,400 , 69 percent of beneficiaries would have cost - sharing responsibilities at least $100 higher than their responsibilities under the current design .

by the end of 8 years , there would still be differences across the designs , but they would become less pronounced — despite levels of catastrophic protection that vary significantly .

over a longer time horizon , a larger percentage of beneficiaries would reach the cap at least once , regardless of the cost - sharing design ( ranging from 23 percent reaching the cap at least once over 8 years under the design with a cap near $10,000 to 66 percent under the design with a cap near $3,400 ) .

however , the subset of these beneficiaries who nonetheless had annual cost - sharing responsibilities at least $100 higher would also increase .

whether this increase would be augmented or offset by the changes over time in the percentage of beneficiaries who never reached the cap and had higher cost - sharing responsibilities would depend on the specific design .

for example , the percentage of beneficiaries with annual cost - sharing responsibilities at least $100 higher than the current design would increase from 16 percent in year 1 to 38 percent by year 8 under the design with a cap near $10,000 .

in contrast , this percentage would decrease from 69 percent in year 1 to 67 percent by year 8 under the design with a cap near $3,400 .

 ( see app .

i tables 5 and 6 for more details , including results on our other two illustrative designs and results over 4 years. ) .

modernizing the medicare ffs cost - sharing design would affect beneficiaries' costs indirectly through beneficiaries' and supplemental insurers' behavioral responses to altered incentives , according to the studies we reviewed and the experts we spoke to .

these studies and experts identified several types of behavioral responses that would influence the net effect of a modernized design on beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs , including changes in beneficiaries' demand for , and insurers' supply of , supplemental insurance ; changes in beneficiaries' utilization of services ; changes in medicare beneficiaries' enrollment in ffs versus ma ; and interactions among these and other behavioral responses , including effects on the price of supplemental insurance .

according to studies we reviewed and experts we spoke to , implementing a modernized cost - sharing design would likely trigger changes in the demand for and supply of supplemental insurance .

for example , a focus group of current and future medicare beneficiaries convened by medpac and a report from the american academy of actuaries stated that the addition of an annual cap would reduce the need of some beneficiaries to purchase supplemental insurance .

while beneficiaries who drop their supplemental insurance would then need to pay all their medicare cost - sharing responsibilities , those might be less than their annual premium for supplemental insurance .

additionally , according to the same medpac study and a congressional budget office report , retiree coverage may change under a modernized design .

for example , with a cap in place , there would be less difference between employer - sponsored plans and medicare , and employers may choose to alter the supplemental insurance they offer .

cms officials told us that this would continue the trend of private employers reducing retiree health coverage .

several studies we reviewed and experts we interviewed indicated that implementing a modernized design could also trigger changes in utilization of medicare services , the extent of which would affect beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs .

for example , the rand health insurance experiment ( hie ) , which some experts consider to be the most comprehensive study on price and utilization , found that patients were “moderately sensitive to price.” the rand hie found that patients respond to increases in cost - sharing that they need to pay at least partly out - of - pocket by decreasing their use of some services .

similarly , cms officials told us that they would expect utilization to decrease as beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs increased , while a study in the american economic review found that the addition of a copayment led to a decline in office visits .

the rand hie study suggests that a 10 percent increase in cost - sharing would lead to a 1 to 2 percent decline in patients' use of services .

in the case of the rand hie study , cost - sharing affected the number of contacts people initiated with their physician , which impacted preventive care and diagnostic tests .

the study found that this could potentially affect patients' use of both effective and less effective services .

according to several studies and interviews with experts , design changes could trigger other behavioral responses .

for example , a study by the kaiser family foundation and a report by the congressional budget office both anticipated that a modernized design could change the proportion of medicare beneficiaries who decide to enroll in ffs or ma .

similarly , officials from the american academy of actuaries told us that they would expect a change in demand for ma under a modernized design .

under the current medicare design , all ma plans have an annual cap that protects beneficiaries from catastrophic medical expenses .

between 2008 and 2017 , the percentage of medicare beneficiaries who chose to enroll in an ma plan increased from 22 to 33 percent .

cms officials told us that the increases in ma enrollment may be due in part to the requirement that ma plans must include an annual cost - sharing cap .

the kaiser family foundation study found that a modernized design , similar to that of an ma plan , might incentivize some ma beneficiaries to move back to ffs .

according to experts we interviewed and studies we reviewed , different behavioral responses described above would also likely interact and affect beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs .

cms officials told us that when all of the factors contributing to out - of - pocket costs are combined , it is difficult to assess the net effect of a modernized cost - sharing design on beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs .

for example , officials with the national association of insurance commissioners emphasized that as both demand for supplemental insurance and expected utilization changed , supplemental premiums would also change , which would change out - of - pocket costs .

similarly , studies by both medpac and the congressional budget office found that changes in beneficiaries' level of supplemental insurance might trigger additional changes in utilization , which would also result in changes to the pricing of supplemental insurance .

specifically , if a number of relatively healthy beneficiaries dropped their supplemental insurance , and the beneficiaries left were sicker ( that is , more costly ) , premiums for supplemental insurance might increase .

officials from the congressional budget office told us that , conversely , if the more costly beneficiaries dropped their supplemental insurance , premiums might be lower .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of health and human services for comment .

the department provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

the direct effect of modernizing the medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) cost - sharing design ( i.e. , the effect when holding utilization and enrollment constant ) on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities would depend on the specific revisions and the time horizon examined .

tables 4 , 5 , and 6 present the direct effect of modernizing the medicare ffs cost - sharing design on beneficiaries' cost - sharing responsibilities under four illustrative designs .

each table presents the direct effect of each illustrative design over 1- , 4- , and 8-year time horizons .

in addition to the contact named above , greg giusto ( assistant director ) , alison binkowski , george bogart , reed meyer , beth morrison , brandon nakawaki , and brian o'donnell made key contributions to this report .

also contributing were todd anderson , emei li , yesook merrill , vikki porter , and frank todisco .

