thank you for inviting me to testify at today's hearing on the department of commerce's national technical information service ( ntis ) .

as you know , ntis was established to serve as a permanent repository and disseminator of scientific , technical , engineering , and business - related information .

this information largely takes the form of research reports acquired from federal agencies and their contractors and grantees , as well as from other domestic and foreign sources .

in addition , ntis performs various fee - based information services for other federal agencies .

the legislation that established ntis requires it to be financially self - sustaining to the fullest extent feasible .

however , the increasing availability of the information that ntis collects and disseminates — primarily through the web — has called the service's basic statutory function into question .

at your request , my testimony today will summarize the results of a report that we issued in november 2012 on ntis's operations , trends in the age of and demand for the information it collects , and the extent to which this information is readily available from other public sources .

to prepare this statement , we relied on our previously published work on ntis ; related updates on actions needed to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in the federal government ; and a review of legislation pertaining to ntis's role .

all of the work supporting this testimony was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the performance audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

ntis operates as 1 of 12 independent bureaus within the commerce department , with the mission of promoting the nation's economic growth by providing access to information that stimulates information and discovery .

it is led by a director , who is aided by two executives — a chief information officer and a chief financial officer .

in addition , three operational offices are responsible for providing ntis's products ( which include the reports it collects and disseminates ) and services .

ntis receives oversight from the deputy secretary of commerce , the director of the national institute of standards and technology , and an advisory board made up of a chairperson and four members appointed by the secretary of commerce .

by 181 staff , including 103 ntis employees and 78 contractors .

as of october 2012 , ntis was supported ntis's basic statutory function is to collect research reports , maintain a bibliographic record and permanent repository of these reports , and disseminate them to the public .

under statutory authority enacted in 1950 , ntis collects reports containing scientific , technical , and engineering information from both domestic and foreign sources in a repository and makes the information available to business and industry , state and local governments , other federal agencies , and the general public .

while the statute does not define “scientific , technical , and engineering information,” the secretary of commerce has interpreted this to include “all types of information which have a more or less direct bearing on business and industry generally.” ntis's enabling legislation authorized it to charge fees for its reports and established a policy to recover all costs , as feasible , through the fees .

the ntis advisory board was established by law ( 15 u.s.c .

§ 3704b ( c ) ) in 1988 to review the general policies and operations of ntis , including policies related to fees and charges for its products and services .

board members can include individuals who are both internal and external to the department of commerce .

joint ventures , and other transactions as necessary to conduct its business .

under this authority , the agency has also developed and provides a variety of information - related services .

this act further declared ntis's repository to be a permanent federal function that could not be transferred to the private sector without congressional approval .

the act was amended by the american technology preeminence act of 1991 , which required all costs associated with ntis's acquisition , processing , storage , bibliographic control , and archiving to be recovered primarily by fees ; required agencies to transfer to ntis unclassified scientific , technical , and engineering information resulting from federally funded research and development ; and provided that ntis should produce and disseminate information in electronic format .

audit work that we conducted in 2000 and 2001 identified concerns about ntis's financial sustainability .

in this regard , we noted that , from fiscal year 1988 through fiscal year 1994 , ntis had shown excess revenue from the sale of its products and services in all years except one and generated cumulative net earned revenues of $5.8 million .

however , over the next 5-year period ( fiscal year 1995 through fiscal year 1999 ) , it had a cumulative net cost of about $4.2 million .

pub .

l. no .

102-395 ( oct. 6 , 1992 ) .

sufficient to recover all of the agency's operating costs .

the secretary attributed the decline , in part , to other agencies making their research results freely and publicly available on the web .

he also proposed transferring ntis's research report archives to the library of congress and requiring federal agencies to give the public free online access to new research reports .

in june 2000 , we reported that although ntis could remain solvent for a few years because commerce and ntis officials had acted to reduce costs , the agency's solvency beyond fiscal year 2003 was in doubt , based accordingly , we suggested that on our forecast of its revenue and costs.congress consider whether ntis ( or another agency ) was needed to serve as a permanent repository for and disseminator of research reports .

we again reported on ntis's operations in may 2001 , according to ntis's deputy director , the agency had significantly reduced its costs after our june 2000 report and had shown net revenues of $2.2 million for fiscal year 2000 .

moreover , the deputy director had projected net earned revenue of $1.5 million for fiscal year 2001 .

we further reported that the agency was providing a variety of fee - based services to other agencies , and while demand for electronic products was on the rise , research reports and other scientific , technical , and engineering information maintained by ntis were increasingly available through agency websites and other public sources — often at no cost .

thus , we suggested that congress look at how this information was defined ; whether there was a need for a central repository of this information ; and , if a central repository was maintained , whether all information should be retained permanently and what business model should be used to manage it .

the secretary of commerce agreed with our assessment and raised the question of whether there was a need for a central repository in view of the increasing availability of newer publications .

however , ntis continued to operate as this repository .

gao , information management: dissemination of technical reports , gao - 01-490 ( washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2001 ) .

our most recent reporting on ntis , in november 2012 , continued to highlight the need for attention to ntis's basic statutory role of disseminating technical reports and the fee - based model upon which it in particular , while the agency was carrying out a variety of operates.mission - related functions , it was being financially sustained primarily by information - related services it offered to other federal agencies .

further , we noted that additions to ntis's repository since 1990 had mostly included older reports , but the demand was greater for more recent reports .

more significantly , we found that most of the reports added to ntis's repository since 1990 were freely available from other websites .

in our 2012 report , we identified the types of products offered by ntis as part of its basic statutory function to collect and disseminate technical information: technical reports: ntis maintains a searchable repository containing bibliographic records on over 2.5 million scientific , technical , engineering , and business research reports .

of these , the agency noted that approximately 700,000 reports had been digitized , with the remainder in physical form , such as paper or microfilm .

access to the reports was provided both through the direct sale of individual reports and by subscription to ntis's national technical reports library .

prices for individual reports and subscriptions varied .

for example , an electronic copy of a report from the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) marshall space flight center , nasa robotics for space exploration , could be purchased for $15 , and a customized cd for this report could be purchased for $30 .

clearinghouse: ntis disseminates publications — either electronically or in print — on a variety of topics on behalf of other agencies .

according to ntis , these agencies request that ntis distribute the publications in print or electronically .

examples include the food and drug administration code manual and the bureau of labor statistics standard occupational classification manual .

publishing: ntis also provides access to information collected from federal agencies under the terms of memoranda of understanding or interagency agreements .

in some cases , ntis repackages the information with additional features .

according to ntis , agencies initiate the request for these services .

examples include the drug enforcement administration database and social security administration's death master file .

we also discussed the variety of fee - based services offered by ntis to other federal agencies , which were less directly related to its basic statutory function .

these information - related services included the following: distribution and order fulfillment services: through memoranda of understanding or interagency agreements , ntis distributes large quantities of informational materials for federal agencies .

for example , it has distributed health and nutrition educational brochures , posters , and similar products on behalf of the department of agriculture .

web - based services and federal cloud computing: ntis offers website hosting and cloud computing services , among other computer - based services , to federal agencies .

brokerage services: ntis provided billing and collection services on a reimbursable basis to agencies that charge for products and services but lack the infrastructure to do their own billing and collecting .

customers have included the national agricultural library and the national library of medicine .

e - training and knowledge management services: these services include software solutions and other tools , offered in conjunction with joint venture partners , to support online training and related functions .

customers have included the departments of justice , the interior , and the treasury , among others .

digitization and scanning services: ntis digitizes various types of documents , such as microfilm or microfiche and paper forms , to assist agencies in complying with federal standards for ensuring access for people with disabilities .

it also offers storage and distribution for documents it digitizes .

as of may 2012 , the agency said it had six primary clients for its digitization and scanning services , including the social security administration and the department of justice .

as we noted , ntis's revenues were generated exclusively from its products and services , and all its revenues , expenses , and capital expenditures were deposited into and paid out of its revolving fund .

we found that for fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2011 , ntis had net earned revenues from all its functions ( products and services ) for 8 of these 11 years .

however , for 10 of these years , ntis's expenditures for its product lines exceeded revenues .

consequently , the overall financial performance of the agency during this time had been supported by revenues from its service offerings , which increased , on average , $1.8 million during this period .

figure 1 shows the trends in reported net earned revenues ( or net costs ) for ntis products and services from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2011 .

the decline that we noted in revenue for its products called into question whether ntis's basic statutory function as a self - financing repository and disseminator of scientific and technical information was still viable .

this was further illustrated by the fact that the services that were financially sustaining the agency were less directly related to this function .

ntis has recognized this situation and has conducted analyses and identified actions to address the decline in revenue from its products .

for example , the agency's strategic plan for 2011-2016 identified three initiatives to address declining product revenue , which include creating new and enhanced products and increasing the breadth and depth of its collection .

our study also found that , during the period from fiscal year 1990 through 2011 , the majority of reports added to ntis's repository were older ; however , the demand for more recent reports was greater: from fiscal year 1990 through fiscal year 2011 , most of the additions to ntis's repository were reports published in the year 2000 or before .

specifically , about 62 percent of the documents added during this period — 524,256 of the 841,502 documents added — had publication dates of 2000 or earlier , while about 38 percent were published from 2001 to 2011 .

from fiscal year 2000 through fiscal year 2011 , ntis distributed ( i.e. , sold ) one or more copies of almost 50 percent of the reports added from fiscal year 1990 through 2011 .

of these , approximately 78 percent were distributed by subscription .

the agency distributed a higher percentage of more recently published reports .

we estimated that between 96 and 100 percent of the reports published from 2001 through 2011 had been distributed , compared with 21 percent of reports published in 1989 or earlier .

it is worth noting that the more recent reports , for which there was greater demand , were also more likely to be freely available from other public sources ( as discussed later in this statement ) .

based on a sample of reports in ntis's repository , we estimated that about 74 percent of those added from fiscal year 1990 through 2011 were readily available from other public websites .

and of these , 95 percent were available for free .

these included reports available from the issuing organization's website , the government printing office's federal digital system website , and the federal government's official web portal , usa.gov , among other sources .

most often , these reports were readily located at another website through the search engine we used , http: / / www.google.com .

in addition , reports with more recent publication dates were more likely to be available from other public sources than older ones .

approximately 87 percent of the reports published from 2009 to 2011 were available elsewhere , while 55 percent of those published in 1989 or earlier were .

we further found that , of the reports that were readily available from one of the sources we searched , about 61 percent had been distributed ( sold ) by ntis .

by contrast , of the reports that were not found to be readily available from one of the other sources , most , or about 82 percent had not been distributed by ntis .

during our review , the director of ntis cited factors contributing to the greater availability of this information: ( 1 ) federal agencies are increasingly making information , including scientific , technical , and engineering information products , freely available on their websites ; and ( 2 ) agencies are working with search engines to make their products more readily available to the public .

moreover , the ntis strategic plan acknowledged that agencies' increasing use of the internet to disseminate information to the public posed a challenge to ntis's mandate as a self - financing repository and disseminator of technical information .

in our report , we concluded that the increasing availability – often at no cost — of the technical reports collected by ntis from other public sources called into question the continuing viability of the fee - based model under which it operates .

in our view , charging for information that is freely available elsewhere is a disservice to the public .

accordingly , we suggested that congress consider examining the appropriateness and viability of the fee - based model to determine whether it should continue .

we have also continued to highlight this issue in our report and related updates on actions needed to reduce fragmentation , overlap , and duplication in the federal government .

specifically , in our 2013 report we noted that many of the reports in ntis's collection overlap with similar information available from the issuing organizations or other sources for free , and that action was still needed to reevaluate the appropriateness and viability of the agency's fee - based model .

in a subsequent update , we noted that congress had not taken final action to reexamine the fee - based model for disseminating technical information , and that commerce did not plan to propose any changes to the ntis fee - based business model in the near term .

recent legislation intended to reassess the critical functions of ntis that you , chairwoman mccaskill , and senator coburn have introduced , well as the version of the legislation introduced by representatives bridenstine and cuellar , has the potential to address the issues we have identified .

in addition , the 2014 senate appropriations bill for the departments of commerce and justice , and science , and related agencies contains a provision that would , among other things , prohibit ntis from charging for any report or document generated by the legislative branch .

these bills stand to serve as an important vehicle for congress to reexamine the appropriateness and viability of ntis's fee - based model .

in summary , changing practices for disseminating and accessing technical information produced by federal agencies , which have been driven in large part by the internet , call into question the suitability or viability of ntis's role as a self - financing collector and disseminator of such information .

in light of this , a reconsideration of this role is warranted to determine whether ntis's statutorily - defined functions are still necessary and , if so , to ensure that they are carried out in a way that best serves the public interest .

the current legislation presents an opportunity for congress to reconsider and modify this role , taking into account the public's interest in accessing technical , scientific , and engineering information produced by the federal government .

let me google that for you act , s. 2206 , 113th congress , 2nd session ( 2014 ) .

chairwoman mccaskill , ranking member johnson , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have .

if you have any questions about this statement , please contact valerie c. melvin at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov .

other key contributors to this statement include neela lakhmani ( assistant director ) , elena epps , and lee mccracken .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

