the department of defense ( dod ) has used military working dogs ( mwds ) since world war ii to assist and protect servicemembers at installations within the united states , and at deployment sites worldwide .

currently , mwds serve as extensions of military law enforcement , and assist with the detection and tracking of drugs , explosives , and physical threats to servicemembers .

the air force's 341st training squadron at joint base san antonio , texas is responsible for procuring and assigning all mwds for the military and transporting them to military installations .

the air force also trains a majority of the mwds , although the other military services — army , navy , and marine corps — may also provide training for the mwds assigned to them .

the u.s. army medical command's public health command regions and subordinate public health activities are responsible for the veterinary care of all military - owned animals , including mwds .

as of october 2016 , about 1,800 mwds were in service .

mwds may be removed from service when they can no longer perform their duties due to medical or behavior problems , are no longer needed by the military , or under other circumstances .

when mwds are removed from service , they can be placed for adoption , either to a private party , such as a former handler , or by transfer to a law enforcement agency , or euthanized for health or behavior reasons .

once mwds have been adopted or transferred , dod is no longer responsible for them , including their medical care .

questions have been raised as to whether the environments or situations that mwds are exposed to during deployment may result in conditions that pose future health challenges once the mwd is removed from service .

based on those questions , house report 114-537 , accompanying the proposed version of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year ( fy ) 2017 , included a provision for us to assess end - of - service veterinary care for mwds .

this report examines ( 1 ) how dod tracks information about mwds , and how many mwds were adopted , transferred , or euthanized over the past 5 years ( 2011-2015 ) ; ( 2 ) prevalent medical conditions of adopted mwds for 2014 and 2015 ; and ( 3 ) what assistance is available for individuals who adopt mwds .

to determine how dod tracks information about mwds , and how many were adopted , transferred , or euthanized over the past 5 years ( 2011- 2015 ) , we interviewed relevant air force and army officials , reviewed data from the systems used to track information about mwds , and reviewed relevant documentation related to these systems .

additionally , we visited joint base san antonio , texas and observed demonstrations of the following three systems: 1 ) the working dog management system ( wdms ) — the computer system used to manage the full life cycle of mwds , 2 ) the central repository — paper copies of records for mwds that have been removed from service , and 3 ) the remote online veterinary record ( rovr ) — the electronic medical record system for all military animals that have been treated by a military veterinarian .

we also reviewed data on the number of mwds that were adopted , transferred , or euthanized over the past 5 years and interviewed air force officials about how reports with these data for 2011 and 2012 were compiled for congress , and how data for 2013-2015 were obtained from wdms and verified .

based on our review of the data , relevant documentation , and interviews with relevant officials , we determined the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objective .

to describe prevalent medical conditions of adopted mwds for 2014 and 2015 , we obtained and analyzed available medical information for these mwds from rovr .

to do this , we obtained identification numbers for the mwds that were adopted during this time from wdms and used this information to identify electronic medical records in rovr .

we specifically focused on electronic medical records that had “master problem lists,” which are lists of diagnosed medical conditions .

we obtained electronic medical records with master problem lists as available for mwds that were adopted in 2014 and 2015 .

according to army officials who maintain the database , while all mwds had hard - copy medical records with master problem lists prior to the implementation of rovr , some mwds adopted in 2014 and 2015 may not have had electronic medical records or master problem lists for the following reasons: 1 .

according to army officials , only active mwds had their hard copy medical records scanned into rovr when it was initially implemented .

as a result , mwds that had been designated for adoption at that time do not have electronic medical records .

2 .

when hard - copy medical records were scanned into rovr , certain types of information , such as master problem lists , had to be manually transcribed .

however , according to army officials , this did not always occur , and as a result , some of the mwds that were adopted in 2014 and 2015 had electronic medical records that did not include master problem lists .

our analysis is not generalizable to all mwds that were adopted during this time because we did not have electronic medical records with master problem lists for all of the mwds adopted in 2014 and 2015 .

however , based on our review of rovr , verification of the data , and interviews with army officials , we determined that the data on medical conditions that we obtained from the electronic medical files with master problem lists were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objective .

we also interviewed the chief of staff of a network of private veterinary hospitals in new jersey , as well as representatives from a national network of private veterinary hospitals to discuss the potential costs for treating mwds for the prevalent medical conditions we identified .

the chief of staff from the network of private veterinary hospitals in new jersey also provided us with estimated costs of preventative care needed for older mwds .

in order to determine what assistance is available for individuals who adopt mwds , we interviewed relevant nonprofit organizations that provide assistance for adopted mwds .

to identify what types of veterinary services are available through the military , we interviewed officials with the army's public health center and the dod mwd veterinary services office at joint base san antonio , texas and reviewed relevant documentation about the availability of veterinary services for privately owned animals , including adopted mwds .

we conducted this performance audit from july 2016 to march 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

dod defines an mwd as any canine bred , procured , or acquired to meet dod's requirements to support operations in the protection of installations , resources , and personnel .

these requirements include explosive and illegal narcotic detection capabilities , patrol , tracking , and other requirements .

as part of their duties , mwds can be deployed to assist in operations outside of their assigned military installation .

mwds are removed from service when they can no longer perform their duties due to medical or behavior problems , when they are no longer needed by the military , or in other circumstances , such as when a handler dies in action .

in 2000 , a law commonly known as “robby's law” was enacted to promote the adoption of mwds after their military service .

according to this law , the military shall make an mwd that is suitable for adoption available for adoption at the end of the dog's “useful life” or when the dog is no longer needed by the department .

robby's law has been amended a number of times since first enacted .

most recently , the ndaa for fy 2016 established priorities among the authorized recipients of mwds that are removed from service .

the amendment generally requires that mwds be made available first to former handlers , who care for and train the mwds .

the amendment gives second priority to others capable of humanely caring for the mwd , and , finally , it gives the lowest priority to law enforcement agencies .

after an mwd is adopted , robby's law provides that “the united states shall not be liable for any veterinary expense associated with ( an adopted mwd ) for a condition of the military animal before transfer” regardless of whether the condition is known at the time of adoption .

while dod is authorized to establish and maintain a veterinary care system for adopted mwds , no federal funds may be used for this purpose .

dod uses the term “disposition” to describe the process of removing mwds from service .

disposition of mwds can be initiated at any military location that has an mwd program .

all the military services follow the same process outlined in air force instruction 31-126 , which includes the policies and procedures for the mwd program .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

all decisions regarding the removal of mwds from service are made by a review board , which includes the commander of the air force's 341st training squadron , a representative of the 341st training squadron or designee , a veterinary corps officer ( army veterinarian ) , and a veterinary corps officer behavioral representative ( an army veterinarian who is trained in animal behavior ) .

air force officials told us that the review board may also consult with the kennel master , who manages the kennel at the military installation where the mwd is located , as well as the veterinary staff at joint base san antonio , texas , when making decisions about removing an mwd from service .

air force officials told us that handlers who are interested in adopting an mwd must communicate their interest to the kennel master where the mwd is located .

the kennel master is responsible for annotating wdms to show the handler's interest in adoption , including adding the handler's name and contact information .

the handler is responsible for maintaining contact with the kennel master and updating this contact information , if needed .

in the event that multiple handlers are interested in adopting the mwd , the unit commander of the entity that owns the mwd is responsible for determining which handler is in the best interest of the mwd .

air force officials told us that in these cases , the most recent handler would typically adopt the mwd .

air force officials told us that they are in the process of updating their adoption policy .

for example , the new policy outlines a method for recording whether or not the mwd was adopted by a former handler .

they also told us they plan to update the mwd service record to include a checkbox to indicate whether the mwd was adopted by a handler , and that these service records will be scanned into wdms .

officials have told us that these procedures will be implemented when the updated air force instruction becomes effective , likely in the spring of 2017 .

the army veterinary service has the lead responsibility for the medical care of all dod - owned animals , including mwds .

specifically , the army provides medical care for mwds through its public health command regions and activities and the dod mwd veterinary service at joint base san antonio , texas .

during the mwd disposition process , army veterinary corps officers are responsible for providing a recommendation letter and a consultation / referral form that describes each mwd's medical condition and suitability for adoption .

the army also maintains a veterinary care system that provides medical care to privately owned animals of individuals with access to medical services at a military installation , including adopted mwds .

the army charges individuals with privately owned animals for the medical care of their pets .

according to army officials , the charges for veterinary care were developed based on a review of supply costs , estimated manpower costs , historical costs for services , and recommended guidance on cost considerations established by the american animal hospital association .

dod uses three systems to track different types of information about mwds , including information related to their removal from service .

the number of mwds that have been adopted , transferred , or euthanized has varied over the past 5 years .

officials from the air force and army use three separate systems to track information on mwds .

two of the systems — wdms and the central repository — are maintained by the air force , while rovr , the electronic medical record system , is maintained by the army .

 ( see table 1. ) .

each of these systems has a different role in documenting information related to an mwd's removal from service .

wdms documents the mwd's status when it is removed from service , including whether the mwd is adopted , transferred , or euthanized .

this status of the mwd can be verified using documents maintained in the central repository , which is used to store copies of records for mwds that have been removed from service — most of which are not contained in wdms .

lastly , rovr is used to provide medical information for consideration of an mwd's removal from service and to document an mwd's euthanization , if needed .

based on our review of data from these systems and related documentation , the number of mwds adopted or transferred during 2011 through 2015 varied , with the highest numbers in 2012 and 2013 .

an air force official explained that these higher numbers of adoptions and transfers in 2012 and 2013 were due to a decreased need for mwds during deployments .

the number of euthanized mwds varied to a lesser extent .

 ( see figure 2. ) .

some of the adopted mwds included in these data were likely never deployed outside of their assigned military installations .

according to air force officials , some mwds may have been acquired by the military but then did not qualify for enrollment in the mwd program due to performance or medical reasons .

other mwds were enrolled in the program but were removed from service for similar reasons before they were 3 years old .

according to air force officials , these dogs were also likely never deployed into service .

 ( see table 2. ) .

available data for 55 percent of the mwds adopted in 2014 and 2015 indicate that prevalent medical conditions included skin , dental , and musculoskeletal issues .

the potential costs for treating these prevalent medical conditions are difficult to determine due to variations in potential courses of treatment and other factors .

however , we did obtain information on recommended preventative care and estimated costs for older breeds used by the mwd program from the chief of staff of a network of private veterinary hospitals .

based on our analysis of electronic medical records with master problem lists — available for approximately 55 percent ( 421 of 772 ) of the mwds adopted in 2014 and 2015 — we found that the most prevalent medical conditions were as follows: skin conditions or ear infections , dental disease or injury , arthritis or degenerative joint disease , degenerative lumbo - sacral stenosis .

some mwds had more than one medical condition , and as a result , they may have been included in more than one category .

 ( see table 3. ) .

an army veterinarian told us that “skin conditions or ear infections” and “dental disease or injury” — the two most prevalent medical conditions we identified — are unlikely to result in removal from service as these conditions generally can be treated or resolved .

 ( see prevalent medical conditions 1 and 2 in table 3. ) .

the remaining three prevalent medical conditions we identified are associated with musculoskeletal issues and are more likely to result in mwds' removal from service .

 ( see prevalent medical conditions 3 , 4 , and 5 in table 3. ) .

according to an army veterinarian , these conditions are common in breeds maintained by the mwd program .

for example , degenerative lumbo - sacral stenosis is common in german shepherd dogs , one of the preferred breeds for the mwd program .

the potential costs for treating these prevalent medical conditions may vary based on a number of factors , including the course of treatment , the underlying cause for the condition , and geographic location .

according to an army official and representatives from a national network of private veterinary hospitals , there are no standardized medical treatment protocols for animals that would dictate particular courses of treatment for specific medical conditions .

therefore , costs for these conditions would vary .

furthermore , the chief of staff of a network of private veterinary hospitals in new jersey , which provides free specialty care to adopted mwds in its area , told us that it would be difficult to estimate treatment costs because some of the prevalent health conditions we identified for mwds could have different underlying causes , which would serve as the basis for treatment options and costs .

for example , lameness could have different root causes , so it would be difficult to estimate treatment costs for this condition without knowing the contributing factors .

adopted mwds need preventative care regardless of their medical conditions .

based on our analysis , the average age of most mwds that had electronic medical records with master problem lists in rovr and were adopted during 2014 and 2015 was about 9 years old , with a range from 1 to 14 years .

the chief of staff of a private network of veterinary hospitals in new jersey provided us with the types of preventative care they recommend for 9-year old labrador retrievers , belgian malinois , and german shepherd dogs — the most common breeds used by the mwd program .

the chief of staff also provided estimated costs for these procedures , which are specific to this private network of veterinary hospitals .

 ( see table 4. ) .

an army veterinarian reviewed the information provided by the chief of staff and concurred that the identified procedures and costs were reasonable .

although owners of adopted mwds are responsible for the costs of their care , some assistance with privately provided veterinary care is available through nonprofit organizations .

individuals with access to dod medical care may also purchase care for their adopted mwds at military installations .

however , the types of available veterinary services vary by military installation , and some installations do not offer veterinary services .

owners of adopted mwds may obtain assistance with privately provided veterinary care through nonprofit organizations .

assistance for adopted mwds is primarily available through the u.s. war dogs association , an organization that offers ( 1 ) a prescription drug program ( free prescription drugs for registered mwds ) , ( 2 ) free specialty care through red bank veterinary hospital in new jersey , and ( 3 ) financial assistance of up to $500 for emergency care and up to $100 for euthanasia .

about 400 former mwds were registered with the association as of august 2016 , according to the association's president .

in addition to assistance with medical care , the association also finds new homes for adopted mwds when the owners are no longer able to take care of them .

according to air force officials , individuals who adopt mwds receive information about the u.s. war dogs association at the time of adoption .

these officials told us that this is the only nonprofit organization's information they provide to individuals adopting mwds .

other nonprofit organizations that inquire about adopted mwds are directed to contact the u.s. war dogs association .

some assistance with privately provided medical care is also available through other organizations , such as the american humane organization , which helps cover some medical costs for adopted mwds when their owners are unable to pay for their care .

officials from this organization told us they currently cover medical care costs for about 21 former mwds .

information about potential services provided by the american humane organization is available on its website .

owners of adopted mwds may purchase veterinary services through dod if they have access to medical services at military installations .

according to an army official , access to medical care is generally available for active duty servicemembers , their dependents , retirees and their dependents , as well as reservists on active orders .

however , the types of veterinary services offered vary by military installation , and some installations do not offer any veterinary services .

 ( see table 5. ) .

the army's public health center maintains an interactive map on its website that provides information about the types of veterinary services that are available at military installations .

according to an army official , the link for this interactive map is listed on all veterinary service newsletters , brochures , and posters .

this website has also been publicized in an army newsletter for retired soldiers , surviving spouses , and family .

we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment .

dod concurred with the report and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committee , and the secretaries of defense , the air force , and the army .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff has any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at draperd@gao.gov .

contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

other major contributors to this report are listed in the appendix .

in addition to the contact named above , bonnie anderson , assistant director ; danielle bernstein , analyst - in - charge ; jennie apter ; and kenisha cantrell made key contributions to this report .

also contributing were jennifer rudisill and mary denigan - macauley .

