we are pleased to be here today to participate in discussing issues related to the volatility of u.s. gasoline markets .

according to data from the energy information administration ( eia ) , the average nationwide price paid for regular gasoline ( the type of gasoline used most in the united states ) at the pump was as high as $2.06 cents / gallon by the end of may 2004 , an increase of about 58 cents / gallon or 39 percent over the same time last year .

on the west coast , gasoline prices reached an average of $2.34 cents / gallon by the end of may 2004 , an increase of about 65 cents / gallon or 38 percent over the same time last year .

although prices have recently begun to fall , elevated gasoline prices can be an economic burden to american consumers and the economy .

a broad range of factors affects the volatility of gasoline prices .

these factors typically include changes in crude oil costs , limited refinery capacity , inventory levels relative to demand , supply disruptions , and regulatory factors — such as the many different gasoline formulations that are required to meet varying federal and state environmental laws .

federal and state taxes are also a component of u.s. gasoline prices , but these do not fluctuate often .

we have addressed many of these issues in several studies on energy markets .

among other things , our past studies showed that the u.s. economy is vulnerable to oil supply disruptions that can impose significant economic costs , and in our report options were identified to mitigate their effects ; the clean air act specifically requires refiners to produce reformulated gasoline , and the requirement to provide a specific blend for a specific area can present challenges to refiners and other suppliers if there are supply disruptions ; gasoline price spikes were generally higher in california from january 1995 through december 1999 than in the rest of the nation , partly because of the difficulty in substituting for the loss of supply of carb , the special reformulated gasoline used in california , when there were unplanned refinery outages ; retail gasoline prices in california rose faster than they fell in response to a delayed pass - through in changes in the wholesale price of gasoline ; as we testified in 2001 , each day vehicles in the united states consume about 10 million barrels of petroleum fuels , primarily gasoline and diesel , and according to projections , the figure will rise to about 15 million barrels per day by 2010 , raising concerns about the nation's ability to satisfy this growing demand ; the transportation sector is more than 90 percent dependent on petroleum - based fuels , such as gasoline , and this dependence contributes to our vulnerability to oil supply disruptions and related price shocks ; and existing federal programs to promote alternative fuel vehicles and alternative fuel use in the transportation sector have faced significant barriers .

market consolidation is another factor that can affect the price of gasoline .

our testimony today will focus on our recent study that examined the effects of market consolidation and other factors on the u. s. petroleum industry .

since the 1990s , the u.s. petroleum industry has experienced a wave of mergers , acquisitions , and joint ventures , several of them between large oil companies that had previously competed with each other for the sale of petroleum products .

a few examples include the merger between british petroleum ( bp ) and amoco in 1998 to form bpamoco , which later merged with arco , and the merger in 1999 between exxon , the largest u.s. oil company , and mobil , the second largest .

in general , mergers raise concerns about potential anticompetitive effects on the u.s. petroleum industry and ultimately on gasoline prices because mergers could result in greater market power for the merged companies , potentially allowing them to increase prices above competitive levels .

on the other hand , mergers could also yield cost savings and efficiency gains , which may be passed on to consumers in lower prices .

ultimately , the impact depends on whether market power or efficiency dominates .

our report examined mergers in the u.s. petroleum industry from the 1990s through 2000 , the changes in market concentration ( the distribution of market shares among competing firms ) and other factors affecting competition in the u.s. petroleum industry , how u.s. gasoline marketing has changed since the 1990s , and how mergers and market concentration in the u.s. petroleum industry have affected u.s. gasoline prices at the wholesale level .

to address these issues , we purchased and analyzed a large body of data on mergers and wholesale gasoline prices , as well as data on other relevant economic factors .

we also developed econometric models for examining the effects of eight specific mergers and increased market concentration on u.s. wholesale gasoline prices nationwide .

it is noteworthy that using econometric models allowed us to measure the effects of mergers and market concentration while isolating the effects of several other factors that could influence wholesale gasoline prices , such as world crude oil costs , limited refining capacity , or low inventories relative to demand .

in the course of our work , we consulted with dr. severin borenstein , a recognized expert in the modeling of gasoline markets ; interviewed officials across the industry spectrum ; and reviewed relevant economic literature and numerous related studies .

we also used an extensive peer review process to obtain comments from experts in academia and relevant government agencies .

we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in summary , we found the following: over 2,600 mergers occurred in the petroleum industry from 1991 through 2000 .

the majority of the mergers occurred during the second half of the decade , most frequently in the upstream ( exploration and production ) segment of the industry .

petroleum industry officials cited various reasons for this wave of mergers , particularly the need for increased efficiency and cost savings .

economic literature suggests that firms also sometimes use mergers to enhance their market power .

ultimately , the reasons cited by both sources generally relate to the merging companies' desire to maximize profit or shareholder wealth .

market concentration , which is commonly measured by the herfindahl - hirschman index ( hhi ) , has increased in the downstream ( refining and marketing ) segment of the u.s. petroleum industry since the 1990s , partly as a result of merger activities , while changing very little in the upstream ( exploration and production ) segment .

in the downstream segment , market concentration in refining increased from moderately to highly concentrated on the east coast and from unconcentrated to moderately concentrated on the west coast ; it increased but remained moderately concentrated in the rocky mountain region .

concentration in the wholesale gasoline market increased substantially from the mid - 1990s so that by 2002 , most states had either moderately or highly concentrated wholesale gasoline markets .

on the other hand , market concentration decreased somewhat in the upstream segment and remained unconcentrated by the end of the 1990s .

anecdotal evidence suggests that mergers also have affected other factors that impact competition , such as the ability of new firms to enter the market .

according to industry officials , two major changes have occurred in u.s. gasoline marketing since the 1990s , partly related to mergers .

first , the availability of unbranded ( generic ) gasoline has decreased substantially .

unbranded gasoline is generally priced lower than branded gasoline , which is marketed under the refiner's trademark .

industry officials generally attributed the decreased availability of unbranded gasoline to , among other factors , a reduction in the number of independent refiners that typically supply unbranded gasoline .

second , industry officials said that refiners now prefer dealing with large distributors and retailers .

this preference , according to the officials , has motivated further consolidation in both the distributor and retail markets , including the rise of hypermarkets — a relatively new breed of gasoline market participants that includes such large retail warehouses as wal - mart and costco .

our econometric analyses , using data from the mid - 1990s through 2000 , show that oil industry mergers generally led to higher wholesale gasoline prices ( measured in our report as wholesale prices less crude oil prices ) , although prices sometimes decreased .

six of the eight specific mergers we modeled — which mostly involved large , fully vertically integrated companies — generally resulted in increases in wholesale prices for branded and / or unbranded gasoline of about 2 cents per gallon , on average .

two of the mergers generally led to price decreases , of about 1 cent per gallon , on average .

for conventional gasoline — the predominant type used in the united states except in areas that require special gasoline formulations — the change in wholesale price ranged from a decrease of about 1 cent per gallon to an increase of about 5 cents per gallon .

the preponderance of price increases over decreases indicates that the market power effects , which tend to increase prices , for the most part outweighed the efficiency effects , which tend to decrease prices .

our econometric analyses also show that increased market concentration , which captures the cumulative effects of mergers as well as other market structure factors , also generally led to higher prices for conventional gasoline and for boutique fuels — gasoline that has been reformulated for certain areas in the east coast and gulf coast regions and in california to lower pollution .

the price increases were particularly large in california , where they averaged about 7 cents per gallon .

higher wholesale gasoline prices were also a result of other factors: low gasoline inventories , which typically occur in the summer driving months ; high refinery capacity utilization rates ; and supply disruptions , which occurred in the midwest and on the west coast .

we also identified price increases of one - tenth of 1 cent to 7 cents per gallon that were caused by other factors included in our models — particularly low gasoline inventories relative to demand , high refinery capacity utilization rates , and supply disruptions that occurred in some regions .

as i noted earlier , we used extensive peer review to obtain comments from outside experts , including the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and eia , and we incorporated those comments as appropriate .

ftc disagreed with our methodology and findings and provided extensive comments , which we have addressed in our report .

our findings are generally consistent with previous studies of the effects of specific oil mergers and of market concentration on gasoline prices .

we believe , however , that ours is the first comprehensive study to model the impact of the industry's 1990s wave of mergers on wholesale gasoline prices for the entire united states , an effort that required us to acquire large datasets and perform complex analyses .

many firms of varying sizes make up the u.s. petroleum industry .

while some firms engage in only limited activities within the industry , such as exploration for and production of crude oil and natural gas or refining crude oil and marketing petroleum products , fully vertically integrated oil companies participate in all aspects of the industry .

before the 1970s , major oil companies that were fully vertically integrated controlled the global network for supplying , pricing , and marketing crude oil .

however , the structure of the world crude oil market has dramatically changed as a result of such factors as the nationalization of oil fields by oil - producing countries , the emergence of independent oil companies , and the evolution of futures and spot markets in the 1970s and 1980s .

since u.s. oil prices were deregulated in 1981 , the price paid for crude oil in the united states has been largely determined in the world oil market , which is mostly influenced by global factors , especially supply decisions of the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) and world economic and political conditions .

the united states currently imports over 60 percent of its crude oil supply .

in contrast , the bulk of the gasoline used in the united states is produced domestically .

in 2001 , for example , gasoline refined in the united states accounted for over 90 percent of the total domestic gasoline consumption .

companies that supply gasoline to u.s. markets also post the domestic gasoline prices .

historically , the domestic petroleum market has been divided into five regions: the east coast region , the midwest region , the gulf coast region , the rocky mountain region , and the west coast region .

proposed mergers in all industries , including the petroleum industry , are generally reviewed by federal antitrust authorities — including ftc and the department of justice ( doj ) — to assess the potential impact on market competition .

according to ftc officials , ftc generally reviews proposed mergers involving the petroleum industry because of the agency's expertise in that industry .

ftc analyzes these mergers to determine if they would likely diminish competition in the relevant markets and result in harm , such as increased prices .

to determine the potential effect of a merger on market competition , ftc evaluates how the merger would change the level of market concentration , among other things .

conceptually , the higher the concentration , the less competitive the market is and the more likely that firms can exert control over prices .

the ability to maintain prices above competitive levels for a significant period of time is known as market power .

according to the merger guidelines jointly issued by doj and ftc , market concentration as measured by hhi is ranked into three separate categories: a market with an hhi under 1,000 is considered to be unconcentrated ; if hhi is between 1,000 and 1,800 the market is considered moderately concentrated ; and if hhi is above 1,800 , the market is considered highly concentrated .

while concentration is an important aspect of market structure — the underlying economic and technical characteristics of an industry — other aspects of market structure that may be affected by mergers also play an important role in determining the level of competition in a market .

these aspects include barriers to entry , which are market conditions that provide established sellers an advantage over potential new entrants in an industry , and vertical integration .

over 2,600 merger transactions occurred from 1991 through 2000 involving all three segments of the u.s. petroleum industry .

almost 85 percent of the mergers occurred in the upstream segment ( exploration and production ) , while the downstream segment ( refining and marketing of petroleum ) accounted for about 13 percent , and the midstream segment ( transportation ) accounted for over 2 percent .

the vast majority of the mergers — about 80 percent — involved one company's purchase of a segment or asset of another company , while about 20 percent involved the acquisition of a company's total assets by another so that the two became one company .

most of the mergers occurred in the second half of the decade , including those involving large partially or fully vertically integrated companies .

petroleum industry officials and experts we contacted cited several reasons for the industry's wave of mergers in the 1990s , including achieving synergies , increasing growth and diversifying assets , and reducing costs .

economic literature indicates that enhancing market power is also sometimes a motive for mergers .

ultimately , these reasons mostly relate to companies' desire to maximize profit or stock values .

mergers in the 1990s contributed to increases in market concentration in the downstream segment of the u.s. petroleum industry , while the upstream segment experienced little change overall .

we found that market concentration , as measured by the hhi , decreased slightly in the upstream segment , based on crude oil production activities at the national level , from 290 in 1990 to 217 in 2000 .

moreover , based on benchmarks established jointly by doj and ftc , the upstream segment of the u.s. petroleum industry remained unconcentrated at the end of the 1990s .

the increases in market concentration in the downstream segment varied by activity and region .

for example , the hhi of the refining market in the east coast region increased from a moderately concentrated level of 1136 in 1990 to a highly concentrated level of 1819 in 2000 .

in the rocky mountain and the west coast regions , it increased from 1029 to 1124 and from 937 to 1267 , respectively , in that same period .

thus , while each of these refining markets increased in concentration , the rocky mountain remained within the moderately concentrated range but the west coast changed from unconcentrated in 1990 to moderately concentrated in 2000 .

the hhi of refining markets also increased from 699 to 980 in the midwest and from 534 to 704 in the gulf coast during the same period , although these markets remained unconcentrated .

in wholesale gasoline markets , market concentration increased broadly throughout the united states between 1994 and 2002 .

specifically , we found that 46 states and the district of columbia had moderately or highly concentrated markets by 2002 , compared to 27 in 1994 .

in both the refining and wholesale markets of the downstream segment , merger activity and market concentration were highly correlated for most regions of the country .

evidence from various sources indicates that , in addition to increasing market concentration , mergers also contributed to changes in other aspects of market structure in the u.s. petroleum industry that affect competition — specifically , vertical integration and barriers to entry .

however , we could not quantify the extent of these changes because of a lack of relevant data .

vertical integration can conceptually have both pro - and anticompetitive effects .

based on anecdotal evidence and economic analyses by some industry experts , we determined that a number of mergers that have occurred since the 1990s have led to greater vertical integration in the u.s. petroleum industry , especially in the refining and marketing segment .

for example , we identified eight mergers that occurred between 1995 and 2001 that might have enhanced the degree of vertical integration , particularly in the downstream segment .

concerning barriers to entry , our interviews with petroleum industry officials and experts provide evidence that mergers had some impact on the u.s. petroleum industry .

barriers to entry could have implications for market competition because companies that operate in concentrated industries with high barriers to entry are more likely to possess market power .

industry officials pointed out that large capital requirements and environmental regulations constitute barriers for potential new entrants into the u.s. refining business .

for example , the officials indicated that a typical refinery could cost billions of dollars to build and that it may be difficult to obtain the necessary permits from the relevant state or local authorities .

at the wholesale and retail marketing levels , industry officials pointed out that mergers might have exacerbated barriers to entry in some markets .

for example , the officials noted that mergers have contributed to a situation where pipelines and terminals are owned by fewer , mostly integrated companies that sometimes deny access to third - party users , especially when supply is tight — which creates a disincentive for potential new entrants into such wholesale markets .

according to some petroleum industry officials that we interviewed , gasoline marketing in the united states has changed in two major ways since the 1990s .

first , the availability of unbranded gasoline has decreased , partly due to mergers .

officials noted that unbranded gasoline is generally priced lower than branded .

they generally attributed the decreased availability of unbranded gasoline to one or more of the following factors: there are now fewer independent refiners , who typically supply mostly unbranded gasoline .

these refiners have been acquired by branded companies , have grown large enough to be considered a brand , or have simply closed down .

partially or fully vertically integrated oil companies have sold or mothballed some refineries .

as a result , some of these companies now have only enough refinery capacity to supply their own branded needs , with little or no excess to sell as unbranded .

major branded refiners are managing their inventory more efficiently , ensuring that they produce only enough gasoline to meet their current branded needs .

we could not quantify the extent of the decrease in the unbranded gasoline supply because the data required for such analyses do not exist .

the second change identified by these officials is that refiners now prefer dealing with large distributors and retailers because they present a lower credit risk and because it is more efficient to sell a larger volume through fewer entities .

refiners manifest this preference by setting minimum volume requirements for gasoline purchases .

these requirements have motivated further consolidation in the distributor and retail sectors , including the rise of hypermarkets .

our econometric modeling shows that the mergers we examined mostly led to higher wholesale gasoline prices in the second half of the 1990s .

the majority of the eight specific mergers we examined — ultramar diamond shamrock ( uds ) - total , tosco - unocal , marathon - ashland , shell - texaco i ( equilon ) , shell - texaco ii ( motiva ) , bp - amoco , exxon - mobil , and marathon ashland petroleum ( map ) - uds — resulted in higher prices of wholesale gasoline in the cities where the merging companies supplied gasoline before they merged .

the effects of some of the mergers were inconclusive , especially for boutique fuels sold in the east coast and gulf coast regions and in california .

for the seven mergers that we modeled for conventional gasoline , five led to increased prices , especially the map - uds and exxon - mobil mergers , where the increases generally exceeded 2 cents per gallon , on average .

for the four mergers that we modeled for reformulated gasoline , two — exxon - mobil and marathon - ashland — led to increased prices of about 1 cent per gallon , on average .

in contrast , the shell - texaco ii ( motiva ) merger led to price decreases of less than one - half cent per gallon , on average , for branded gasoline only .

for the two mergers — tosco - unocal and shell - texaco i ( equilon ) — that we modeled for gasoline used in california , known as california air resources board ( carb ) gasoline , only the tosco - unocal merger led to price increases .

the increases were for branded gasoline only and exceeded 6 cents per gallon , on average .

for market concentration , which captures the cumulative effects of mergers as well as other competitive factors , our econometric analysis shows that increased market concentration resulted in higher wholesale gasoline prices .

prices for conventional ( non - boutique ) gasoline , the dominant type of gasoline sold nationwide from 1994 through 2000 , increased by less than one - half cent per gallon , on average , for branded and unbranded gasoline .

the increases were larger in the west than in the east — the increases were between one - half cent and one cent per gallon in the west , and about one - quarter cent in the east ( for branded gasoline only ) , on average .

price increases for boutique fuels sold in some parts of the east coast and gulf coast regions and in california were larger compared to the increases for conventional gasoline .

the wholesale prices increased by an average of about 1 cent per gallon for boutique fuel sold in the east coast and gulf coast regions between 1995 and 2000 , and by an average of over 7 cents per gallon in california between 1996 and 2000 .

our analysis shows that wholesale gasoline prices were also affected by other factors included in the econometric models — particularly , gasoline inventories relative to demand , refinery capacity utilization rates , and the supply disruptions that occurred in some parts of the midwest and the west coast .

in particular , wholesale gasoline prices were about 1 cent per gallon higher , on average , when gasoline inventories were low relative to demand , typically in the summer driving months .

also , prices were higher by about an average of one - tenth to two - tenths of 1 cent per gallon when refinery capacity utilization rates increased by 1 percent .

the prices of conventional gasoline were about 4 to 5 cents per gallon higher , on average , during the midwest and west coast supply disruptions .

the increase in prices for carb gasoline was about 4 to 7 cents per gallon , on average , during the west coast supply disruptions .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 .

key contributors to this testimony included godwin agbara , scott farrow , john a. karikari , and cynthia norris .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

