i am pleased to be here today to participate in this hearing to address the challenges facing the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) .

usps is in a serious financial crisis , and as mail volume continues to decline , it has not generated sufficient revenue to cover its expenses and financial obligations .

at the end of this fiscal year , usps officials project a substantial cash shortfall and report that usps may default on its retiree health payments owed to the federal government .

within the next 4 months , critical decisions by congress and usps are needed to avoid its projected default and set usps on a path to financial solvency .

my statement today focuses on the urgent need for usps to rightsize its operations and infrastructure in light of the current and projected decrease in demand for its services .

this means downsizing and modernizing its networks to reflect the accelerating decline in mail volume resulting from changing mail use by businesses and the public .

specifically , my statement addresses ( 1 ) why it is important to restructure usps's networks and ( 2 ) what actions are needed to facilitate progress in restructuring .

this statement is primarily based on our extensive body of work on usps's activities including our reviews over the past several years of usps's business model , financial condition , networks , and service ; foreign posts ; and postal reform .

in addition , it draws on interviews with senior usps officials conducted in may and june 2011 .

we conducted the performance audit work that supports this statement in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

additional information on our scope and methodology is available in each issued report .

usps urgently needs to restructure its networks and operations as its financial condition and outlook reach a crisis level .

usps has experienced a cumulative net loss of nearly $20 billion over the last 5 fiscal years and has already reported a net loss of $2.6 billion through the first 6 months of fiscal year 2011 .

by the end of this fiscal year , usps projects that it will incur a $8.3 billion loss , experience a substantial cash shortfall , reach its $15 billion borrowing limit , and be unable to make its scheduled retiree health benefits payment to the federal government .

usps's financial problems have been building , as customers' mail use has been changing — that is , mail volume is declining as customers shift to electronic communications and payment alternatives .

total mail volume peaked in fiscal year 2006 at 213 billion pieces and declined by about 20 percent by the end of fiscal year 2010 , to about 170 billion pieces .

in the first 2 quarters of this fiscal year , the volume for first - class mail — usps's most profitable product that accounted for 44 percent of usps total volume — has declined by almost 7 percent .

usps has projected a further drop in total mail volume to 150 billion pieces or less by 2020 .

declining mail volume exposes fundamental weaknesses in usps's business model , which has historically relied on mail volume growth to help cover the costs associated with national retail , processing , and delivery networks .

usps does not have sufficient revenue to cover the growing costs of expanding delivery service to roughly 1 million new residences and businesses each year while maintaining about 33,000 usps - operated retail and processing facilities .

furthermore , usps faces a variety of challenges in trying to reduce costs , including an inflexible cost structure ; legal and regulatory restrictions ; stakeholder resistance ; difficulty reducing compensation and benefit costs , which comprise 80 percent of usps's total expenses ; and increasing difficulty in achieving work hour savings .

for these reasons and more , we placed usps's financial condition and outlook on our 2011 list of high - risk programs and agencies .

usps currently operates about 32,500 retail facilities .

customers can also purchase some usps products or services at over 70,000 locations , including about 3,700 contract postal units and community post offices and through partnerships with retailers , as well as through usps.com .

in fiscal year 2010 , about 31 percent of retail revenue from usps products and services was generated through retail alternatives , and usps estimates that by 2020 , these alternatives may account for nearly 60 percent of retail sales .

meanwhile , fewer customers are visiting usps - operated retail locations .

according to usps , customer visits have declined over the last decade by about 21 percent and retail revenue generated at usps - operated retail locations has dropped by about 16 percent , yet the number of usps - operated facilities has remained largely unchanged since fiscal year 2001 .

although the number of channels through which customers can access usps's products and services is expanding , usps has been slow to modernize its legacy retail network .

figure 1 compares the number of selected groups of postal retail facilities — usps - operated facilities and non - usps - operated — in fiscal years 2001 and 2010 .

non - usps facilities may be operated by partners and are therefore less costly for usps and may be more conveniently located where there is higher customer traffic .

while usps has slightly reduced the total number of usps - operated and non - usps - operated retail facilities over the last 10 years , the ratio of usps - operated versus non - usps - operated facilities has barely changed ( 88 percent in fiscal year 2001 compared with 90 percent in fiscal year 2010 ) .

foreign postal operators we studied have modernized their legacy brick - and - mortar retail networks by drastically reducing the proportion of facilities they operate relative to the proportion of those operated by others .

several factors have constrained usps's efforts to make significant changes to its retail network: legal requirements: usps officials have stated that the legal process has hindered usps's ability to make progress in retail realignment .

statutory requirements prohibit usps from closing small post offices solely for operating at a deficit , and , therefore , certain retail facilities cannot be closed based on financial performance alone .

usps has reported that about 80 percent of postal retail facilities do not generate sufficient revenue to cover their costs .

additionally , the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) has authority to hear appeals on “post office” closures .

however , usps and the prc have differed in their interpretation of the prc's statutory authority to review appeals of usps decisions to close stations and branches .

further , when usps proposes changes in the nature of postal services that will generally affect service on a nationwide or substantially nationwide basis , it must request an advisory opinion from the prc .

according to usps officials , the amount of time taken to complete the required statutory process for closing facilities has hindered usps from timely realignment of its retail network .

usps is required to provide 60 days advance notice of closing a post office , and any person served by the facility may appeal the closure decision .

the prc has 120 days after receiving an appeal to make a determination , which is made on a case - by - case basis .

so far this fiscal year , the prc has received more appeals of retail facility closures than it did in the last decade combined ( 18 in 2011 compared with 8 in fiscal years 2001 through 2010 ) .

of these 18 appeals , 10 involved stations and branches .

the prc may affirm usps's decision or require usps to reconsider its closure decisions , but the ultimate authority to close a post office rests with usps .

currently , after the prc's determination , usps must wait at least 90 days to take action after posting a final closure determination .

in its filings with the prc , usps has asserted that , in cases where the closing involves a station or branch , the prc lacks subject matter jurisdiction to hear appeals that do not involve a “post office.” nevertheless , the prc issues determinations on appeals of usps decisions to close retail facilities , including stations and branches .

this issue remains unresolved .

in 2009 , usps filed a request for a prc advisory opinion of its analysis of over 4,000 stations and branches for possible closure , which resulted in the closure of about 145 facilities from this proceeding .

the prc's opinion advised usps to improve public notice and input prior to making closure decisions .

it also suggested that usps implement uniform procedures for closing or consolidating all types of retail facilities — post offices , stations , or branches .

since then , usps officials have told us that they plan additional closings of certain retail facilities .

stakeholder resistance: usps has often faced formidable resistance from employees , affected communities , and members of congress when it has attempted to close post offices because of concerns about possible effects on service , employees , and communities .

although usps is taking steps to improve its communication for making these retail changes , stakeholders continue to protest the closure of postal facilities .

the foreign posts we recently studied have also experienced declining mail volume and revenue .

their solutions to addressing stakeholder resistance involved regular engagement with stakeholders , including strategic communication and outreach efforts .

these posts emphasized that although a neighborhood post office would be closing , retail alternatives were available with local merchants who had extended operating hours and were located where customers frequently visit — such as grocery , convenience , and drug stores .

for example , when modernizing its retail network , the swedish postal operator launched a nationwide campaign that focused on the post as “a service” instead of “a place” and proactively informed customers about how and where they could access postal services .

the swedish post reported that customers adapted to the change and preferred the expanded service options .

officials we interviewed at australia post discussed the importance of involving local communities in deciding , for example , whether to contract with a local retail partner or close a post office .

usps has taken actions to reduce excess capacity and improve operational efficiency throughout its mail processing network for sorting and transporting mail , but has had difficulty comprehensively adjusting its network to respond to the unprecedented mail volume decline since fiscal year 2006 .

as a result , costly excess capacity remains .

usps's mail processing network comprises over 500 mail processing facilities and corresponding transportation services , equipment , and staff .

usps has made some progress in streamlining its processing network , such as by closing smaller facilities like airport mail centers and remote encoding centers .

these and other actions have helped usps eliminate nearly 108 million workhours from its processing network over the last 5 years ( or nearly 40 percent of its total workhour reduction over that time ) .

costly excess mail processing capacity remains for several reasons: mail volume has declined , particularly single - piece first - class mail , which has dropped by about 23 billion pieces over the past decade .

as a result , less mail is processed end - to - end through usps's processing network .

in 2009 , for example , a usps official testified that usps had 50 percent excess plant capacity in its first - class mail processing operations .

continuing automation improvements enable usps to sort mail faster and more efficiently .

some space once needed for manual sorting is now excess .

eighty - three percent of standard mail in fiscal year 2010 was destination entered by mailers , meaning that it bypassed most of usps's mail processing network and long - distance transportation .

this increase — 16 percent over the last decade — has left usps with excess processing capacity .

as a result of these factors , usps's mail processing network could handle significantly more mail than is currently going through the system .

usps has often faced resistance from employees , affected communities , and members of congress when it has attempted to consolidate its processing operations and networks , close mail processing facilities , or both because of concerns about possible effects on service , employees , and communities .

in particular , we have reported that stakeholders have concerns about usps's ongoing efforts to consolidate its area mail processing ( amp ) facilities .

proposals to consolidate these processing operations and facilities are intended to reduce costs and increase efficiency by making better use of excess capacity or underused resources .

the amp proposals consist of consolidating operations from one mail processing facility that downsizes its mail processing operations to other facilities nearby that gain the processing operations .

usps has improved its processes for communicating and implementing its amp consolidation plans and is currently evaluating over 130 proposals for consolidations .

usps has ongoing efforts to increase the efficiency of mail delivery , which is its most costly activity and involves more than 310,000 carriers accounting for approximately 47 percent ( $23 billion ) of usps's total salary and benefit expenses in fiscal year 2010 .

two key efforts are underway: realignment of city delivery routes to remove excess capacity and improve efficiency .

usps expects this effort to generate nearly $1 billion in annual savings by reducing space needs in post offices and other facilities and helping provide more consistent delivery service .

installation of new automated systems to sort certain mail , such as catalogs and magazines , into delivery order so that costly manual sorting by carriers is no longer needed .

usps expects this effort to improve delivery accuracy , consistency , and timeliness .

these efforts , along with other actions and declines in volumes , have helped usps eliminate approximately 70 million delivery work hours over the last 5 fiscal years ( or nearly a quarter of usps's total workhour reduction over that time ) .

usps has attempted to further reduce delivery costs by asking congress not to include the language in its annual appropriations legislation that requires it to deliver mail 6 days a week .

usps officials have stated that moving to 5-day delivery would result in annual savings of about $3 billion once the change would be fully implemented .

because usps expects mail volume to continue declining , it will need to continue working to improve delivery efficiency .

according to usps , it generated $1.80 in daily revenue contribution for each delivery point in fiscal year 2000 ; by fiscal year 2009 , that number had shrunk to $1.40 , and by fiscal year 2020 , usps estimates that it could decline to about $1.00 .

while moving to 5-day delivery would not , by itself , resolve usps's considerable financial challenges , this and other restructuring strategies will need to be considered to adapt to changes in mail use and achieve financial viability .

congress and usps urgently need to reach agreement on a package of actions that will address difficult constraints and legal restrictions and allow usps to accelerate progress on restructuring its networks .

members of the 112th congress have introduced legislation to promote network restructuring , and usps has proposed regulatory changes .

we also have recommended in prior reports that usps realign its postal operations , networks , and workforce with changes in mail usage and customer behavior .

as part of this work , we proposed options for action by congress and usps to reduce costs and improve efficiency .

these proposals and options , which are presented in more detail below , offer an opportunity to reconsider some of the key statutory requirements and processes for closing postal facilities , many of which have not changed significantly since the 1970s and may not be conducive to the type of networkwide changes that are currently needed .

table 1 highlights congress's , usps's , and gao's key retail proposals and options .

in addition to options for retail networks , the following are among the options we have previously identified for restructuring usps's mail processing and delivery networks: mail processing network options: close unneeded mail processing facilities .

relax delivery standards to facilitate closures and consolidations .

expand the use of more cost - efficient delivery methods , such as clusterboxes and curbline delivery .

decrease delivery frequency from 6 to 5 days a week .

stakeholders have raised concerns about these restructuring options and strategies .

for example , postmaster management associations and the prc have raised objections to usps's proposed rule to modify its retail structure .

similarly , usps received a variety of comments raising concerns about its 5-day delivery proposal .

restructuring decisions involve key public policy questions as well as difficult trade - offs — for example , what postal services are needed and what is affordable ? .

some tension exists between usps's role as a federal government entity expected to provide universal postal services , including access to retail service , while also being self - financing through businesslike operations .

as we have reported , congress's decisions about how to address the following questions will shape usps's future role , operations , networks , and ability to adapt to changes in mail use and mail volume: universal service: what aspects of universal service , including 6-day delivery , are appropriate in light of fundamental changes in customers' use of the mail ? .

what , if any , changes are needed to delivery standards ? .

how can usps improve customers' access to postal services through modernizing its retail network to maximize costs savings ? .

statutory and regulatory changes: what statutory or regulatory changes are needed to give usps the flexibility it needs to restructure its operations , networks , and workforce , while also assuring appropriate oversight ? .

for example , what changes may be needed to clarify whether or not the prc has the authority to review appeals of closures and consolidations of stations and branches ? .

stakeholder involvement: what role , if any , should congress , the board of governors , and the prc have in developing , approving , or reviewing decisions to modernize and realign postal services ? .

what input should postmasters or other postal employees and the public have in these decisions ? .

how and when should usps notify the public of its decisions to modernize and realign services ? .

accountability: what incentives and oversight mechanisms would help to balance the public's expectations of universal service , usps's need for more flexibility to achieve efficiencies , and the government's responsibility to ensure sufficient transparency , oversight , and accountability ? .

in order for usps to be self - sustaining , it needs to significantly reduce its costs to match its revenues .

change is needed to needed to facilitate restructuring postal networks and operations .

some changes to consider include: revise legal requirements to facilitate networkwide restructuring .

this would broaden the current focus on individual facility closures , which are often contentious , time consuming and inefficient , to a broader networkwide restructuring , perhaps similar to the defense base closure and realignment and commission ( brac ) approach .

under this approach , expert panels have successfully informed and permitted difficult restructuring decisions , helping to provide consensus on intractable decisions .

adapt prc review processes to changes made to facilitate networkwide review .

the current appeals process focuses on decisions usps has made about individual facilities closing .

another oversight approach to facilitate networkwide restructuring would be an annual reporting and review requirement , whereby usps would report all service changes , including facility closures , completed over the past year and changes planned for the next fiscal year in its annual compliance report to the prc .

the prc could then review and comment on any potential impacts on service in its annual compliance determination report .

improve outreach and transparency of information used to make decisions .

for example , strategically communicate and conduct outreach with retail customers , government officials , and employee groups ; use maps and a template of specified data to show all locations of postal facilities , alternatives , and retail partners where postal services are available in a designated service area ; indicate proposed changes in this context ; and allow the public to submit questions or comments .

enhance public input by simplifying rules and requirements so that they are consistent , timely , and easy to understand .

for example , eliminate references to internal usps terms that are not clear to the public , such as whether a retail facility is a post office , station , or branch , and clearly define what is meant by such terms as facility closings , consolidations , discontinuance , conversions , or replacements .

in summary , effectively rightsizing usps will require both congressional support and usps leadership to address resistance to change .

usps senior management will need to provide leadership and work with stakeholders for such actions to be successfully implemented .

usps must explain its plans in an open and transparent manner ; engage with its unions , management associations , the mailing industry , and political leaders ; and then demonstrate the results of its actions .

in turn , stakeholders need to recognize that major change is urgently needed if usps is to be financially viable and self - sustaining .

it is time for usps management , unions , the public , community leaders , and members of congress to take a hard look at what postal services residents and businesses need and can afford .

the status quo is no longer sustainable .

changes are necessary to ensure that postal services remain available to all u.s. residents and businesses by a usps that is financially healthy and self - supporting .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information about this statement , please contact phillip herr at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or herrp@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this statement include susan ragland , director , financial management and assurance ; amy abramowitz , teresa anderson , joshua bartzen , erin cohen , shelby kain , margaret mcdavid , sara ann moessbauer , amrita sen , and crystal wesco .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

