i am pleased to be here today to discuss the results of our recent study of the u.s. securities and exchange commission ( sec ) division of enforcement ( enforcement ) .

the division plays a key role in helping the agency meet its mission of protecting investors and maintaining fair and orderly markets .

current economic conditions and recent turmoil in financial markets have underscored the importance of enforcement's role .

each year , enforcement brings hundreds of civil enforcement actions against individuals and companies accused of violating securities laws .

however , we and others have criticized enforcement's capacity to effectively manage its activities and fulfill its critical law enforcement and investor protection responsibilities on an ongoing basis .

as you know , the alleged madoff fraud — described as the largest ponzi scheme in history — and the failure of enforcement to detect the fraud during prior investigation of the firm have increased concerns about the adequacy of sec's enforcement efforts .

this statement is based on our march 31 , 2009 report , and focuses on: ( 1 ) the extent to which enforcement has an appropriate mix of resources dedicated to achieving its objectives , including support staff , information technology , and access to specialized services ; ( 2 ) the factors that influence the amount of penalties and disgorgements that are ordered and the total amount of these remedies in recent years ; and ( 3 ) the adoption , implementation , and effects of two recent policies for determining corporate penalties .

to address our objectives , we analyzed information on trends in sec resources , enforcement actions , and penalties , and reviewed relevant documents on the corporate penalty policies .

we also met with sec officials , former sec commissioners , current and former enforcement staff , and outside parties knowledgeable about enforcement practices , such as securities defense attorneys and academics who study the securities industry and sec .

we held 11 small group meetings with a total of more than 80 front - line enforcement staff — investigative attorneys , and first - level supervisors , known as branch chiefs — in four sec offices across the country ( chicago , san francisco , new york , and washington , d.c. ) .

we undertook this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

sec is an independent agency created to protect investors ; maintain fair , honest , and efficient securities markets ; and facilitate capital formation .

sec's five - member commission oversees sec's operations and provides final approval of sec's interpretation of federal securities laws , proposals for new or amended rules to govern securities markets , and enforcement activities .

enforcement staff located in headquarters and 11 regional offices conduct investigations through informal inquiries , interviews of witnesses , examination of brokerage records , reviews of trading data , and other methods .

at the request of enforcement staff , the commission may issue a formal order of investigation , which allows the division's staff to compel witnesses by subpoena to testify and produce books , records , and other documents .

following an investigation , sec staff present their findings to the commission for its review , recommending commission action either in a federal court or before an administrative law judge .

on finding that a defendant has violated securities laws , the court or the administrative law judge can issue a judgment ordering remedies , such as civil monetary penalties and disgorgement .

in many cases , the commission and the party charged decide to settle a matter without trial .

in these instances , enforcement staff negotiates settlements on behalf of the commission .

total enforcement staffing has declined 4.4 percent , from a peak of 1,169 positions in fiscal year 2005 to 1,117 positions in fiscal year 2008 .

while overall enforcement resources and activities have remained relatively level in recent years , the number of non - supervisory investigative attorneys , who have primary responsibility for developing enforcement cases , decreased by 11.5 percent , from a peak of 566 in fiscal year 2004 to 501 in fiscal year 2008 .

enforcement management attributed this greater decline to several factors: promotion of staff attorneys into management during a hiring freeze , which left their former positions vacant ; diversion of investigative positions to other functions ; and reduction of opportunities for non - attorney support staff to move to positions outside the agency .

at the same time , staff turnover has decreased and staff tenure increased .

the majority of enforcement's non - supervisory attorney workforce has 10 years of experience or less , but the distribution of experience in this category has reversed in recent years .

the portion with less than 3 years of experience has declined by about 50 percent , and the portion with 3 to less than 10 years of experience has increased by about 55 percent .

the portion with 10 to less than 15 years , while small overall , has grown by about 14 percent .

enforcement management welcomed these trends , but believed they resulted from a weaker private - sector job market for attorneys .

they felt that had market conditions been better recently , departures would have been more numerous , which would have depressed the experience level .

measured by the number of enforcement cases opened and number of enforcement actions brought annually , enforcement activity has been relatively level in recent years .

case backlog has declined somewhat as the division has made case closings a greater priority .

nevertheless , enforcement management and investigative attorneys agreed that resource challenges have affected their ability to bring enforcement actions effectively and efficiently .

enforcement management told us that the current level of resources has not prevented the division from continuing to bring cases across a range of violations .

but management and staff acknowledged that current staffing levels mean some worthwhile leads cannot be pursued , and some cases are closed without action earlier than they otherwise would have been .

more specifically , investigative attorneys cited the low level of administrative , paralegal , and information technology support , unavailability of specialized services and expertise , and a burdensome system for internal case review as causing significant delays in bringing cases , reducing the number of cases that can be brought , and potentially undermining the quality of cases .

enforcement management concurred with the staff's observations that resource challenges undercut enforcement efforts .

effective and efficient use of resources is important to accomplishing enforcement's mission .

sec's strategic plan calls for targeting resources strategically , examining whether positions are deployed effectively , and exploring how to improve program design and organizational structure .

some attorneys with whom we spoke estimated that they spend as much as a third to 40 percent of their time on the internal review process .

recently , enforcement management has begun efforts that seek to streamline the case review process .

the initiative focuses on process , but our review suggests that organizational culture issues , such as risk aversion and incentives to drop cases or narrow their scope , are also present .

if the division does not consider such issues in its initiative , it may not be as successful as it otherwise could be .

enforcement staff consider a number of factors when determining the dollar amounts of penalties and disgorgements , which in total have declined in recent years .

to determine a penalty in an individual case , enforcement staff consider factors such as the nature of the violation , egregiousness of conduct , cooperation by the defendant , remedial actions taken , and ability to pay .

disgorgement is intended to recover ill - gotten gains made , or losses avoided , through a defendant's actions .

in 2006 and 2007 , the commission articulated certain policies for determining the appropriateness and size of corporate penalties .

the 2006 policy — which the commission said was based in part on the legislative history of a 1990 act that provided sec with civil penalty authority — established nine factors for evaluating imposition of corporate penalties , but said two were of primary importance: ( 1 ) direct benefit to the corporation and ( 2 ) additional harm to shareholders .

the 2007 policy , now discontinued , required enforcement staff , when contemplating a corporate penalty , to obtain commission approval of a penalty range before settlement discussions could begin .

cases that subsequently were settled within the range specified by the commission were eligible for approval on an expedited basis .

at the same time the commission provided the settlement range , it also granted enforcement staff authority to sue .

according to enforcement staff and former commissioners with whom we spoke , and as stated by the then - chairman , the purpose of the policy , also known as the “pilot program,” was to: provide earlier commission involvement in the penalty process ; strengthen enforcement staff's negotiating position ; and maintain consistency , accountability , and due process .

setting aside the effect of the implementation of any policy , the total amount of penalties and disgorgement ordered on an annual basis can vary according to the type and magnitude of cases concluded in a given period .

as shown in figure 1 , since reaching peaks in fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , total annual penalty and disgorgement amounts have declined .

while both penalties and disgorgements fell in recent years , penalties have been declining at an accelerating rate , falling 39 percent in fiscal year 2006 , another 48 percent in fiscal year 2007 , and then 49 percent in fiscal year 2008 .

also , penalties declined in the aggregate by a greater amount than disgorgements .

in particular , penalties fell 84 percent , from a peak of $1.59 billion in fiscal year 2005 to $256 million in fiscal year 2008 .

disgorgements fell 68 percent , from a peak of $2.4 billion in fiscal year 2006 to $774.2 million in fiscal year 2008 .

compared to fiscal year 2006 , sec brought more corporate penalty cases in fiscal 2007 , but for smaller amounts .

in 2007 , sec brought 10 cases , compared to 6 in 2006 .

four of the six cases in 2006 resulted in penalties of $50 million or more , with the two largest , american international group , inc. and fannie mae , totaling $100 million and $400 million , respectively .

in contrast , in the fiscal year 2007 cases , only two issuers , mbia , inc. , and freddie mac , were assessed penalties of at least $50 million .

the distribution of enforcement actions by type of case generally has been consistent in recent years .

enforcement management said that the division has met its goal that a single category of cases not account for more than 40 percent of all actions .

we found that enforcement management , investigative attorneys , and others concurred that the 2006 and 2007 penalty policies , as applied , have delayed cases and produced fewer and smaller corporate penalties .

on their face , the penalty policies are neutral , in that they neither encourage nor discourage corporate penalties .

however , enforcement management and many investigative attorneys and others said that commission handling of cases under the policies both transmitted a message that corporate penalties were highly disfavored and caused there to be fewer and smaller corporate penalties .

according to a number of enforcement attorneys and division managers , investigative attorneys began avoiding recommendations for corporate penalties .

for example , when the question of whether to seek a corporate penalty is a close one , the staff will default to avoiding the penalty .

or , if investigative staff decides to seek a penalty , they will change their focus from pursuing what they otherwise would recommend as most appropriate to tailoring recommendations to what they believe the commission will find acceptable .

according to many investigative attorneys , the penalty policies contributed to an adversarial relationship between enforcement and the commission , where some investigative attorneys came to see the commission less as an ally and instead more as a barrier to bringing enforcement actions .

enforcement management told us they concurred with these observations about the effect of the application of the penalty policies .

although the commission never directed there be fewer or smaller penalties , the officials said this has been the practical effect because commission handling of cases made obtaining corporate penalties more difficult .

over time , the officials said they struggled with implementation and were unable to provide guidance to the staff , because they saw the commission's application of the penalty factors as inconsistent .

furthermore , the widely held view in enforcement was that the unstated purpose of the 2006 policy was to scale back corporate penalties .

our review identified several other concerns voiced by enforcement staff and others: that the policies have had the effect of making penalties less punitive in nature — by conditioning corporate penalties in large part on whether a corporation benefited from improper practices , penalties effectively become more like disgorgement .

that the 2007 policy ( commission pre - approval of a settlement range ) could have led to less - informed decisions about corporate penalties .

that is , the commission would decide on a penalty range in advance of settlement discussions , when settlement discussions themselves can reveal relevant information about the conduct of the wrongdoer .

that the policies have reduced incentives for subjects of enforcement actions to cooperate with the agency , because of the perception that sec has retreated on penalties .

that it became more difficult to obtain formal orders of investigation , which allow issuance of subpoenas to compel testimony and produce books .

since fiscal year 2005 , the number of formal orders approved by the commission has decreased 14 percent .

our review also showed that in adopting and implementing the 2006 and 2007 corporate penalty policies , the commission did not act in concert with agency strategic goals calling for broad communication with , and involvement of , the staff .

in particular , enforcement , which is responsible for implementing the policies , had only limited input into their development .

according to enforcement management , the broad enforcement staff had no input into either policy .

senior division management did have input into the 2006 policy , but none into the 2007 policy .

as a result , enforcement attorneys say there has been frustration and uncertainty about application of the penalty policies .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have .

for further information on this testimony , please contact orice m. williams at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or williamso@gao.gov , or richard j. hillman at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or hillmanr@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include karen tremba , assistant director and christopher schmitt .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

