i am pleased to be here today to discuss natural gas prices .

as you know , last fall two powerful and destructive hurricanes , katrina and rita , tore through the gulf of mexico and several states bordering it — an important area for the supply of natural gas .

by early december 2005 , wholesale natural gas prices topped $15 per million btus , more than double the prices seen last summer and seven times the prices common throughout the 1990s .

for the 2005-2006 winter heating season , the energy information administration estimated in january 2006 that residential households heating with natural gas will pay $257 ( 35 percent ) more , on average , than last winter .

consumers in the midwest are expected to witness even greater increases — paying 41 percent more than last winter .

this is not the first time that natural gas prices have sharply increased .

in 2000-2001 , prices rose steadily and remained high for nearly a year .

we examined this phenomenon in 2002 and found that prices went up mainly because supplies could not keep pace with rising demand .

we also reported that federal agencies responsible for overseeing aspects of the natural gas market were actively investigating whether market participants had violated market rules or manipulated prices .

concerned about the recent increases in natural gas prices and the implications of these increases on consumers in the united states , you asked us to address the following: ( 1 ) the factors causing natural gas price increases , ( 2 ) how consumers are affected by these higher prices , and ( 3 ) the roles federal government agencies play in ensuring that natural gas prices are determined in a competitive and informed marketplace .

our testimony today is based on our prior reports , interviews , and a review of recent reports published by others .

prior related gao products are listed at the end of this statement .

to update our findings from those reports , we conducted interviews with federal agencies that included the energy information administration , the federal energy regulatory commission , and the commodities and futures trading commission .

we also interviewed the state commissions that oversee natural gas utilities , selected trade associations representing the natural gas industry , and other potentially affected industries .

further , we examined data on the natural gas industry , including prices , consumption , and supplies .

in addition , we reviewed relevant reports and other documents published by others .

we conducted our work from december 2005 to february 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

natural gas is a colorless , odorless fossil fuel found underground that is generated through the slow decomposition of ancient organic matter .

in some cases , the gas , composed mainly of methane , is trapped in pockets of porous rock held in place by impermeable rock .

in other cases , natural gas may occur within oil reservoirs or in coal deposits .

natural gas is extracted via wells drilled into the porous rock .

the natural gas is then moved through pipelines and processing plants to consumers .

historically , domestic natural gas production has occurred largely in texas , oklahoma , and louisiana .

in more recent years , as older fields have been depleted , the rocky mountain region , alaska , and areas beneath the deeper waters of the gulf of mexico are becoming increasingly important in supplying natural gas ; however , in many cases these supplies are not near pipelines and other infrastructure needed for getting the gas to markets , which increases the costs of gas obtained from the newer fields .

residential users living in houses , apartments , and mobile homes ; commercial users such as stores , offices , schools , places of worship , and industrial users covering a wide range of facilities for producing , processing , or assembling goods , including manufacturing , agricultural , and mining operations ; entities that use natural gas to generate electricity and provide that electricity to others , such as regulated electric utilities and competitive suppliers of electricity ; and the transportation sector , including pipeline companies , which use natural gas to operate the pipeline networks , as well as those using natural gas to power cars and buses .

most residential and commercial consumers rely on natural gas utilities to supply their gas .

industrial consumers and electricity generators obtain their gas through a variety of means , including buying it directly from spot markets and natural gas utilities .

the demand for natural gas in the united states has generally been seasonal , with peak demand during the winter heating months .

from april through october , companies typically purchase natural gas and place it into underground storage facilities located around the country .

later , as the seasonal demand increases , these stored supplies of natural gas are used to augment the supplies provided via pipelines .

according to eia , natural gas demand during winter months is usually 1.5 times greater than monthly natural gas production in other months .

over the past 25 years , the wholesale natural gas supply market has evolved from a highly regulated market to a largely deregulated market , where prices are mainly driven by supply and demand .

while the regulated market ensured stable prices , it also caused severe gas supply shortages because , with artificially low prices , producers had no incentive to increase production and consumers had no reason to curtail their demand .

before implementation of the natural gas policy act of 1978 , which began deregulation of wholesale natural gas prices , the federal government controlled the prices that natural gas producers could charge for the gas they sold through interstate commerce .

under this regulatory approach , producers located natural gas reserves , drilled wells , gathered the gas , and sold it at federally controlled prices to interstate pipeline companies .

after purchasing the natural gas , pipeline companies generally transported and sold the gas to local distribution or gas utility companies .

these companies , under the oversight of state or local regulatory agencies , then sold and delivered the gas to their consumers , such as homeowners .

in today's restructured market , the retail prices that consumers pay are still regulated in many states and reflect the prices paid by their suppliers to acquire the natural gas .

however , the federal government does not control the wholesale price of natural gas .

since the removal of federal price controls , the wholesale price of natural gas decreased initially and has become more volatile .

producers still locate and gather natural gas , but they now sell the gas at market - driven prices to a variety of companies , including marketers , broker / trader intermediaries , and a variety of consumers .

new market centers have emerged , including a market center referred to as the henry hub , located in henry , louisiana .

henry hub prices are reported on a daily basis , and trades made at that market are often used as benchmarks for other natural gas trades .

the various players in the market may sell gas back and forth several times before it is actually delivered to the ultimate consumers .

in some cases — in spot markets , for example — natural gas is sold for immediate delivery .

in other cases , it may be sold for delivery in the future , through a variety of what are called futures markets .

in addition , several types of financial derivatives related to natural gas — contracts whose market value is derived from the price of the gas itself — can be bought and sold through numerous sources by entities that are interested in protecting themselves against increases in the price of natural gas .

derivatives include natural gas futures and options , and derivative prices typically move in parallel with the spot market .

derivatives markets include exchanges such as the new york mercantile exchange , which is regulated by the cftc ; and the intercontinental exchange , which operates as an exempt commercial market without cftc oversight but over which cftc has anti - manipulation and anti - fraud authority ; and off - exchange and over - the - counter ( otc ) markets , which are not subject to general federal regulatory oversight .

since 1999 , wholesale prices for natural gas have trended steadily upward due to expanding demand — largely for electricity production — and supply that could not expand as quickly because the industry is already operating at near capacity .

this tightness in the demand and supply balance has also made the market susceptible to extreme price changes in times when either demand or supply change unexpectedly .

one such period of extreme price changes occurred in late 2005 , when two hurricanes hit the gulf coast region , disrupting a substantial portion of the domestic supply of natural gas .

prices spiked to high levels and , although they have since dropped , they remain unusually high today .

since 1999 , wholesale natural gas prices have risen steadily , as demonstrated by the moving average in figure 1 .

previously , in the early and mid - 1990s , prices were generally low , usually ranging from $2 to $3 per million btus , adjusted for inflation .

from january 1999 through july 2005 , however , average wholesale prices increased by over 200 percent , rising from about $2 to $6.75 per million btus .

most recently , in the last half of 2005 , prices rose to over $15 per million btus , sevenfold higher than prices seen in the early 1990s .

a combination of market forces has caused the upward trend in wholesale natural gas prices since 1999 .

demand for natural gas has been growing rapidly since the mid - 1980s , with total consumption increasing by about 38 percent from 1986 through 2004 .

figure 2 illustrates the extent to which consumption of natural gas has risen in the united states over the past 2 decades and the relative amounts used by each of the five types of consumers: residential , commercial , industrial , electricity generators , and transportation .

a significant share of the increased demand in recent years has resulted from increased use of natural gas to generate electricity .

out of concern regarding the supply of natural gas and other factors , construction of power plants using oil or natural gas as a primary fuel was restricted from 1978 , when the powerplant and industrial fuel use act ( fuel use act ) took effect , through 1987 , when it was repealed .

after the fuel use act's repeal , use of natural gas by the electric generation sector increased by 79 percent from 1987 through 2004 .

newer gas - powered plants produce low levels of pollutants , compared with many existing plants .

this characteristic , as well as the long period of low prices in the 1990s and other factors , has made natural gas the primary fuel in new power plants .

the supply of natural gas , however , has not kept pace with the increased demand .

historically , most of the natural gas used in the united states — 85 percent in 2003 — has been produced here .

however , as older natural gas fields have been depleted , additional drilling for natural gas has been required in order to maintain domestic production .

this additional drilling has not necessarily resulted in immediate additional supplies in part because development of new wells and supporting pipeline infrastructure can take time .

overall , from 1994 through 2003 , domestic annual production held steady at about 19 trillion cubic feet .

in 2003 , eia reported that the domestic natural gas industry had produced nearly all of the natural gas that could be produced on a monthly basis from 1996 through 2001 — the most recent data then available .

furthermore , eia reported that at times there was virtually no spare capacity in some parts of the country and forecasted that these tight supply conditions would continue , despite eia's projection for a significant increase in drilling activity .

in recent years , imports of natural gas have become increasingly important .

net imports of natural gas have increased steadily , rising by over 250 percent from 1987 through 2004 .

in 2004 , the united states imported about 15 percent of the total natural gas consumed here .

nearly all of the imported gas comes from canada via pipeline , and those imports constitute virtually all of canada's production not used in that country .

in addition , a small share — about 3 percent of total u.s. supply — has been shipped on special ocean tankers as liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from countries such as trinidad and tobago , nigeria , and others .

these imports have increased significantly in recent years ; however , it is not clear if we have the capacity to handle further increased shipments , in part because only five facilities in the united states are able to receive and process lng imports .

moreover , because of limited international supplies and high prices in other markets , it also is not clear how much additional supply is available to the united states .

the tight demand and supply balance has made the market for natural gas more susceptible to extreme price changes when demand or supply changed unexpectedly .

as we previously reported , prices spikes occur periodically in natural gas markets because neither the demand side nor the supply side can quickly adjust to changes in the marketplace .

on the demand side , some customers are able to react to changes in prices .

for example , some industrial entities may be able to switch fuels or reduce their production .

however , many other customers , such as residential customers , may have few fuel - switching options and little firsthand knowledge of spot natural gas prices — and understand the costs of their natural gas consumption only when they receive their bill .

on the supply side , suppliers are slow to respond to price changes .

for example , they may be delayed in responding to high prices because , as noted earlier , existing domestic sources of natural gas are already operating at near full capacity — often above 90 percent in the united states in recent years , according to eia .

in these circumstances , because little excess supply is readily available , it must be added , generally by drilling new wells and connecting those wells to existing pipelines , which can take time .

for example , receiving regulatory approval can take a year or more , and the time to drill the well and connect it to the pipeline network can take another 6 to 18 months .

because neither the suppliers nor many consumers can react quickly to price changes , even small unexpected increases in demand or disruptions in supplies can cause sudden and significant price increases .

most recently , prices rose sharply following the landfall of two hurricanes in the gulf region .

it appears that the price spike was caused by the unexpected decrease in the supply of natural gas in late 2005 following hurricanes katrina and rita , exacerbated by factors that raised demand .

because of the damage caused to production , processing , importing , and transporting infrastructure in the gulf region , wholesale prices climbed to a high of $15 per million btus by december 2005 .

other factors — such as market manipulation — may also have affected wholesale prices .

our ongoing work examining futures trading in natural gas markets will address this issue later this year .

the gulf region produces about 20 percent of the u.s. natural gas supply .

the region's extensive natural gas - related infrastructure includes about 4,000 platforms that extract natural gas from beneath the ocean floor ; two of the five terminals that import lng into the united states ; plants that remove impurities from natural gas to prepare it for sale and use ; and an extensive network of pipelines , linked by hubs such as the henry hub , that transport natural gas to other parts of the united states .

the paths of hurricanes katrina and rita , in relation to gulf region natural gas infrastructure , are shown in figure 3 .

the hurricanes forced operators to evacuate about 90 percent of the oil and gas platforms in the gulf for safety reasons , rendering them unable to produce natural gas ; shut down one of the two lng importing terminals for about two weeks ; damaged processing plants ; and damaged several pipelines and their connecting hubs , delaying transmission of natural gas from supply facilities that were still operational .

for example , the henry hub , a major gas market center , was closed by flooding for a total of 11 days following katrina and rita .

as a result of all of these factors , the hurricanes had a significant impact on the supply of natural gas .

figure 4 shows the impact of hurricanes katrina and rita on the production of natural gas from the gulf region .

hurricane katrina disrupted about 8 billion cubic feet of natural gas production per day immediately following its landfall — amounting to about 80 percent of daily production from the gulf and about 16 percent of total daily u.s. production of natural gas .

lost production from katrina was in the process of being restored when hurricane rita struck — again reducing production of natural gas from the gulf region to levels similar to those immediately following katrina .

as a result of the severity and timing of these two hurricanes , the gulf region produced less than half its usual amount of natural gas for about 9 weeks after hurricane katrina struck .

by comparison , nearly all of the lost production that resulted from hurricane ivan in 2004 was restored within 9 weeks and amounted to about 20 percent of that caused by katrina and rita .

by the end of january , only about 80 percent of the natural gas supplies that had been disrupted by katrina and rita had been restored , leaving the overall market tighter than it was prior to the hurricanes and leaving the u.s. vulnerable to future unexpected interruptions in supply or increases in demand — either of which could result in higher prices .

the high natural gas prices that followed the katrina and rita supply disruptions came at a time when demand for natural gas was already high .

higher - than - average late - summer temperatures in august had led to increased demand for natural gas to generate electricity , particularly in the south .

as a result of this high level of demand , existing supplies were stretched thin and overall price levels were high .

in addition , the hurricanes struck as companies were filling their storage of natural gas in preparation for the winter heating season .

prices for natural gas in both the spot and the futures market spiked dramatically immediately following the supply disruptions caused by the 2005 hurricanes .

in september 2005 , after the second hurricane , natural gas spot prices increased to over $15 per million btus — roughly twice as high as the average price in july 2005 of about $7.60 per million btus .

futures prices to deliver gas in october also doubled to $14.20 per million btus , reflecting traders' expectations that high spot prices could continue into the future .

futures prices closely followed spot prices until early november 2005 , when spot prices fell to about $9 per million btus , but prices for december gas futures remained at about $12 per million btus , reflecting the belief by futures market traders that natural gas prices would be high in december .

a brief cold spell during the beginning of december increased demand for natural gas for heating purposes , driving prices up .

the arrival of warmer than normal temperatures just before the end of the year reduced demand and has contributed to the recent reduction in prices .

figure 5 shows the spikes in natural gas prices during the months of , and following , the 2005 hurricanes .

two other instances of price spikes — caused by unexpected increases in demand — have occurred since 1999 .

first , coincident with the western electricity crisis , from mid - 2000 through early 2001 , wholesale prices for natural gas rose substantially and remained relatively high for nearly a year .

this period witnessed significant increased demand for natural gas by the electric generation sector in order to meet electricity demand across the west during a year of diminished availability of hydroelectricity , a situation compounded by high demand through the winter and lower - than - normal storage levels .

in a second instance , wholesale prices rose sharply in february 2003 during a period of high demand because of unusually cold winter temperatures ; however , prices returned to normal relatively quickly .

how higher wholesale natural gas prices are affecting consumers depends largely on the degree to which the consumers or their suppliers may have purchased gas on the spot market — which reflects current wholesale prices — or may have taken steps to reduce their exposure to these prices .

the effect of higher prices also depends on the consumer's sensitivity to price changes .

some consumers , such as low - income residents and certain industries , are more sensitive to price changes than others .

the impact of recent increases in natural gas wholesale prices on consumers depends on how much of the natural gas they use is purchased in spot markets .

those with the greatest reliance on spot markets are hit the hardest when prices rise or spike .

for example , some natural gas utilities that relied on spot markets are spending significantly more on energy this winter , which may translate into higher gas bills for residential and commercial consumers .

according to our preliminary work with the state commissions that regulate natural gas utilities , 10 states reported that at least some of the natural gas utilities they regulate were highly exposed to spot market prices .

furthermore , in a few states , some of the largest natural gas utilities projected they would purchase 70 percent or more of their natural gas supplies for this winter from the spot market .

participants in the market , such as industrial consumers who purchase gas directly from the market or natural gas utilities that purchase gas on behalf of their customers , can hedge against high spot market prices for natural gas in three main ways: ( 1 ) by purchasing and storing gas for use during times when prices are high ; ( 2 ) by signing fixed - price contracts for delivery of the gas in the future ; and ( 3 ) by purchasing financial instruments , such as options or derivatives , that increase in value as natural gas prices rise .

since the winter of 2000-2001 , some state public utility commissions ( pucs ) have encouraged the natural gas utilities they regulate to hedge some part of their gas purchases in order to help stabilize prices , according to the american gas association .

according to the state commissions , 27 states reported that the utilities they regulate will acquire at least half of their expected winter natural gas needs at a known price , generally ranging from $7 to $10 per million btus .

in that regard , last november , commissioner donald mason of ohio told congress that customers around dayton , ohio , have saved about $3 per million btus as a result of hedging , including use of long - term , fixed - price contracts .

gas utilities are also taking other approaches to keep down or stabilize their customers' costs .

for example , in some states , utilities offer “level” payment programs and show customers how to use energy wisely through energy - efficient appliances .

in minnesota , in 2005 , all state - jurisdictional gas utilities are required to spend at least 0.5 percent of their gross operating revenues on conservation improvement efforts such as weather audits , weatherization , and rebates for purchases of energy - efficient appliances .

while some gas utilities have made efforts to reduce their exposure to spot prices by increasing their use of hedging , as some did after the price spike in 2000-2001 , some states and municipalities still discourage the use of hedging , according to the association that represents the public utility commissioners .

while hedging allows consumers to obtain greater price stability , it has costs and risks , and utilities may lack incentives to undertake it .

storing gas for later use , for example , entails up - front costs such as the cost of placing it into and keeping it in storage .

market participants face risks if , for example , they purchase gas in advance under a fixed - price long - term contract and prices drop .

for that reason , some natural gas utilities may be reluctant to enter into long - term contracts when prices are relatively high , according to a trade association that represents municipal gas utilities .

furthermore , absent specific puc guidance to hedge purchases , gas utilities may have few incentives to hedge since they are generally able to pass along increased costs associated with purchases of natural gas .

moreover , some state regulators may not allow gas utilities to financially benefit from using hedging but hold them financially responsible if the hedge proves unnecessary .

furthermore , while under some circumstances hedging can reduce or eliminate the impact of a price spike , it may offer little benefit during prolonged periods of price changes .

for example , a utility that signed a 5-year commitment to purchase natural gas at a predetermined price may witness no change in the cost of acquiring the natural gas during the period of the contract but would again face market prices ( either higher or lower ) when it came time to replace this gas supply at the end of the contract .

in this sense , hedging may serve to delay until the contract term ends , but not prevent , the effect of higher or lower prices on consumers .

because energy costs account for a relatively large share of overall costs for some consumers or because they are heavily dependent on natural gas , any price increases can present significant difficulties .

in particular , low - income residential consumers and some highly energy intensive industries appear likely to encounter the greatest impact .

the effect of high natural gas prices has already been especially severe on low - income individuals .

according to representatives from a trade association representing publicly owned natural gas utilities , a utility in philadelphia , philadelphia gas works , has billed $42 million more than they have collected so far this winter , representing an increase of 2 percent in uncollectible heating bills this winter compared with last winter .

in kentucky , utilities this winter have witnessed the highest number of complaints and the greatest number of problems faced by customers .

furthermore , federal assistance to low - income households in meeting heating expenditures provides only limited assistance .

according to the national association of state energy officials , the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) currently serves only 20 percent of the eligible population , with average payments of $311 per family designed to help families pay projected natural gas heating expenditures of $1,568 this winter .

additionally , despite several years of increases , liheap funding in fiscal year 2005 is only 67 percent of what it was in fiscal year 1982 , adjusted for inflation .

however , some states have increased funding for low - income individuals recently .

for example , in december , minnesota began distribution of an additional $13.4 million in funding designed to assist an additional 26,000 households in paying for heating .

electricity generators are also sensitive to higher prices because of their dependence on natural gas .

this is true especially in the eastern united states , where , according to ferc , electricity generators rely heavily on natural gas .

furthermore , the region has many of the newer gas - fired electric power plants that have less flexibility to switch to other fuels , such as oil - based fuels , according to the national petroleum council and others .

as a result , some consumers may see higher electricity bills .

high natural gas prices are also adversely affecting industrial consumers .

as we reported in 2003 , some industrial consumers shut down production facilities because of higher energy costs in 2000 and 2001 .

industry representatives expect recent high prices to have a similar effect .

a recent survey by a trade association representing large energy consumers showed that more than half of 31 member companies surveyed are decreasing their demand for natural gas an average of 8 percent to 9 percent this winter compared with last winter , leading the association to conclude that higher prices have forced industries to curtail production in the united states .

the association expects that further cutbacks will occur if prices remain high this year .

according to an association that represents industrial consumers , high natural gas spot prices have been particularly detrimental to specific industries in the united states that rely on natural gas , such as fertilizer and chemical manufacturers , that compete in international markets .

as we reported in 2003 , natural gas expenses can account for 90 percent of the total cost of manufacturing nitrogen fertilizer .

the high cost of domestic natural gas has made it difficult for u.s. producers of nitrogen fertilizer to compete with foreign nitrogen fertilizer producers , who can buy natural gas at lower prices and export their products to the united states .

for example , in 2004 , trinidad and tobago was the largest supplier of anhydrous ammonia , a type of nitrogen fertilizer , to the united states .

prices of natural gas are sharply lower in trinidad and tobago , where , according to the fertilizer institute , prices were about $1.60 per million btus in 2005 .

the u.s. fertilizer industry , which typically supplied 85 percent of its domestic needs from u.s. - based production during the 1990s , now relies on imports for nearly 45 percent of nitrogen supplies , according to a trade association representing fertilizer companies .

furthermore , other industries can be affected .

in the fertilizer industry , according to a trade association representing fertilizer companies , costs are passed on to u.s. farmers , which have witnessed a dramatic increase in the cost of nitrogen fertilizers .

the prices paid by farmers for the major fertilizer materials reached a record during the spring of 2005 — on average , 8 percent higher compared with the same period in 2004 , according to a trade association representing fertilizer companies .

in today's restructured market , the federal government does not control the price of natural gas or directly regulate most wholesale prices .

however , three federal agencies — ferc , cftc , and eia — play key roles in overseeing and supporting a competitive and informed natural gas marketplace .

under federal law , ferc is responsible for regulating the terms , conditions , and rates for interstate transportation by natural gas pipelines and public gas utilities to ensure that wholesale prices for natural gas , sold and transported in interstate commerce , are “just and reasonable.” ferc's jurisdiction over retail natural gas sales is limited to domestic gas sold by pipelines , local distribution companies , and their affiliates .

the commission does not prescribe prices for these commodity sales .

ferc's regulatory authority applies to the physical markets for energy commodities , such as natural gas , and not to futures markets .

in december 2002 , we reported that as energy markets were restructured , ferc had not adequately revised its regulatory and oversight approach to respond to the transition to competitive energy markets .

ferc agreed that its approach to ensuring just and reasonable prices needed to change: from one of reviewing individual companies' rate requests and supporting cost data to one of proactively monitoring energy markets to ensure that they are working well to produce competitive prices .

that year , the commission established the office of market oversight and investigations to actively monitor energy markets and , when necessary , undertake investigations into whether any entity had or was attempting to manipulate energy prices .

as we previously reported , in 2002 , ferc staff undertook several studies and investigations to determine whether there had been attempts to manipulate upward prices for natural gas delivered to california during 2000-2001 .

ferc's ability to monitor the natural gas markets has been enhanced in several regards recently .

first , the energy policy act of 2005 , passed last september , contains several enforcement provisions that increase the commission's ability to punish wrongdoers that harm the public .

in particular , the act provides ferc with the authority to impose greater civil penalties on firms that commit fraud .

in addition , ferc has taken steps to strengthen its efforts to protect energy consumers .

these actions include establishing a telephone hotline that individuals can call to report market abuse or other problems .

ferc also has begun actively monitoring natural gas markets to determine whether price movements are the result of market manipulation or market fundamentals .

the staff reviews market activity for any possible manipulation that might also affect prices and performs a detailed review of natural gas prices and market activity on a daily basis with the intent of identifying areas of possible manipulation .

if the staff identifies price anomalies that are not explained by market fundamentals , they investigate .

since 2002 , ferc has settled a number of investigations involving natural gas market manipulation .

for example , 10 companies agreed to pay settlements totaling approximately $84 million .

in addition , a ferc administrative law judge found that another company exercised market power over natural gas prices in california during the 2001-2002 heating season , and the company subsequently agreed to pay a settlement of $1.6 billion .

ferc officials told us that , since early fall of last year , it has received complaints , expressions of concern , and requests to investigate with respect to high natural gas prices through its enforcement hotline and from public officials and the general public .

additionally , ferc has identified areas of concern through its daily market oversight process .

ferc officials told us that all complaints and concerns are taken seriously and actively investigated , where appropriate .

however , since ongoing investigations are considered nonpublic under ferc's regulations , officials said they could not comment further on any ongoing investigations of the natural gas market .

a large part of cftc's mission is to protect market users and the public from fraud , manipulation , and abusive practices related to the sale of commodity futures and options , including natural gas .

cftc does this for federally regulated exchanges such as nymex , and it has limited authority over certain other futures markets .

it does not have general regulatory authority for other over - the - counter markets , including some used for trading natural gas futures or options .

in fulfilling its regulatory role , cftc conducts market surveillance to identify situations that could amount to attempted or actual futures market manipulation and to initiate appropriate preventive actions .

for instance , to protect the futures market from excessive speculation that could cause unwarranted price fluctuations , cftc or an exchange impose limits on the size of the transactions that may be held in futures or options of a commodity .

in the natural gas futures market , these transaction limits are placed on trading that occurs during the spot month .

to monitor these transaction limits , the commission has about 45 market surveillance staff and economists to do policy and economic analysis of energy trading issues .

as part of its regulatory role , cftc also enforces various laws prohibiting fraud , manipulation , and abusive trading practices .

cftc's enforcement group investigates and prosecutes alleged violations of the commodity exchange act .

from 2002 through may 2005 , cftc investigated over 40 energy companies and individuals , filed over 20 actions , and collected over $300 million in penalties .

most of these actions were related to natural gas .

for example , in july 2004 , coral energy resources , l.p. ( coral ) , a houston - based firm that marketed gas to consumers across the united states , was ordered to pay a civil monetary penalty of $30 million .

the penalty was imposed because the cftc found that coral knowingly provided false , misleading , or inaccurate information concerning its natural gas transactions from january 2000 to september 2002 .

during that time , cftc found that coral employees also attempted to manipulate the price of natural gas in interstate commerce or for future delivery .

natural gas traders report their market information to firms like natural gas intelligence , who in turn compile pricing and volume indexes , for instance , that are used by market participants to settle their transactions .

submitting incorrect information could affect the price of natural gas in interstate commerce and could affect the futures or options prices of gas .

ferc and cftc have recently signed a memorandum of understanding to create a more effective and efficient working relationship between the two agencies .

the agreement covers the sharing of information and the confidential treatment of proprietary energy - trading data .

ferc officials told us that if either agency needs information about trading within the other agency's jurisdiction , then the other agency must provide it .

the understanding is to contribute to better coordination of enforcement cases .

the energy information administration ( eia ) is charged with collecting information about energy markets , including natural gas .

the information reported by this agency is important in promoting efficient natural gas markets and public awareness of these markets .

in our 2002 analysis of natural gas markets , we identified that most elements of eia's natural gas data collection program inadequately reflected some of the changes in the market .

for example , with some exceptions , eia's current natural gas data collection program remains primarily an annual effort to obtain comprehensive information on natural gas volumes and prices , while markets have evolved to require more timely and detailed data .

however , beginning in the spring of 2002 , eia began to provide more real time market information that traders and other gas industry analysts use as an indicator of both supply and demand .

for example , on may 9 , 2002 , eia began releasing weekly estimates of natural gas in underground storage for the united states and three regions of the united states .

according to eia , these data are valued by market participants and are a key predictor of future natural gas price movements .

eia has also undertaken efforts to better understand derivatives markets and the effectiveness of energy derivatives to manage price risk .

in addition , eia's weekly natural gas data releases are published each thursday , and according to eia officials , these releases have been well received by natural gas market participants .

natural gas has become an essential element in our national energy picture .

ironically , however , natural gas markets may be suffering from the growing popularity of this versatile fuel .

rising demand and tightening supply appear to have contributed to both the general rise in prices over the past several years as well as the price spikes , such as that following the hurricanes in 2005 .

moreover , the stage seems set for future price spikes if either demand is higher than expected or supplies are unexpectedly interrupted .

to the extent that the higher prices persist and price spikes are possible , natural gas markets could pose significant challenges for our country .

many people may have to pay a larger percentage of their income for home heating and other uses of natural gas , such as electricity — not just this year , but every year .

some may not be able to afford it .

further , because some key industries have historically relied on low natural gas prices to be competitive , we may lose some of these industries along with the jobs that they provide .

these are weighty issues that require concerted actions reaching across not just the natural gas industry but also across the energy sector and related financial markets .

the american consumer wants secure , affordable , reliable , and environmentally sound energy .

meeting this demand will be a challenge .

this hearing offers another important step in the process of overseeing the regulators — ferc and cftc — charged with ensuring these markets operate as intended .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

if you have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or wellsj@gao.gov .

other major contributors to this testimony include karla springer ( assistant director ) , lee carroll , michael derr , patrick dynes , elizabeth erdmann , philip farah , john forrester , mark gaffigan , mike hix , chester joy , jon ludwigson , kristen sullivan massey , cynthia norris , frank rusco , jena sinkfield , rebecca spithill , john wanska , and kim wheeler - raheb .

meeting energy demand in the 21st century: many challenges and key questions .

gao - 05-414t .

washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2005 .

natural gas: domestic nitrogen fertilizer production depends on natural gas availability and prices .

gao - 03-1148 .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2003 .

energy markets: additional actions would help ensure that ferc's oversight and enforcement capability is comprehensive and systematic .

gao - 03-845 .

washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2003 .

natural gas: analysis of changes in market price .

gao - 03-46 .

washington , d.c.: december 18 , 2002 .

energy markets: concerted actions needed by ferc to confront challenges that impede effective oversight .

gao - 02-656 .

washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2002 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

