we are pleased to be here to discuss the efforts of the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) federal protective service ( fps ) to protect the nearly 9,600 federal facilities that are under the control and custody of the general services administration ( gsa ) , including the challenges associated with fps's use of contract guards and risk assessments .

the 2012 shooting at the anderson federal building in long beach , california , the results of our 2009 covert testing , and fps's ongoing penetration testing demonstrate the continued vulnerability of federal facilities .

the challenge of protecting federal facilities is one of the major reasons why we have designated federal real property management as a high - risk area .

fps is authorized to ( 1 ) protect the buildings , grounds , and property that are under the control and custody of gsa , as well as the persons on the property ; ( 2 ) enforce federal laws and regulations aimed at protecting such property and persons on the property ; and ( 3 ) investigate offenses against these buildings and persons .

fps conducts its mission by providing security services through two types of activities: physical security activities — conducting risk assessments and recommending countermeasures aimed at preventing incidents — and law enforcement activities — proactively patrolling facilities , responding to incidents , conducting criminal investigations , and exercising arrest authority .

to accomplish its mission , fps currently has almost 1,200 full - time employees and about 13,500 contract guards deployed at federal facilities across the country .

it expects to receive approximately $1.2 billion in fees for fiscal year 2014 .

since 2008 , we have reported on the challenges fps faces with carrying out its mission , including overseeing its contract guards and assessing risk at federal facilities .

fps's contract guard program is the most visible component of the agency's operations , and the agency relies on its guards to be its “eyes and ears” while performing their duties .

however , we reported in 2010 and again in 2013 that fps continues to experience difficulty ensuring that its guards have the required training and certifications .

before guards are assigned to a post ( an area of responsibility ) at a federal facility , fps requires that they all undergo employee fitness determinations and complete approximately 120 hours of training provided by the contractor and fps , including basic training and firearms training .

guards must also possess the necessary certificates , licenses , and permits as required by the contract , such as cpr and first - aid certifications .

among other duties , contract guards are responsible for controlling access to facilities ; conducting screening at access points to prevent the introduction of prohibited items , such as weapons and explosives ; and responding to emergency situations involving facility safety and security .

fps also faces challenges assessing risks at the 9,600 facilities under the control and custody of gsa .

in 2012 and in 2014 , we reported that fps's ability to protect and secure federal facilities has been hampered by the absence of a risk assessment program that is consistent with federal standards .

to address issues with overseeing contract guards and conducting risk assessments , we made several recommendations which fps agreed to implement .

these recommendations and their status are discussed later in this statement .

this testimony discusses challenges fps faces in ( 1 ) ensuring contract security guards deployed to federal facilities are properly trained and certified and ( 2 ) conducting risk assessments at federal facilities .

it is based on our reports and testimonies issued from 2009 through 2014 on fps's contract guard and risk assessment programs .

a complete list of these related products appears at the end of my statement .

as part of the work for these products , we reviewed relevant statutes and federal guidance , examined fps contract guard and risk assessment processes and procedures , reviewed a sample of contract guard files , conducted site visits to fps's 11 regions where we interviewed fps officials , and conducted interviews with the 31 guard companies with which fps has contracted and 4 risk management experts .

in addition , we reviewed fps's and eight other selected federal agencies' risk assessment methodologies and compared it to the risk management process for federal facilities standard ( rmp ) that the interagency security committee ( isc ) issued .

the eight selected agencies include: department of energy , office of health , safety , and security ; department of interior ; department of justice , justice protective service ; department of state , diplomatic security ; department of veterans affairs ; federal emergency management agency ; nuclear regulatory commission ; and office of personnel management .

we selected these agencies to achieve diversity with respect to the number and types of agencies' facilities , as well as the agencies' missions .

we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

these standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

additional details about the scope and methodology can be found in each of these related reports .

according to fps officials , the agency has required its guards to receive training on how to respond to an active - shooter scenario since 2010 .

however , as our 2013 report shows , fps faces challenges providing active - shooter response training to all of its guards .

we were unable to determine the extent to which fps's guards have received active - shooter response training , in part , because fps lacks a comprehensive and reliable system for guard oversight ( as discussed below ) .

when we asked officials from 16 of the 31 contract guard companies we contacted if their guards had received training on how to respond during active - shooter incidents , responses varied.companies we interviewed about this topic: for example , of the 16 contract guard officials from eight guard companies stated that their guards had received active - shooter scenario training during fps orientation ; officials from five guard companies stated that fps had not provided active - shooter scenario training to their guards during the fps - provided orientation training ; and officials from three guard companies stated that fps had not provided active - shooter scenario training to their guards during the fps - provided orientation training , but that the topic was covered at some other time .

without ensuring that all guards receive training on how to respond to active - shooter incidents , fps has limited assurance that its guards are prepared for this threat .

according to fps officials , the agency provides guards with information on how they should respond during an active - shooter incident as part of the 8-hour fps - provided orientation training .

fps officials were not able to specify how much time is devoted to this training , but said that it is a small portion of the 2-hour special situations training .

according to fps's training documents , this training includes instructions on how to notify law enforcement personnel , secure the guard's area of responsibility , and direct building occupants according to emergency plans as well as the appropriate use of force .

as part of their 120 hours of fps - required training , guards must receive 8 hours of screener training from fps on how to use x - ray and magnetometer equipment .

however , in our september 2013 report , we found that fps has not provided required screener training to all guards .

screener training is important because many guards control access points at federal facilities and thus must be able to properly operate x - ray and magnetometer machines and understand their results .

in 2009 and 2010 , we reported that fps had not provided screener training to 1,500 contract guards in one fps region .

in response to those reports , fps stated that it planned to implement a program to train its inspectors to provide screener training to all its contract guards by september 2015 .

information from guard companies we contacted indicate that guards who have never received this screener training continue to be deployed to federal facilities .

an official at one contract guard company stated that 133 of its approximately 350 guards ( about 38 percent ) on three separate fps contracts ( awarded in 2009 ) have never received their initial x - ray and magnetometer training from fps .

the official stated that some of these guards are working at screening posts .

officials at another contract guard company in a different fps region stated that , according to their records , 78 of 295 ( about 26 percent ) guards deployed under their contract have never received fps's x - ray and magnetometer training .

these officials stated that fps's regional officials were informed of the problem , but allowed guards to continue to work under this contract , despite not having completed required training .

because fps is responsible for this training , according to guard company officials , no action was taken against the company .

consequently , some guards deployed to federal facilities may be using x - ray and magnetometer equipment that they are not qualified to use─thus raising questions about the ability of some guards to execute a primary responsibility to properly screen access control points at federal facilities .

in our september 2013 report , we found that fps continues to lack effective management controls to ensure that guards have met training and certification requirements .

for example , although fps agreed with our 2012 recommendations to develop a comprehensive and reliable system to oversee contract guards , it still has not established such a system .

without a comprehensive guard management system , fps has no independent means of ensuring that its contract guard companies have met contract requirements , such as providing qualified guards to federal facilities .

instead , fps requires its guard companies to maintain files containing guard - training and certification information .

the companies are then required to provide fps with this information each month .

in our september 2013 report , we found that 23 percent of the 276 guard files we reviewed ( maintained by 11 of the 31 guard companies we interviewed ) lacked required training and certification documentation .

as shown in table 1 , some guard files lacked documentation of basic training , semi - annual firearms qualifications , screener training , the 40-hour refresher training ( required every 3 years ) , and cpr certification .

fps has also identified guard files that did not contain required documentation .

fps's primary tool for ensuring that guard companies comply with contractual requirements for guards' training , certifications , and qualifications is to review guard companies' guard files each month .

from march 2012 through march 2013 , fps reviewed more than 23,000 guard files .

it found that a majority of the guard files had the required documentation but more than 800 ( about 3 percent ) did not .

fps's file reviews for that period showed files missing , for example , documentation for screener training , initial weapons training , cpr certification , and firearms qualifications .

as our september 2013 report explains , however , fps's process for conducting monthly file reviews does not include requirements for reviewing and verifying the results , and we identified instances in which fps's monthly review results did not accurately reflect the contents of guard files .

for instance , fps's review indicated that required documentation was present for some guard files , but for some of those files we were not able to find ( for example ) documentation of training and certification , such as initial weapons training , dhs orientation , and pre - employment drug screenings .

as a result of the lack of management controls , fps is not able to provide reasonable assurance that guards have met training and certification requirements .

we found in 2012 that fps did not assess risks at the 9,600 facilities under the control and custody of gsa in a manner consistent with federal standards , although federal agencies paid fps millions of dollars to assess risk at their facilities .

our march 2014 report examining risk assessments at federal facilities found that this is still a challenge for fps and several other federal agencies .

federal standards such as the national infrastructure protection plan's ( nipp ) risk management framework and isc's rmp call for a risk assessment to include a threat , vulnerability , and consequence assessment .

risk assessments help decision - makers identify and evaluate security risk and implement protective measures to mitigate risk .

moreover , risk assessments play a critical role in helping agencies tailor protective measures to reflect their facilities' unique circumstances and enable them to allocate security resources effectively .

instead of conducting risk assessments , fps uses an interim vulnerability assessment tool , referred to as the modified infrastructure survey tool ( mist ) , with which it assesses federal facilities until it develops a longer - term solution .

according to fps , mist allows it to resume assessing federal facilities' vulnerabilities and recommend countermeasures — something fps has not done consistently for several years .

mist has some limitations .

most notably , it does not assess consequence ( the level , duration , and nature of potential loss resulting from an undesirable event ) .

three of the four risk assessment experts we spoke with generally agreed that a tool that does not estimate consequences does not allow an agency to fully assess risks .

fps officials stated that it intends to eventually incorporate consequence into its risk assessment methodology and is exploring ways to do so .

mist was also not designed to compare risks across federal facilities .

consequently , fps does not have the ability to comprehensively manage risk across its portfolio of 9,600 facilities and recommend countermeasures to federal tenant agencies .

as of april 2014 , according to an fps official , fps had used mist to complete vulnerability assessments of approximately 1,200 federal facilities in fiscal year 2014 and have presented approximately 985 of them to the facility security committees .

the remaining 215 assessments were under review by fps .

fps has begun several initiatives that , once fully implemented , should enhance its ability to protect the more than 1 million federal employees and members of the public who visit federal facilities each year .

since fiscal year 2010 , we have made 31 recommendations to help fps address its challenges with risk management , oversight of its contract guard workforce , and its fee - based funding structure .

dhs and fps have generally agreed with these recommendations .

as of may 2014 , as shown in table 2 , fps had implemented 6 recommendations , and was in the process of addressing 10 others , although none of the 10 have been fully implemented .

the remaining 15 have not been implemented .

according to fps officials , the agency has faced difficulty in implementing many of our recommendations because of changes in its leadership , organization , funding , and staffing levels .

for further information on this testimony , please contact mark goldstein at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by email at goldsteinm@gao.gov .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include tammy conquest , assistant director ; geoff hamilton ; jennifer dubord ; and saraann moessbauer .

federal facility security: additional actions needed to help agencies comply with risk assessment methodology standards .

gao - 14-86 .

washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2014 .

homeland security: federal protective service continues to face challenges with contract guards and risk assessments at federal facilities .

gao - 14-235t .

washington , d.c.: december 17 , 2013 .

homeland security: challenges associated with federal protective service's contract guards and risk assessments at federal facilities .

gao - 14-128t .

washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2013 .

federal protective service: challenges with oversight of contract guard program still exist , and additional management controls are needed .

gao - 13-694 .

washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2013 .

facility security: greater outreach by dhs on standards and management practices could benefit federal agencies .

gao - 13-222 .

washington , d.c.: january 24 , 2013 .

federal protective service: actions needed to assess risk and better manage contract guards at federal facilities .

gao - 12-739 .

washington , d.c.: august 10 , 2012 .

federal protective service: actions needed to resolve delays and inadequate oversight issues with fps's risk assessment and management program .

gao - 11-705r .

washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2011 .

federal protective service: progress made but improved schedule and cost estimate needed to complete transition .

gao - 11-554 .

washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2011 .

homeland security: protecting federal facilities remains a challenge for the department of homeland security's federal protective service .

gao - 11-813t .

washington , d.c.: july 13 , 2011 .

federal facility security: staffing approaches used by selected agencies .

gao - 11-601 .

washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2011 .

budget issues: better fee design would improve federal protective service's and federal agencies' planning and budgeting for security , gao - 11-492 .

washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2011 .

homeland security: addressing weaknesses with facility security committees would enhance protection of federal facilities , gao - 10-901 .

washington , d.c.: august 5 , 2010 .

homeland security: preliminary observations on the federal protective service's workforce analysis and planning efforts .

gao - 10-802r .

washington , d.c.: june 14 , 2010 .

homeland security: federal protective service's use of contract guards requires reassessment and more oversight .

gao - 10-614t .

washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2010 .

homeland security: federal protective service's contract guard program requires more oversight and reassessment of use of contract guards .

gao - 10-341 .

washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2010 .

homeland security: ongoing challenges impact the federal protective service's ability to protect federal facilities .

gao - 10-506t .

washington , d.c.: march 16 , 2010 .

homeland security: greater attention to key practices would improve the federal protective service's approach to facility protection .

gao - 10-142 .

washington , d.c.: october 23 , 2009 .

homeland security: preliminary results show federal protective service's ability to protect federal facilities is hampered by weaknesses in its contract security guard program , gao - 09-859t .

washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2009 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

