i am pleased to be here today to discuss the recently enacted federal information technology ( it ) acquisition reform legislation ( commonly referred to as the federal information technology acquisition reform act or fitara ) and our recent designation of it acquisitions and operations as a government - wide high - risk area .

as you know , the effective and efficient acquisition and management of it investments has been a long - standing challenge in the federal government .

in particular , the federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing it investments , which often suffered from ineffective management , moreover spending on it operations has been inefficient .

over the last 6 fiscal years , we have made about 800 recommendations to address weaknesses in agencies' it acquisitions and operations .

my statement today will discuss fitara requirements and our designation of it acquisitions and operations as a high - risk area .

we based this work upon prior reports and updates from agencies regarding our recommendations .

a more detailed discussion of the objectives , scope , and methodology of this work is included in each of the reports that are cited throughout this statement .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the federal government invests more than $80 billion annually in it , but many of these investments fail to meet cost and schedule expectations or make significant contributions to mission - related outcomes .

we have previously testified that the federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed it investments , such as the department of defense's ( dod ) expeditionary combat support system , which was canceled in december 2012 , after spending more than a billion dollars and failing to deploy within 5 years of initially obligating funds ; the department of homeland security's secure border initiative network program , which was ended in january 2011 , after the department obligated more than $1 billion to the program , because it did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards ; the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) financial and logistics integrated technology enterprise program , which was intended to be delivered by 2014 at a total estimated cost of $609 million , but was terminated in october 2011 due to challenges in managing the program ; the farm service agency's modernize and innovate the delivery of agricultural systems program , which was to replace aging hardware and software applications that process benefits to farmers , was halted after investing about 10 years and at least $423 million , while only delivering about 20 percent of the functionality that was originally planned .

the office of personnel management's retirement systems modernization program , which was canceled in february 2011 , after spending approximately $231 million on the agency's third attempt to automate the processing of federal employee retirement claims ; the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , dod , and the national aeronautics and space administration's national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system , which was a tri - agency weather satellite program that the white house office of science and technology stopped in february 2010 after the program spent 16 years and almost $5 billion ; and the va scheduling replacement project , which was terminated in september 2009 after spending an estimated $127 million over 9 years .

these and other failed it projects often suffered from a lack of disciplined and effective management , such as project planning , requirements definition , and program oversight and governance .

in many instances , agencies had not consistently applied best practices that are critical to successfully acquiring it investments .

federal it projects have also failed due to a lack of oversight and governance .

executive - level governance and oversight across the government has often been ineffective , specifically from chief information officers ( cio ) .

for example , we have reported that not all cios had the authority to review and approve the entire agency it portfolio and that cios' authority was limited .

recognizing the severity of issues related to government - wide management of it , in december 2014 , congress enacted it reform legislation , fitara .

the law holds promise for improving agencies' acquisition of it and enabling congress to monitor agencies' progress and hold them accountable for reducing duplication and achieving cost savings .

fitara includes specific requirements related to seven areas .

agency cio authority enhancements .

agency cios are required to ( 1 ) approve the it budget requests of their respective agencies , ( 2 ) certify that it investments are adequately implementing the office of management and budget's ( omb ) incremental development guidance , ( 3 ) review and approve contracts for it , and ( 4 ) approve the appointment of other agency employees with the title of cio .

enhanced transparency and improved risk management .

omb and agencies are to make publicly available detailed information on federal it investments , and agency cios are to categorize their it investments by risk .

additionally , in the case of major it investments rated as high risk for 4 consecutive quarters , the law requires that the agency cio and the investment's program manager conduct a review aimed at identifying and addressing the causes of the risk .

portfolio review .

agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness , and identify potential waste and duplication .

in developing the associated process , the law requires omb to develop standardized performance metrics , to include cost savings , and to submit quarterly reports to congress on cost savings .

federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) .

agencies are required to provide omb with a data center inventory , a strategy for consolidating and optimizing the data centers ( to include planned cost savings ) , and quarterly updates on progress made .

the law also requires omb to develop a goal of how much is to be saved through this initiative , and provide annual reports on cost savings achieved .

expansion of training and use of it cadres .

agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to address supporting the timely and effective acquisition of it .

in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres .

maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative .

federal agencies are required to compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative .

omb is also required to issue related regulations .

government - wide software purchasing program .

the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software .

in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user .

in addition , in june 2015 , omb released guidance describing how agencies are to implement the law .

omb's guidance states that it is intended to , among other things: assist agencies in aligning their it resources to statutory requirements ; establish government - wide it management controls that will meet the law's requirements , while providing agencies with flexibility to adapt to unique agency processes and requirements ; clarify the cio's role and strengthen the relationship between agency cios and bureau cios ; and strengthen cio accountability for it cost , schedule , performance , and security .

in this regard , the guidance reiterates omb's existing guidance on portfoliostat , the it dashboard , and the federal data center consolidation initiative , and expands its existing guidance on techstat sessions .

the guidance includes several actions agencies are to take to establish a basic set of roles and responsibilities ( referred to as the “common baseline” ) for cios and other senior agency officials that are needed to implement the authorities described in the law .

for example , agencies were required to conduct a self - assessment and submit a plan describing the changes they will make to ensure that common baseline responsibilities are implemented .

agencies were to submit their plans to omb's office of e - government and information technology by august 15 , 2015 , and make portions of the plans publicly available on agency websites no later than 30 days after omb approval .

as of october 30 , 2015 , none of the 24 chief financial officers act agencies had made their plans publicly available .

the guidance also noted that omb will help support agency implementation of the common baseline by , for example , requiring the federal cio council to , on quarterly basis , discuss topics related to the implementation of the common baseline and to assist agencies by sharing examples of agency governance processes and it policies .

further , by june 30 , 2015 , the president's management council was to select three members from the council to provide an update on government - wide implementation of fitara on a quarterly basis through september 2016 .

however , as of october 28 , 2015 , omb officials stated that the president's management council had not yet selected members to provide these updates .

in addition , omb recently issued a memorandum regarding commodity it acquisitions and noted that agencies buy and manage their it in a fragmented and inefficient manner which conflicts with the goals of fitara .

among other things , the memorandum directed agencies to standardize laptop and desktop configurations for common requirements and reduce the number of contracts for laptops and desktops by consolidating purchasing .

the memorandum notes that omb intends for agencies to implement standard configurations over time by using approved contracts , with a government - wide goal of 75 percent of agencies using approved contracts by fiscal year 2018 .

the memorandum requires agencies to develop transition plans to achieve this goal and submit them to omb by february 28 , 2016 .

our government - wide high - risk area improving the management of it acquisitions and operations highlights critical it initiatives , four of which align with provisions in fitara: ( 1 ) an emphasis on incremental development , ( 2 ) a key transparency initiative , ( 3 ) efforts to consolidate data centers , and ( 4 ) efforts to streamline agencies' portfolios of it investments .

our high - risk report notes that implementation of these initiatives had been inconsistent , and more work remained to demonstrate progress in achieving it acquisition outcomes .

implementing the provisions from the law , along with our outstanding recommendations , will be necessary for agencies to demonstrate progress in addressing this high - risk area .

omb has emphasized the need to deliver investments in smaller parts , or increments , in order to reduce investment risk , deliver capabilities more quickly , and facilitate the adoption of emerging technologies .

in 2010 , it called for agencies' major investments to deliver functionality every 12 months and , since 2012 , every 6 months .

however , we recently reported that less than half of selected investments at five major agencies planned to deliver capabilities in 12-month cycles .

accordingly , we recommended that omb develop and issue clearer guidance on incremental development and that selected agencies update and implement their associated policies .

most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment .

in january 2010 , the federal cio began leading techstat sessions — face - to - face meetings to terminate or turn around it investments that are failing or are not producing results .

these meetings involve omb and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and improve performance .

omb reported that federal agencies achieved over $3 billion in cost savings or avoidances as a result of these sessions in 2010 .

subsequently , omb empowered agency cios to hold their own techstat sessions within their respective agencies .

we have since reported that omb and selected agencies held multiple techstats , but additional omb oversight was needed to ensure that these meetings were having the appropriate impact on underperforming projects and that resulting cost savings were valid .

we concluded that until omb and agencies develop plans to address these investments , the investments would likely remain at risk .

among other things , we recommended that omb require agencies to address high - risk investments .

omb generally agreed with this recommendation .

however , as of october 28 , 2015 , omb has only conducted one techstat review in the last 2 years .

in particular , between march 2013 and october 2015 , omb held one techstat on the department of state's legacy consular systems investment in july 2015 .

moreover , omb has not listed any savings from techstats in any of its required quarterly reporting to congress since june 2012 .

to help the government achieve transparency while managing legacy investments , in june 2009 , omb established a public website ( referred to as the it dashboard ) that provides detailed information on major it investments at 27 federal agencies , including ratings of their performance against cost and schedule targets .

among other things , agencies are to submit ratings from their cios , which , according to omb's instructions , should reflect the level of risk facing an investment relative to that investment's ability to accomplish its goals .

as of august 2015 , according to the it dashboard , 163 of the federal government's 738 major it investments — totaling $9.8 billion — were in need of management attention ( rated “yellow” to indicate the need for attention or “red” to indicate significant concerns ) .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

over the past several years , we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the it dashboard and to increase its availability .

most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment .

in addition to spending money on new it development , agencies also plan to spend a significant amount of their fiscal year 2016 it budgets on the operations and maintenance ( o&m ) of legacy ( i.e. , steady - state ) systems .

from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2016 , this amount has increased , while the amount invested in developing new systems has decreased by about $7.1 billion .

 ( see figure 2. ) .

this raises concerns about agencies' ability to replace systems that are no longer cost - effective or that fail to meet user needs .

of the more than $79 billion budgeted for federal it in fiscal year 2016 , 26 federal agencies plan to spend about $60 billion , more than three - quarters of the total budgeted , on the o&m of legacy investments .

figure 3 provides a visual summary of the relative cost of major and nonmajor investments , both in development and o&m .

given the size and magnitude of these investments , it is important that agencies effectively manage the o&m of existing investments to ensure that they ( 1 ) continue to meet agency needs , ( 2 ) deliver value , and ( 3 ) do not unnecessarily duplicate or overlap with other investments .

to accomplish this , agencies are required by omb to perform annual operational analyses of these investments , which are intended to serve as periodic examination of an investment's performance against , among other things , established cost , schedule , and performance goals .

however , we have reported that agencies were not consistently performing such analyses and that billions of dollars in o&m investments had not undergone needed analyses .

specifically , as detailed in our november 2013 report , only 1 of the government's 10 largest o&m investments underwent an omb - required operational analysis .

we recommended that operational analyses be completed on the remaining 9 investments .

most agencies generally agreed with our recommendations .

to improve the efficiency , performance , and environmental footprint of federal data center activities , omb established the federal data center consolidation initiative in february 2010 .

in a series of reports , we found that , while data center consolidation could potentially save the federal government billions of dollars , weaknesses existed in the execution and oversight of the initiative .

most recently , we reported that , as of may 2014 , agencies collectively reported that they had a total of 9,658 data centers ; as of may 2015 , they had closed 1,684 data centers and were planning to close an additional 2,431 — for a total of 4,115 — by the end of september 2015 .

we also noted that between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , agencies reported planning a total of about $5.3 billion in cost savings and avoidances due to the consolidation of federal data centers .

in correspondence subsequent to the publication of our report , dod's office of the cio identified an additional $2.1 billion in savings to be realized beyond fiscal year 2017 , which increased the total savings across the federal government to about $7.4 billion .

further , since our may 2014 report we received additional information from other agencies about their actual 2014 cost savings and revised plans for future savings .

this information is shown in table 1 , which provides a summary of agencies' total data center cost savings and cost avoidances between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , as well as dod cost savings and cost avoidances to be realized beyond 2017 .

however , in our september 2014 report , we noted that planned savings may be understated because of difficulties agencies encountered when calculating savings and communicating their estimates to omb .

we made recommendations to ensure the initiative improves efficiency and achieves cost savings .

most agencies agreed with our recommendations or did not comment .

to better manage existing it systems , omb launched the portfoliostat initiative , which requires agencies to conduct an annual , agency - wide it portfolio review to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how their it investments align with the agency's mission and business functions .

in november 2013 , we reported that agencies continued to identify duplicative spending as part of portfoliostat and that this initiative had the potential to save at least $5.8 billion through fiscal year 2015 ; however , weaknesses existed in agencies' implementation of the initiative , such as limitations in the cios' authority .

we made more than 60 recommendations to improve omb's and agencies' implementation of portfoliostat .

omb partially agreed with our recommendations , and responses from 21 of the agencies varied , with some agreeing and others not .

in april 2015 , we reported that agencies decreased their planned portfoliostat savings to approximately $2 billion — a 68 percent reduction from the amount they reported to us in 2013 .

additionally , although agencies also reported having achieved approximately $1.1 billion in savings , inconsistencies in omb's and agencies' reporting made it difficult to reliably measure progress in achieving savings .

among other things , we made recommendations to omb aimed at improving the reporting of achieved savings , with which it agreed .

we have also recently reported on two additional key areas of agency's it spending portfolio: software licensing and mobile devices .

regarding software licensing , we recently reported that better management was needed to achieve significant savings government - wide .

in particular , 22 of the 24 major agencies we reviewed did not have comprehensive license policies , and only 2 had comprehensive license inventories .

we recommended that omb issue needed guidance to agencies and made more than 130 recommendations to the agencies to improve their policies and practices for managing software licenses .

omb disagreed with the need for guidance .

however , we believe that without such guidance , agencies will likely continue to lack the visibility into what needs to be managed .

most agencies generally agreed with the recommendations or had no comments .

we have also reported that most of the 15 agencies in our mobile devices review did not have an inventory of mobile devices and associated services , and only 1 of the 15 agencies we reviewed had documented procedures for monitoring spending .

accordingly , we recommended that the agencies take actions to improve their inventories and control processes and that omb measure and report progress in achieving cost savings .

omb and 14 of the agencies generally agreed with the recommendations or had no comment .

the department of defense partially agreed , and we maintained that actions were needed .

in our february 2015 high - risk report , we identified actions that omb and the agencies need to take to make progress in this area .

these include implementing the recently enacted statutory requirements promoting it acquisition reform , as well as implementing our previous recommendations , such as updating the public version of the it dashboard throughout the year .

as noted in that report , we have made multiple recommendations to improve agencies' management of their it acquisitions , many of which have been discussed in this statement .

in the last 6 years we made approximately 800 recommendations to multiple agencies .

as of october 2015 , about 32 percent of these recommendations had been implemented .

also in our high - risk report , we stated that omb and agencies will need to demonstrate measurable government - wide progress in the following key areas: implement at least 80 percent of gao's recommendations related to the management of it acquisitions and operations within 4 years .

ensure that a minimum of 80 percent of the government's major acquisitions deliver functionality every 12 months .

achieve no less than 80 percent of the planned portfoliostat savings and 80 percent of the planned savings planned for data center consolidation .

in conclusion , with the recent passage of it reform legislation , the federal government has an opportunity to improve the transparency and management of it acquisition and operations , and strengthen the authority of cios to provide needed direction and oversight .

further , by identifying the management of it acquisitions and operations as a new government - wide high - risk area we are bringing necessary attention to several critical it initiatives in need of additional congressional oversight .

omb and federal agencies should expeditiously implement the requirements of the legislation and continue to implement our previous recommendations .

to help ensure that these improvements are achieved , continued congressional oversight of omb's and agencies' implementation efforts is essential .

chairmen meadows and hurd , ranking members connolly and kelly , and members of the subcommittees , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

for additional information about this high - risk area , contact david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao.gov , carol cha at ( 202 ) 512- 4456 or chac@gao.gov , or valerie melvin at ( 202 ) 512-6304 or melvinv@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are kevin walsh ( assistant director ) , chris businsky , rebecca eyler , kaelin kuhn , and jessica waselkow .

telecommunications: agencies need better controls to achieve significant savings on mobile devices and services .

gao - 15-431 .

may 21 , 2015 .

information technology: additional omb and agency actions needed to ensure portfolio savings are realized and effectively tracked .

gao - 15-296 .

april 16 , 2015 .

federal chief information officers: reporting to omb can be improved by further streamlining and better focusing on priorities .

gao - 15-106 .

april 2 , 2015 .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 15-290 .

february 11 , 2015 .

data center consolidation: reporting can be improved to reflect substantial planned savings .

gao - 14-713 .

september 25 , 2014 .

federal software licenses: better management needed to achieve significant savings government - wide .

gao - 14-413 .

may 22 , 2014 .

information technology: agencies need to establish and implement incremental development policies .

gao - 14-361 .

may 1 , 2014 .

it dashboard: agencies are managing investment risk , but related ratings need to be more accurate and available .

gao - 14-64 .

december 12 , 2013 .

information technology: agencies need to strengthen oversight of multibillion dollar investments in operations and maintenance .

gao - 14-66 .

november 6 , 2013 .

information technology: additional omb and agency actions are needed to achieve portfolio savings .

gao - 14-65 .

november 6 , 2013 .

information technology: additional executive review sessions needed to address troubled projects .

gao - 13-524 .

june 13 , 2013 .

information technology: agencies need to strengthen oversight of billions of dollars in operations and maintenance investments .

gao - 13-87 .

october 16 , 2012 .

it dashboard: accuracy has improved , and additional efforts are under way to better inform decision making .

gao - 12-210 .

november 7 , 2011 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

