as you know , technology plays an important role in helping the federal government provide security for its many physical and information assets .

in particular , “smart cards” offer the potential to significantly improve the process of verifying the identity of people accessing federal buildings and computer systems — especially when these cards are used in combination with other technologies , such as biometrics .

further , smart cards can be used to support other business - related functions , such as tracking immunization records or storing cash value for electronic purchases .

the general services administration ( gsa ) has promoted the adoption of smart card technology across the government based on a goal of equipping all federal employees with a standardized smart card for a wide range of services .

in support of this goal , gsa has implemented a governmentwide , standards - based contracting vehicle , the smart card access common id contract , which federal agencies can use to procure smart card products and services .

the contract specifies adherence to the government smart card interoperability specification , which has been developed by the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and is intended to ensure that government smart card implementations achieve a minimum level of interoperability .

in january 2003 , we reported on progress that the federal government had made in promoting the adoption of smart card technology .

this report responds to your request that we update this information .

specifically , our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the current status of smart card projects under way at the time of our last review , ( 2 ) identify and determine the status of projects initiated since our last review was completed , and ( 3 ) identify integrated agencywide smart card projects that are currently under way .

to address these objectives , we surveyed the 24 major federal agencies ( i.e. , agencies covered by the chief financial officers act as well as the department of homeland security ( dhs ) ) regarding the status of their smart card projects .

we also obtained supporting documentation where available and conducted follow - up interviews with agency officials responding to the survey to ensure that the information provided was current and accurate .

in addition , we contacted gsa officials to discuss agencies' use of the smart card access common id contract and other governmentwide implementation issues .

further details of our objectives , scope , and methodology are given in appendix i .

we performed our work between november 2003 and july 2004 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

today , federal employees are issued a wide variety of identification ( id ) cards , which are used to access federal buildings and facilities , sometimes solely on the basis of visual inspection by security personnel .

these cards often cannot be used for other important identification purposes — such as gaining access to an agency's computer systems — and many can be easily forged or stolen and altered to permit access by unauthorized individuals .

in general , the ease with which traditional id cards — including credit cards — can be forged has contributed to increases in identity theft and related security and financial problems for both individuals and organizations .

one means to address such problems is offered by the use of smart cards .

smart cards are plastic devices about the size of a credit card that contain an embedded integrated circuit chip capable of both storing and processing data .

figure 1 shows a typical example of a smart card .

the unique advantage of smart cards — as opposed to cards with simpler technology , such as magnetic stripes or bar codes — is that smart cards can exchange data with other systems and process information rather than simply serving as static data repositories .

by securely exchanging information , a smart card can help authenticate the identity of the individual possessing the card in a far more rigorous way than is possible with simpler traditional id cards .

a smart card's processing power also allows it to exchange and update many other kinds of information with a variety of external systems , which can facilitate applications such as financial transactions or other services that involve electronic record - keeping .

smart cards can also be used to significantly enhance the security of an organization's computer systems by tightening controls over user access .

a user wishing to log on to a computer system or network with controlled access must “prove” his or her identity to the system — a process called authentication .

many systems authenticate users by merely requiring them to enter secret passwords , which provide only modest security because they can be easily compromised .

substantially better user authentication can be achieved by supplementing passwords with smart cards .

to gain access under this scenario , a user is prompted to insert a smart card into a reader attached to the computer as well as type in a password .

this authentication process is significantly harder to circumvent because an intruder would need not only to guess a user's password but also to possess the same user's smart card .

even stronger authentication can be achieved by using smart cards in conjunction with biometrics .

smart cards can be configured to store biometric information ( such as fingerprint templates or iris scans ) in electronic records that can be retrieved and compared with an individual's live biometric scan as a means of verifying that person's identity in a way that is difficult to circumvent .

a system requiring users to present a smart card , enter a password , and verify a biometric scan provides what security experts call “three - factor” authentication , the three factors being “something you possess” ( the smart card ) , “something you know” ( the password ) , and “something you are” ( the biometric ) .

systems employing three - factor authentication are considered to provide a relatively high level of security .

the combination of smart cards and biometrics can provide equally strong authentication for controlling access to physical facilities .

smart cards can also be used in conjunction with public key infrastructure ( pki ) technology to better secure electronic messages and transactions .

a properly implemented and maintained pki can offer several important security services , including assurance that ( 1 ) the parties to an electronic transaction are really who they claim to be , ( 2 ) the information has not been altered or shared with any unauthorized entity , and ( 3 ) neither party will be able to wrongfully deny taking part in the transaction .

security experts generally agree that pki technology is most effective when deployed in conjunction with smart cards .

in addition to enhancing security , smart cards have the flexibility to support a wide variety of uses not related to security .

a typical smart card in use today can store and process 16 to 32 kilobytes of data , while newer cards can accommodate 64 kilobytes .

the larger the card's electronic memory , the more functions can be supported , such as tracking itineraries for travelers , linking to immunization or other medical records , or storing cash value for electronic purchases .

smart cards are grouped into two major classes: contact cards and “contactless” cards .

contact cards have gold - plated contacts that connect directly with the read / write heads of a smart card reader when the card is inserted into the device .

contactless cards contain an embedded antenna and work when the card is waved within the magnetic field of a card reader or terminal .

contactless cards are better suited for environments where quick interaction between the card and the reader is required , such as high - volume physical access .

for example , the washington metropolitan area transit authority has deployed an automated fare collection system using contactless smart cards as a way of speeding patrons' access to the washington , d.c. , subway system .

smart cards can be configured to include both contact and contactless capabilities , but two separate interfaces are needed because standards for the technologies are very different .

since the 1990s , the federal government has considered the use of smart card technology as one option for electronically improving security over buildings and computer systems .

in 1996 , gsa was tasked with taking the lead in facilitating a coordinated interagency management approach for the adoption of multiapplication smart cards across government .

the tasking came from omb , which has statutory responsibility to develop and oversee policies , principles , standards , and guidelines used by agencies for ensuring the security of federal information and systems .

to make it easier for federal agencies to acquire commercial smart card products , gsa developed the governmentwide smart card access common id contracting vehicle , which also specified adherence to the government smart card interoperability specification that nist developed in collaboration with smart card vendors .

in 2003 , omb , in accordance with the president's vision of creating a more responsive and cost - effective government , issued a memorandum to federal chief information officers outlining details of the e - authentication e - government initiative on authentication and identity management .

omb also created the federal identity credentialing committee ( ficc ) to make policy recommendations and develop the federal identity credentialing component of the federal enterprise architecture , to include services such as identity proofing and credential management for the federal government .

in february 2004 , ficc issued policy guidance on the use of smart card – based systems in badge , identification , and credentialing systems with the objective of helping agencies plan , budget , establish , and implement credentialing and identification systems for government employees and their agents .

in our january 2003 report on smart cards , we made recommendations to omb , nist , and gsa .

specifically , we recommended that the director , omb , issue governmentwide policy guidance regarding adoption of smart cards for secure access to physical and logical assets ; the director , nist , continue to improve and update the government smart card interoperability specification by addressing governmentwide standards for additional technologies — such as contactless cards , biometrics , and optical stripe media — as well as integration with pki ; and the administrator , gsa , improve the effectiveness of its promotion of smart card technologies within the federal government by ( 1 ) developing an internal implementation strategy with specific goals and milestones to ensure that gsa's internal organizations support and implement smart card systems consistently ; ( 2 ) updating its governmentwide implementation strategy and administrative guidance on implementing smart card systems to address current security priorities ; ( 3 ) establishing guidelines for federal building security that address the role of smart card technology ; and ( 4 ) developing a process for conducting ongoing evaluations of the implementation of smart card – based systems by federal agencies to ensure that lessons learned and best practices are shared across government .

to date , all three agencies have taken actions to address the recommendations made to them .

in response to our recommendation , omb issued a july 3 , 2003 , memorandum to major departments and agencies directing them to coordinate and consolidate investments related to authentication and identity management , including the implementation of smart card technology .

nist has responded by improving and updating the government smart card interoperability specification to address additional technologies , including contactless cards and biometrics.gsa responded to our recommendations by updating its “smart card policy and administrative guidance” to better address security priorities , including minimum security standards for federal facilities , computer systems , and data across the government .

however , three of our four recommendations to gsa are still outstanding .

gsa officials stated that they are working to address the recommendations to develop an internal gsa smart card implementation strategy , develop a process for conducting evaluations of smart card implementations , and share lessons learned and best practices across government .

the responsibility for one recommendation — establishing guidelines for federal building security that address the role of smart card technology — was transferred to dhs .

in january 2003 , we reported that 18 federal agencies were planning , testing , operating , or completing 62 smart card projects .

these projects varied widely in size and technical complexity , ranging from small - scale , limited - duration pilot projects to large - scale , agencywide initiatives providing multiple services .

the projects were reported in varying stages of deployment .

specifically , 17 projects were listed as operational , 13 projects were in the planning stage , and 7 were being piloted .

in addition , 10 were reported at that time as having been completed or discontinued for various reasons .

no information was provided about the project phase of the remaining 15 initiatives .

in responding to our survey regarding the 52 projects listed as ongoing in our previous report , agencies reported that as of june 2004 , 28 had been terminated .

of the remaining projects , 11 were operational , 5 were in the planning or pilot phase , and agencies did not provide current information on 8 .

the operational and planned projects consist mostly of large - scale projects intended to provide identity credentials to an entire agency's employees or other large groups of individuals .

figure 2 shows the current status of the 52 federal smart card projects that were previously reported as continuing .

table 1 provides summary information on the status of individual projects , providing reasons for any terminations .

agencies reported that the majority ( 28 ) of the above projects had been terminated since our last review was conducted .

according to agency officials , reasons for termination were primarily that the projects were absorbed into other smart card projects or were deemed no longer feasible .

for example , dod terminated 14 of 26 previously reported projects by substituting functionality provided by two large - scale smart card projects , the common access card ( cac ) and the ezpay ( a project that was not previously reported ) .

dod's cac card is to be used to authenticate the identity of nearly 3.5 million military and civilian personnel and to improve security over online systems and transactions .

the ezpay program is a stored - value card given to recruits at training installations to accelerate the processing time and thus maximize training time .

table 2 provides further details on the remaining 16 ongoing projects .

as the table shows , 12 of these are large - scale projects .

agencywide smart card projects are ongoing at nasa and the departments of defense , the interior , state , and the treasury .

these and other large projects will serve populations ranging up to 6 million .

the cards will be used for identity credentials , physical access to buildings , logical access to computer systems , and stored value .

the remaining 4 projects are used for similar purposes .

however , they are smaller in scale , serving populations ranging from 612 to 3,100 individuals .

for example , the interior's minerals management service is planning a smart card program for use as identity credentials , and physical and logical access for about 2,100 employees .

in response to our survey , agency officials reported 8 additional smart card projects that were ongoing at the time of our last review but not previously reported .

four of the 8 projects were planned for multiple applications such as identity credentials and physical and logical access .

the remaining 4 projects were planned for single applications such as stored value , logical access to computer systems and networks , or processing travel documents .

figure 3 shows the number of these projects by the type of applications planned and the stage of reported deployment .

table 3 provides more detailed status information on these projects .

in response to our survey , agencies reported 10 smart card projects that were initiated since our last review was completed .

based on these reported projects , more agencies are using gsa's smart card access common id contracting vehicle to acquire smart card technology .

the 10 new projects identified in response to our survey vary in size , scope , and stage of deployment: planning , pilot , and operational .

all of the projects are planned for multiple applications such as identity credentials and physical and logical access .

figure 4 shows the number of these projects by the type of application planned and the stage of reported deployment .

these 10 projects vary widely in size , including small - scale projects — involving smart cards issued to as few as 126 cardholders — as well as much larger scale initiatives .

for example , department of labor officials reported that the employment and training administration physical access control smart card was issued to 126 federal employees and contractors as of december 2003 .

this card is operational and will be issued to 175 cardholders when fully deployed ; it is used for identity credentials and physical access to buildings and other facilities .

in contrast , va plans to issue an estimated 500,000 smart cards to employees and contractors under its authentication and authorization infrastructure project .

through this initiative , smart cards will be used for identity credentials , accessing buildings or other facilities , and accessing computer systems .

production began in july 2004 .

another example of a large - scale project is gsa's nationwide id card .

gsa plans to issue cards to 61,000 federal employees , contractors , and tenant agencies .

using this card , gsa plans to implement nationwide uniform credentials based on smart card technology by providing a single standard credential card for identification , building access , property management , and other applications .

table 4 provides status information on the 10 recently initiated smart card projects .

gsa developed the smart card access common id contracting vehicle to help make it easier for federal agencies to acquire commercial smart card products and services .

according to the director of gsa's center for smart card solutions , further guidance is planned that will require agencies to use the contracting vehicle or provide justification for not using it .

the director also stated that using gsa's contract should help reduce the cost of smart cards and ensure that vendors incorporate interoperability specifications .

between december 2004 and december 2008 , five agencies — including nasa and the departments of defense , homeland security , the interior , and veterans affairs — are planning to make an aggregated purchase of up to 40 million cards through the gsa contract .

as a part of this purchase , these agencies are scheduled to begin making quarterly procurements beginning in december 2004 of approximately 1.2 million cards .

in response to our survey , the majority of the agencies ( 4 of 7 ) that reported new initiatives told us that they purchased smart cards under the gsa contract .

the remaining agencies cited reasons for not acquiring smart cards under the gsa contract , such as purchase arrangements with another agency or purchases under other types of contracts .

agencies continue to move towards integrated agencywide initiatives that use smart cards as identity credentials that agency employees can use to gain both physical access to facilities , such as buildings , and logical access to computer systems and networks .

in some cases , additional functions , such as asset management and stored value , are also being included .

nine agencies reported such projects: 4 of these were reported in our prior report , and 5 are recently initiated efforts .

these projects are in various stages of deployment .

one of the largest agencywide efforts is dhs's identification and credentialing project .

the agency plans to issue 250,000 cards to employees and contractors .

this is a comprehensive identification and credentialing effort that will use pki technology for logical access and proximity chips for physical access .

authentication will rely on biometrics with a personal identification number as a backup .

other recently initiated agencywide smart card projects include gsa's nationwide identification , va's authentication and authorization infrastructure project , and the department of labor's e - authentication project .

table 5 summarizes both previously reported and recently initiated agencywide smart card efforts .

we received oral comments on a draft of this report from gsa's associate administrator , office of governmentwide policy , and from officials of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs and its office of general counsel .

both gsa and omb generally agreed with the content in the draft report .

in addition , each agency provided technical comments , which have been addressed where appropriate in the final report .

we will provide copies of this report to the director of omb and the administrator of gsa , and the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

should you have any questions on matters contained in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 or john de ferrari , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6335 .

we can also be reached by e - mail at koontzl@gao.gov and deferrarij@gao.gov , respectively .

other key contributors to this report were tonia brown , barbara collier , felipe colón , pamlutricia greenleaf , and joel grossman .

our objectives were to ( 1 ) determine the current status of smart card projects under way at the time of our last review , ( 2 ) identify and determine the status of projects initiated since our last review was completed , and ( 3 ) identify integrated agencywide smart card projects that are currently under way .

to address these objectives , we developed a questionnaire and surveyed 24 federal agencies .

these included agencies that are subject to the provisions of the chief financial officers act as well as the department of homeland security .

the survey included the 18 agencies pursuing smart card projects that were identified in our previous report .

the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors .

for example , differences in how a particular question is interpreted , the sources of information available to respondents , or the types of people who do not respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results .

we included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages for the purpose of minimizing such errors .

we analyzed information obtained through the survey to develop summary results and identify trends .

to ensure the reliability of the information reported through the survey , we obtained available supporting documentation — such as project plans and descriptions — to verify ( 1 ) reported planning and implementation dates and ( 2 ) the numbers of smart cards issued as of december 31 , 2003 , or planned for issuance .

as needed , we conducted follow - up interviews with agency officials responding to the survey to further ensure that the information provided was current and accurate .

in addition , we contacted gsa officials to discuss agencies' use of the smart card access common id contract and other governmentwide implementation issues .

we performed our work in washington , d.c. , and atlanta , georgia , between november 2003 and july 2004 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the government accountability office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people .

gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions .

gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability .

the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) .

each weekday , gao posts newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence on its web site .

to have gao e - mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to updates. .

