medicaid — the joint federal - state health financing program estimated to cover over 73 million low - income and medically needy individuals in fiscal year 2017 — allows states significant flexibility to design and implement their programs within broad federal parameters .

while this flexibility has allowed states to fashion their programs based on their unique needs , it also complicates oversight .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that oversees medicaid , has a critical role in monitoring states' compliance with federal requirements , including ensuring that federal medicaid payments are made appropriately .

to help inform its oversight , cms relies on data that are submitted by states .

for example , for expenditure and utilization data that can be linked to individual enrollees , states historically submitted data to be incorporated into cms's medicaid statistical information system ( msis ) data .

we and others have reported that insufficiencies in available medicaid data , including msis data , have affected cms's ability to ensure proper payments and beneficiaries' access to care .

these concerns are not new ; however , recent trends in improper payments have exacerbated concerns about medicaid oversight .

in particular , of the $596 billion in federal and state medicaid expenditures in fiscal year 2017 , improper payments were an estimated $36.7 billion , a significant increase from the estimated $14.4 billion in improper payments in fiscal year 2013 .

cms has acknowledged the need for improved medicaid data .

the transformed medicaid statistical information system ( t - msis ) initiative is the agency's primary effort , conducted jointly with states , to improve its collection of medicaid expenditure and utilization data , and replace msis .

cms officials cite aspects of t - msis that are designed to broaden the scope and improve the quality of state - reported data , as well as the data's usefulness for states .

for example , t - msis is intended to include data not previously reported by states , such as unique provider identification numbers and information on third - party liability , which could be used to help enhance cms and states' program oversight .

t - msis also includes automated quality checks that should improve the quality of data that states report .

in a january 2017 report , we examined cms efforts to implement t - msis and concluded that uncertainty existed with respect to when all states would report t - msis data ; how cms will ensure the quality of these data ; and how cms will use them for oversight purposes .

you asked us to examine states' experiences regarding t - msis implementation , including obstacles they have faced in reporting quality data , and their planned uses of these data for oversight .

in this report , we examine 1. states' experiences regarding the implementation of t - msis , including cms's actions to facilitate states' efforts ; and 2. challenges to cms's and states' use of t - msis data for oversight .

to examine states' experiences regarding the implementation of t - msis — including cms's actions to facilitate their efforts — we reviewed federal laws and guidance , and interviewed cms officials and contractors who assisted the agency with t - msis implementation .

we reviewed cms documentation of the number of states reporting t - msis data and of its actions to support states' t - msis implementation efforts .

we also selected a non - generalizable sample of eight states for further review: louisiana , michigan , minnesota , north carolina , pennsylvania , utah , virginia , and washington .

we selected these states based on variation in their t - msis reporting status , geographic location , program expenditures , use of medicaid managed care programs , and participation in cms's t - msis pilot program .

for each selected state , we reviewed relevant documents , and interviewed officials about their experiences reporting t - msis data and cms's efforts to assist them .

to supplement the information provided by our selected states , we also interviewed individuals who were identified through background research as having experience with other states' t - msis reporting efforts .

we also reviewed prior gao reports on medicaid data and reports published by other entities , such as the hhs office of inspector general ( hhs - oig ) .

to examine challenges to cms's and states' use of t - msis data for oversight , we reviewed cms guidance , selected states' documentation of t - msis reporting efforts , and federal internal control standards .

we also interviewed officials from cms and selected states regarding their plans to use these data for oversight .

to assess the completeness of the t - msis data that selected states were reporting , we analyzed state documents regarding unreported t - msis data elements and their plans to report them in the future .

these documents , which states submit to cms , are known as addendum bs .

to assess the reliability of the addendum b data , we compared them with related documentation , such as cms guidance , and with information from interviews with knowledgeable cms and state officials .

we also assessed the data for duplicate values and clarified inconsistencies we identified .

we confirmed with state officials that their documents reflected unreported t - msis data elements as of august 2017 .

we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from december 2016 through december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

cms intends for the t - msis initiative to provide a national data repository that would support federal and state program management , financial management , and program integrity activities , among other functions .

t - msis is also intended to benefit states by reducing the number of reports cms requires them to submit , and by improving program efficiency by allowing states to compare their data with other states' data in the national repository or with information in other cms repositories , including medicare data .

for example , cms intends to use t - msis data for reports that states are currently required to submit , such as early and periodic screening , diagnostic , and treatment program reports .

t - msis is designed to capture significantly more data from states than is the case with msis , thereby collecting data not previously reported that should provide cms and states with information to enhance their oversight efforts .

t - msis includes the five data files that were collected through msis: an eligibility file and four claims files ( inpatient , long - term care , pharmacy , and other ) .

the scope of data to be collected from these five previously defined msis files has expanded to include more detailed information on enrollees , such as their citizenship , immigration , and disability status ; and expanded diagnosis and procedure codes associated with their treatments .

additionally , t - msis requires states to report three new data files on ( 1 ) providers , ( 2 ) third - party liability , and ( 3 ) managed care organizations ( mco ) .

the provider file includes a unique identifier for each provider , as well as data fields to show provider specialty and practice locations .

each of these identifiers can assist cms and state oversight by providing information on provider referrals , medicaid payments to specific providers , and identifying ineligible providers .

the third - party liability file includes data on whether a beneficiary has any health insurance in addition to medicaid , or other potential sources of funds that could reduce medicaid's expenditures .

medicaid is generally the payer of last resort , meaning if medicaid enrollees have another source of health care coverage , that source should pay , to the extent of its liability , before medicaid does .

information on beneficiaries' other sources of coverage could help ensure that medicaid pays only those expenditures for which it is liable .

the managed care file includes more detailed information on mcos , such as type and name of managed care plans , covered eligibility groups , service areas , and reimbursement arrangements .

in addition to identifying which mcos are reporting encounter data as required , this file could help cms's oversight by allowing the agency to identify excess plan profits and volatility of expenditures for some beneficiary groups across states .

in total , t - msis includes approximately 1,400 data elements , according to cms .

many of these elements , however , have content that is used in more than one of the eight t - msis files .

for example , the element “date of birth” is required in five t - msis files — eligibility , claim inpatient , claim long - term care , claim prescription , and claim other .

cms requires states to report all t - msis elements that are applicable to their programs , and has worked closely with states to facilitate their efforts to report these data .

for example , before cms approves a state for reporting t - msis data , states must complete a number of activities , including developing detailed work plans and completing a series of data testing phases .

for a state to meet cms's requirements for submitting t - msis data , it must report data for all eight files , but not necessarily all elements within each file .

in addition , t - msis includes aspects aimed at improving the timeliness and accuracy of data submitted by states .

for example , cms requires states to report t - msis data monthly , rather than quarterly , as was the case with msis .

regarding data accuracy , t - msis includes approximately 2,800 automated quality checks that provide states with feedback on data format and consistency , according to cms ; this is in contrast to msis , which had relatively few automated checks .

other quality checks are to ensure logical relationships across t - msis files .

both we and the hhs - oig have previously recommended that cms take steps to address the quality of t - msis data .

in our january 2017 report , we recommended that cms take immediate steps to assess and improve t - msis data .

as part of that effort , we noted that cms could refine their t - msis data priority areas to identify those that are critical for reducing improper payments and expedite efforts to assess and ensure their quality .

cms agreed with our recommendation , but as of september 2017 , the agency had not implemented it .

more recently , the hhs - oig reported that cms and states continue to have concerns regarding the completeness and reliability of t - msis data , echoing concerns raised in its 2013 review of cms's t - msis pilot program .

the hhs - oig noted it was concerned that cms and states would delay further efforts rather than assign the resources needed to address the outstanding challenges , and reaffirmed its 2013 recommendation that cms establish a deadline for when t - msis data will be available for program analysis and other management functions .

despite challenges converting their data to the t - msis format , most states were reporting t - msis data as of november 2017 , representing significant progress over the past year .

with most states reporting , cms has shifted its efforts to working with states to improve the quality of t - msis data .

as of november 2017 , 49 states have begun reporting t - msis data , a significant increase from the 18 states that had started reporting these data in october 2016 .

these reporting states represent over 97 percent of the 2017 medicaid population nationwide .

cms officials told us that they expect all states to report t - msis data by 2018 .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

as of november 2017 , all eight of our selected states were reporting t - msis data , with seven of them having begun in september 2016 or later .

selected states' estimated spending a collective $14.16 million on their efforts to report t - msis data from october 2011 through june 2017 , ranging from approximately $850,000 in virginia to $4.42 million in minnesota .

 ( see table 1. ) .

the age and scope of states' existing medicaid management information systems ( mmis ) were among the factors that affected certain states' spending and timing on this effort .

mapping the data — the process by which states convert their data to the t - msis format on an element - by - element basis — was the primary challenge our eight selected states identified in reporting t - msis data .

in some cases , before converting their data to the t - msis format , states had to obtain data they had not previously collected from other state entities , mcos , or providers .

for example , minnesota had to begin collecting information on denied claims from mcos , and utah had to collect third - party liability information from other state agencies .

in addition , while some state data elements could be converted to the t - msis format fairly easily , because the relationships between the two were clear , the conversion of other data elements was more complicated .

for example , the t - msis data element for male and female is “m” and “f,” respectively .

accordingly , in states that identified gender by a numeric value , “1” for male and “2” for female , the conversion to t - msis for this element was a fairly straightforward one - to - one relationship .

however , for other data elements , the conversion process was more complex , requiring states to expand or collapse their data to match the t - msis format .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

selected states shared examples of steps they took to convert state data to the t - msis format .

louisiana officials noted that they had to map the state's single durable medical equipment ( dme ) element to multiple specific t - msis dme elements , such as dme pharmacy or dme orthotics .

virginia officials said they had to combine three state ambulance service provider elements into a single t - msis element .

in addition , individuals who had experience with other states' t - msis reporting efforts also noted that states may not have always collapsed categories in the same way .

for example , one state collapsed its 109 provider categories to match t - msis's 57 provider categories , according to an individual who worked with the state on this effort .

this individual noted that there were 32 state provider elements that did not directly match a specific t - msis element , so the state grouped them all into the “other” t - msis element .

changes in cms's data reporting requirements further complicated some states' efforts to convert their data to the t - msis format , according to officials from our selected states .

cms updated the t - msis data dictionary — the document that defines the required t - msis elements and their reporting formats — twice in 2013 and again in november 2015 .

according to cms officials , they updated the data dictionary to clarify and remove inconsistencies from guidance in response to feedback from states .

some of the selected states reported that the changes included in this update required considerable rework , and in some cases , delayed their t - msis reporting .

for example , washington officials noted that the 2015 update became available at the point it was completing a t - msis testing phase .

due to the rework required to comply with the new data specifications , the state's efforts to report t - msis data were delayed by nearly one year .

similarly , minnesota officials also cited rework associated with changes to the 2015 data dictionary , which contributed to delays in their efforts to report t - msis data .

over the past six years , cms has relied on a variety of mechanisms to support states' efforts to report t - msis data .

cms assigned technical assistants to help states understand the t - msis requirements , prioritize steps to report t - msis data , and serve as a resource on technical issues .

the majority of selected states had positive comments about the technical assistance they received .

for example , pennsylvania officials said its technical assistant regularly met with them , answered any questions they had , and facilitated their efforts to complete t - msis testing .

cms began hosting national webinars covering a range of topics , including clarification on specific t - msis elements that cms identified as challenging or subject to error , and updates on the nationwide implementation .

the webinars also provided an opportunity for states to ask cms questions about t - msis requirements .

cms established web - based avenues through which the agency could compile and disseminate information , as well as elicit questions from states and contractors .

for example , cms provided an electronic option for states to submit questions regarding policy and technical issues .

cms took additional steps to help states , including creating a sharepoint web site through which states are notified about changes in guidance .

with nearly all states having begun reporting t - msis data , cms has shifted its efforts to improving the quality of the t - msis data reported , and these efforts are still evolving .

for example , to provide states with immediate feedback on their reported t - msis data , cms created an online “operational dashboard” for each state , which provides specific information on errors in its reported data .

using information on the operational dashboard , states can identify the frequency and cause of certain errors , which facilitates their efforts to resolve them more expeditiously and to improve future submissions .

all six of the selected states reporting t - msis data had positive comments about the value of the operational dashboard , with some of them noting that the feedback on errors was a significant improvement from their experience with msis , where feedback had a considerable time - lag .

more recently , according to agency officials , cms has initiated a pilot study with four states to identify anomalies in their reported data that merit further attention , obtain feedback on automated quality measures , and determine the best approach for ongoing quality review .

while work on the pilot is ongoing , cms officials anticipate using what they learned to expand the agency's quality review to include all states .

in addition , cms has turned to external stakeholders to evaluate the quality of t - msis data .

specifically , cms has shared t - msis data with a technical expert panel it formed to obtain feedback on inconsistencies and other quality concerns .

according to cms officials , the technical expert panel focused on a preliminary set of t - msis data from a limited number of states .

the agency officials noted that technical expert panel members include individuals from hhs's office of the actuary , the congressional budget office , and the medicaid and chip payment and access commission , among others .

panel participants analyzed the t - msis data from 11 states on the specific topics in which they have expertise .

according to cms officials , the panel is to provide its results to the agency in a summary report .

ongoing data concerns raise questions about how soon — and to what extent — t - msis data will be sufficient to achieve the goals of improving cms's and states' ability to use medicaid data for oversight .

for example , none of the six selected states that were reporting t - msis data as of august 2017 were reporting complete data at that time .

in reviewing selected states' documentation of unreported data elements , we determined that the number of unreported data elements ranged from about 80 elements to 260 elements .

although t - msis includes about 1,400 data elements , the number of data elements relevant to each state varies , in part , because certain elements may not be applicable to all states and others may be populated at the state's discretion .

in addition , the content of some data elements are present in more than one of the eight t - msis files .

as a result , the number of unreported elements may overstate the extent of state efforts needed to report complete t - msis data .

our selected states provided a range of reasons for not reporting t - msis data elements , including that certain elements were contingent on federal or state actions .

in other cases , state officials indicated that data elements were too costly to report , so they would not be reporting them .

we identified further examples of where certain data elements were not applicable to states' medicaid programs , and therefore were not required .

 ( see table 2. ) .

although cms requires states to report all t - msis data elements applicable to their program , cms officials said they did not specify a reporting deadline for states , and selected states' documentation to cms did not always include the reasons they did not report certain elements , or whether or when they planned to report them .

due to the lack of clarity and completeness in selected states' documentation , we were not able to identify the reasons for all unreported data elements .

however , among our selected states , virginia's documentation more clearly specified most — but not all — of the reasons it was not reporting 260 t - msis elements .

virginia identified 167 elements that its mmis did not capture , and noted that once the state's new medicaid information system is fully implemented in 2019 , the state will be able to report them .

virginia identified 16 elements as pending other state or related actions .

virginia identified 18 elements as pending the implementation of hhs efforts .

virginia identified 53 elements as not applicable to aspects of its medicaid program .

without complete information from all states on unreported data elements and their plans to report them , it is unclear when — and to what extent — t - msis data will be available to use for oversight , which is inconsistent with federal internal control standards for using quality information to achieve objectives .

in some cases , data elements important for program oversight were not reported by two or more of the six selected states reporting t - msis data , limiting t - msis's usefulness for oversight in these areas .

 ( see table 3. ) .

another factor affecting the ability of cms and states to use t - msis data for oversight is that not all of the 49 states submitting t - msis data are submitting current data .

according to cms officials , before beginning to report t - msis data , each state stops reporting msis data .

at that point , there is a temporary gap in the state's reporting until it receives cms's approval to begin reporting t - msis data .

after a state gets cms's approval , it must first submit the t - msis data that correspond to the date that it stopped submitting msis data ; the data for previous months is known as “catch up” data .

once a state reports that data , it then shifts to reporting current t - msis data .

according to cms , as of november 2017 , 42 of the 49 states reporting t - msis data were reporting current data ; the remaining 7 states were still reporting catch up data for previous months .

regarding the comparability of t - msis data across states , state officials we interviewed cited concerns that could affect their use of t - msis for oversight .

officials from most selected states cited the benefit that a national repository of t - msis data could provide by allowing them to compare their medicaid program data — such as spending or utilization rates — to other states , which could potentially improve their oversight .

however , concerns about comparability of the data make officials from most selected states hesitant to use the data for this purpose .

in particular , officials from six of eight selected states , and other individuals we interviewed , are not confident that the decisions states made when converting their data to the t - msis format were consistent across states .

an individual who worked with other states on t - msis reporting efforts noted that states may have made different decisions about what types of providers to include as part of the “all other” category of providers within t - msis .

while one state he worked with included a range of provider types , such as licensed drug and alcohol counselors and non - emergency medical transportation providers , in the “all other” t - msis provider category , other states may have made different decisions .

some state officials and individuals working with states noted that states' different decisions may complicate their ability to use the data for cross - state comparisons .

further , officials from some of the selected states noted that they were not familiar with the quality of other states' t - msis data .

cms has begun to take steps to address the quality of the t - msis data ; however , its efforts are still evolving .

for example , in may 2017 , cms identified 12 data quality priority areas for states to focus on for improving the accuracy and consistency of t - msis data , including accurately categorizing beneficiaries into t - msis eligibility groups and ensuring consistency related to mco reporting .

cms has worked to identify existing or develop new guidance for each of these priority areas , and to compile the guidance in a central location for states' reference .

as of august 2017 , cms officials said they compiled guidance for 11 of the 12 areas , and intended to continue work with states on these priorities .

in addition , cms has not created a mechanism to disseminate information about states' data limitations or states' efforts to improve and use the data , which also affects their utility for oversight .

officials from four of the eight selected states said that learning more about other states' t - msis data could help allay their concerns about comparability , and two of the four states said it could also help them address their own data quality issues .

additionally , officials from all eight selected states were interested in opportunities to learn more about other states' use of the data .

cms officials acknowledged the benefits of a mechanism to disseminate information about states' data limitations more broadly , and to facilitate information sharing among states .

cms officials told us that they plan to launch a learning collaborative with states to facilitate feedback and collaboration .

this effort could address a range of data - related topics , including data quality .

cms officials told us they were taking actions to put the learning collaborative in place , and may launch the collaborative in early 2018 .

the lack of an effort to facilitate information sharing is inconsistent with cms's goals for t - msis and with federal internal control standards for using and communicating quality information to achieve objectives .

absent such an effort , cms is missing an opportunity to help states understand ways they could improve the quality of their t - msis data and facilitate states' use of the data for oversight .

cms is also missing an opportunity to expedite quality improvements that could result from states conducting their own independent analyses .

although cms has taken steps to begin using t - msis data , it has not yet fully articulated a plan for how and when it will use t - msis data for its own broader oversight efforts of state medicaid programs .

for example , according to cms officials , the agency has begun to use t - msis data to generate money follow the person reports , and has begun exploring additional uses of t - msis data to reduce states' reporting burden .

these preliminary efforts are consistent with one of cms's stated goals for t - msis , which is to reduce states' reporting burden by relying on t - msis data in place of separate reports that states currently submit , and officials from six of eight selected states indicated that such an effort would reduce their reporting burden .

however , as of august 2017 , cms officials acknowledged that they had yet to outline how best to use t - msis data for program monitoring , oversight , and management , because they were still largely focused on working with the remaining states to begin reporting t - msis data , analyzing the quality and usability of the t - msis data , and preparing the data for research purposes .

cms's lack of a specific plan and time frames for using t - msis data is inconsistent with federal internal control standards related to using and communicating quality information to achieve objectives .

absent a specific plan and time frames , cms's ability to use these data to oversee the program , including ensuring proper payments and beneficiaries' access to services , is limited .

as part of its efforts to address longstanding concerns about the data available to oversee the medicaid program , cms has taken important steps toward developing a reliable national repository for medicaid data .

t - msis has the potential to improve cms's ability to identify improper payments , help ensure beneficiaries' access to services , and improve program transparency , among other benefits .

by providing more standardized data on various aspects of medicaid — such as spending or utilization rates — states could be better positioned to compare their programs to other states , thereby improving their ability to identify program inefficiencies or opportunities for improvement .

implementing the t - msis initiative has been a significant undertaking .

over the past 6 years , cms has worked closely with states and has reached a point where nearly all states are reporting t - msis data .

while recognizing the progress that has been made , more work needs to be done before cms or states can use these data for program oversight .

it remains unclear when all states will report complete and comparable t - msis data , and how cms and states will use them to improve oversight .

in the interim , improper medicaid payments continue to increase , reaching $36.7 billion in fiscal year 2017 .

further delays in t - msis's use limit cms's ability to reverse that trend in the near term , underscoring the need for cms to take additional steps to expedite the use of the data .

we are making the following two recommendations to cms .

the administrator of cms , in partnership with the states , should take additional steps to expedite the use of t - msis data for program oversight .

such steps should include , but are not limited to , efforts to obtain complete information from all states on unreported t - msis data elements and their plans to report applicable data elements ; identify and share information across states on known t - msis data limitations to improve data comparability ; and implement mechanisms , such as the learning collaborative , by which states can collaborate on an ongoing basis to improve the completeness , comparability , and utility of t - msis data .

 ( recommendation 1 ) the administrator of cms should articulate a specific plan and associated time frames for using t - msis data for oversight .

 ( recommendation 2 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment .

in its written comments , hhs concurred with our recommendations , and noted that strong medicaid data can help the federal government and the states move toward better health outcomes and improve program integrity , performance , and financial management .

with most states now reporting t - msis data , hhs highlighted efforts it has taken to improve the quality of t - msis data .

for example , hhs developed a database on data quality findings , which could be used to identify solutions for common problems across states , and has begun to develop a data quality scorecard for t - msis users , which aggregates data quality findings in a user - friendly tool .

regarding taking steps to expedite the use of t - msis data for program oversight , hhs stated that it will ( 1 ) continue to work to obtain complete t - msis information from all states ; ( 2 ) take additional steps to share information across states on t - msis data limitations ; and ( 3 ) implement ways for states to collaborate regarding t - msis .

hhs also noted that it is in the process of developing a plan for using t - msis data for oversight .

hhs emphasized that it is dependent on states — and their available staffing and resources — to address data quality and reporting issues .

hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

hhs's comments are reprinted in appendix i .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of hhs , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .

carolyn l. yocom , ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report include susan anthony ( assistant director ) , manuel buentello ( analyst - in - charge ) , anna bonelli , and robin burke .

also contributing were muriel brown , drew long , and jennifer rudisill .

