i appreciate the opportunity to be here today as the committee considers ways to promote coordination among federal programs that provide housing and other services to the elderly .

according to the report of the congressionally established commission on affordable housing and health facility needs for seniors in the 21st century , decreased investment in affordable housing and a burgeoning elderly population that is projected to grow from about 12 percent of the population in 2002 to 20 percent by 2030 are likely to increase the number of elderly who must spend large portions of their incomes on housing .

moreover , according to the commission , about a third of the elderly tenants of government - subsidized housing required assistance with some type of activity of daily living , such as preparing meals or getting in and out of bed or a chair .

my statement is based largely on our recent report to the senate's special committee on aging , which requested that we identify federal programs that provide housing assistance to the elderly and the extent to which supportive services , such as meals and transportation , were affiliated with these programs .

beginning in the 1930s , a number of federal housing programs have subsidized the construction of housing for the poor , provided rental assistance to tenants in existing privately owned housing , and insured mortgages for both single - and multifamily properties .

today , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) administers the majority of federal housing assistance programs in urban areas , and the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) rural housing service ( rhs ) implements housing programs in rural areas .

among the programs they administer are a number that either target the elderly specifically or provide benefits for which the elderly are eligible .

my statement discusses ( 1 ) housing assistance programs that serve the elderly and require that supportive services be made available to elderly residents , ( 2 ) other hud programs that can be used in conjunction with housing programs to assist the elderly in obtaining supportive services , and ( 3 ) private partnerships and federal health care programs that may provide some services in conjunction with federally assisted housing .

in preparing this information , we consulted with hud and usda officials to identify housing assistance programs that benefit the elderly .

we reviewed laws and regulations to determine which of the housing assistance programs within our scope were required to ensure that supportive services were available .

we identified programs providing supportive services that could be used with various housing assistance programs , whether or not such services were required .

we reviewed literature and descriptions of housing assistance programs and interviewed administrators of the housing assistance programs within our scope , as well as representatives of advocacy organizations and professional associations interested in elderly housing issues and supportive services .

we obtained descriptions of the supportive services programs by interviewing and obtaining documentation from officials from hud , usda , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

we performed our work in baltimore , maryland ; greensboro and raleigh , north carolina ; columbus , ohio ; oklahoma city and stillwater , oklahoma , and washington , d.c. , between december 2003 and december 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

of 23 federal housing assistance programs that we reviewed , only 4 required property owners to ensure that services such as meals or transportation were available to their residents .

three are hud programs: the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly program , which subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly households with very low incomes ; assisted living conversion program , which subsidizes the conversion of hud - subsidized multifamily properties into assisted living facilities ; and section 232 mortgage insurance program , which insures mortgages for licensed facilities that provide varying levels of skilled care and services .

in addition , usda's section 515 rural rental housing loan program , which makes loans for the construction and rehabilitation of rural multifamily properties , has a congregate housing services subprogram that requires the provision of supportive services .

hud administers four service - related programs that can be used in conjunction with various housing programs to assist the elderly in obtaining supportive services: the congregate housing services program , which provides meals and other services in public and multifamily housing properties ; the neighborhood networks program , which provides resources for establishing computer networks at these sites ; and the resident opportunities and self sufficiency ( ross ) and service coordinator programs , which link residents with services in the community .

supportive services may also be available to elderly residents of subsidized housing through partnerships between individual properties and local organizations and through programs provided by hhs .

for example , hhs's public housing primary care program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care through clinics that are located either in or near public housing properties .

beginning in the 1930s , a number of federal housing programs have provided assistance to low - income renters and homeowners , including rent subsidies , mortgage insurance , and loans and grants for the purchase or repair of homes .

housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs .

for example , a loan or mortgage on a multifamily property may be insured through a hud or usda program , and the property may have tenants that receive rental assistance from these agencies .

in our earlier report , we identified a total of 23 federal housing programs that target or have special features for the elderly .

of these programs , 2 are intended for the elderly only , 3 target the elderly and disabled , and another 18 have special features for the elderly , such as income adjustments that lower elderly households' rental payments .

appendix i lists these housing assistance programs .

in general , both hud and usda programs target families at lower income levels .

hud programs target families with incomes that are extremely low ( no more than 30 percent of an area's median ) , very low ( no more than 50 percent of an area's median ) , and low ( no more than 80 percent of an area's median ) .

usda programs also target families with incomes that are very low and low .

in addition , some usda programs target families with moderate incomes ( no more than 115 percent of an area's median ) .

however , these programs do not reach all needy households , and waiting lists for many types of subsidized housing , including housing for the elderly , are often long .

hud has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the elderly , including one goal specifically related to supportive services .

as outlined in its fiscal year 2004 annual performance plan , these goals include ( 1 ) increasing the availability of affordable housing for the elderly , ( 2 ) increasing the number of assisted - living units , ( 3 ) increasing the number of elderly households living in privately owned , federally assisted multifamily housing served by a service coordinator , and ( 4 ) increasing elderly families' satisfaction with their section 202 units .

usda does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 annual performance plan .

as gao has previously reported , virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies .

this shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors , including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts .

achieving results on public problems , such as the potentially large service needs of a growing elderly population , increasingly calls for effective interagency coordination .

however , our work has shown that a number of barriers inhibit coordination among agencies .

for example: in reporting on the coordination of programs for the homeless , we noted that the federal government's system for providing assistance to low - income people is highly fragmented .

each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria , application , documentation requirements , and time frames ; moreover , applicants may need to travel to many locations and interact with many caseworkers to receive assistance .

a review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation - disadvantaged” seniors ( who are more likely to have difficulty accessing transportation due to physical ailments ) found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs .

service providers told gao that certain characteristics of federal programs , such as what the providers view as burdensome reporting requirements and limited program guidance , can impede the implementation of practices that enhance senior mobility .

more generally , we have noted the range of barriers to coordination that agencies often face , including missions that are not mutually reinforcing or that may even conflict ; concerns about protecting jurisdiction over missions and control over resources ; and incompatible procedures , processes , data , and computer systems .

generally , hud and usda's housing assistance programs are not required to provide supportive services to the elderly .

of the 23 housing assistance programs that target or include the elderly among potential beneficiaries , only 4 require the owners of properties developed under the programs to ensure that supportive services are available .

appendix ii provides summaries of the four programs , which include: hud's section 202 program , which subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly households with very low incomes .

it is the only federal housing program that targets all of its rental units to very - low - income elderly households .

applicants for section 202 funding must demonstrate that services will be available at the development or in the community where new construction is proposed .

hud's assisted living conversion program , which provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly .

the reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area , lounges , and recreation and other multiple - use areas .

the facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care , transportation , meals , housekeeping , and laundry .

hud's section 232 mortgage insurance program , which provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes ( facilities that provide skilled nursing care and have 20 or more beds ) ; intermediate care facilities ( those that provide minimum but continuous care and have 20 or more beds ) ; board and care homes ( facilities that provide room , board , and continuous protective oversight and have at least 5 accommodations ) ; and assisted living facilities ( those with 5 or more units designed for frail elderly persons who need assistance with at least 3 activities of daily living ) .

all insured facilities must provide supportive services , but these services vary according to the type of facility .

usda's section 515 program , which provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities in rural communities .

tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through hud or usda programs .

the congregate housing subprogram funds the development of assisted , group living environments that must provide meals , transportation , housekeeping , personal services , and recreational and social activities .

generally , hud and usda do not provide funding for the services required under these housing programs .

the property owners typically obtain other funds , either from federal programs , local charities , and civic groups to provide supportive services or must ensure that appropriate services are available in the community .

hud administers four service - related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs: two programs that provide supportive services to residents of public and multifamily properties developed under hud programs , and two that link residents to supportive services .

none of these programs are targeted exclusively to the elderly , but they either can be used in properties designated for the elderly or offer funding specifically for services for the elderly .

the congregate housing services program provides grants for the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing , including usda's section 515 housing .

while hud provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services , grantees must pay at least 50 percent of the costs , and program participants pay fees to cover at least 10 percent .

like the elderly / disabled services coordinator program under ross , the congregate housing services program has provided no new grants since 1995 , but congress has provided funds to extend expiring grants on an annual basis .

the neighborhood networks program encourages property owners , managers , and residents of hud - insured and - assisted housing to develop computer centers .

although computer accessibility is not a traditional supportive service for the elderly , a senior hud official noted that having computers available enhances elderly residents' quality of life .

hud does not fund each center's planned costs but encourages property owners to seek cash grants , in - kind support , and donations from sources such as state and local governments , educational institutions , private foundations , and corporations .

the ross grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services .

this program differs from the service coordinator program in that it is designed specifically for public housing residents .

the ross program has five funding categories , including the resident service delivery models for the elderly and persons with disabilities ( resident services ) and the elderly / disabled service coordinator program .

resident services funds can be used to hire a project coordinator ; assess residents' needs for supportive services and link residents to federal , state , and local assistance programs ; provide wellness programs ; and coordinate and set up meal and transportation services .

the elderly / disabled service coordinator program has not provided new grants since 1995 but still services existing grants .

the service coordinator program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled to hire coordinators to assist residents in obtaining supportive services from community agencies .

these services , which may include personal assistance , transportation , counseling , meal delivery , and health care , are intended to help the elderly live independently and to prevent premature and inappropriate institutionalization .

service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds , residual receipts ( excess income from a property ) , or rent increases .

according to hud's fiscal year 2003 performance and accountability report , service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties .

elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships between property owners and local organizations and through programs provided by hhs .

for example , property owners can establish relationships with local nonprofit organizations , including churches , to ensure that residents have access to the services that they need .

at their discretion , property owners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals , transportation , and housekeeping and personal care services .

although gao did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing , in site visits to hud and usda multifamily properties , we found several examples of such partnerships: in greensboro , north carolina , dolan manor — a section 202 housing development — has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church .

the volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents .

in plain city , ohio , residents of a section 515 property called pleasant valley garden receive meals five times a week in the community's senior center ( a $2 donation is suggested ) .

a local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it .

volunteers , including residents , serve the meals .

the senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities .

in addition , local grocery stores donate bread products to the senior center daily .

the united way provides most of the funding for the senior center .

in guthrie , oklahoma , guthrie properties — also a section 515 property — has established a relationship with the local area agency on aging .

the agency assists residents of guthrie properties in obtaining a variety of services , including meals and transportation to a senior center .

some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health - related services through programs run by hhs .

for example , hhs's public housing primary care program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care through clinics that are located either within public housing properties or in immediately accessible locations .

the program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics .

the organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents .

currently , there are 35 grantees , 3 of which are in rural areas .

according to a program administrator , although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly , they can be established at such properties .

elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the medicaid home and community - based services ( hcbs ) waiver program , which is administered by hhs's centers for medicare and medicaid services .

through this waiver program , individuals eligible for medicaid can receive needed health care without having to live in an institutional setting .

hud has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing .

in addition , eligible elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may receive health care through the program of all - inclusive care for the elderly ( pace ) , which is also administered by the centers for medicare and medicaid services .

like the hcbs waiver program , this program enables eligible elderly individuals to obtain needed services without having to live in an institutional setting .

the program integrates medicare and medicaid financing to provide comprehensive , coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes .

figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs that assist the elderly .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact david g. wood at ( 202 ) 512-8678 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony included emily chalmers , natasha ewing , alison martin , john mcgrail , marc molino , lisa moore , john mingus , paul schmidt , and julianne stephens .

usda section 502 rural housing loans ( direct ) section 502 direct housing natural disaster loans section 502 guaranteed rural housing loans section 504 rural housing repair and rehabilitation loans section 515 rural rental housing loans section 521 rural rental assistance section 538 guaranteed rural rental housing loans project - based rental assistance ( section 8 and rent supplement ) ( inactive ) section 8 moderate rehabilitation ( inactive ) section 207 mortgage insurance for manufactured home parks section 207 / 223 ( f ) mortgage insurance for existing multifamily properties section 213 mortgage insurance for cooperatives section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) below - market interest rate ( inactive ) section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) / ( d ) ( 4 ) mortgage insurance section 236 mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments ( inactive ) before fiscal year 1992 , the section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled .

the section 515 program's congregate housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services .

