i am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent work related to the december 2014 information technology ( it ) reform law ( commonly referred to as the federal information technology acquisition reform act or fitara ) .

as you know , the effective and efficient acquisition and management of it investments has been a long - standing challenge in the federal government .

in particular , the federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing it investments , which often suffered from ineffective management .

moreover , spending on it operations has been inefficient .

in light of these ongoing challenges , in february 2015 , we added improving the management of it acquisitions and operations to our list of high - risk areas for the federal government .

my statement today discusses agencies' progress in improving the management of it acquisitions and operations .

to do so , we reviewed and summarized our prior and recently published work on ( 1 ) data center consolidation , ( 2 ) risk levels of major investments as reported on the office of management and budget's ( omb ) it dashboard , and ( 3 ) implementation of incremental development practices .

a more detailed discussion of the objectives , scope , and methodology for this work is included in each of the reports that are cited throughout this statement .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the federal government is likely to invest more than $89 billion on it in fiscal year 2017 .

however , as we have previously reported , investments in federal it too often result in failed projects that incur cost overruns and schedule slippages , while contributing little to the desired mission - related outcomes .

for example: the department of veterans affairs' scheduling replacement project was terminated in september 2009 after spending an estimated $127 million over 9 years .

the tri - agency national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system was stopped in february 2010 by the white house's office of science and technology policy after the program spent 16 years and almost $5 billion .

the department of homeland security's secure border initiative network program was ended in january 2011 , after the department obligated more than $1 billion to the program , because it did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards .

the office of personnel management's retirement systems modernization program was canceled in february 2011 , after spending approximately $231 million on the agency's third attempt to automate the processing of federal employee retirement claims .

the department of veterans affairs' financial and logistics integrated technology enterprise program was intended to be delivered by 2014 at a total estimated cost of $609 million , but was terminated in october 2011 due to challenges in managing the program .

the department of defense's expeditionary combat support system was canceled in december 2012 after spending more than a billion dollars and failing to deploy within 5 years of initially obligating funds .

these and other failed it projects often suffered from a lack of disciplined and effective management , such as project planning , requirements definition , and program oversight and governance .

in many instances , agencies had not consistently applied best practices that are critical to successfully acquiring it investments .

federal it projects have also failed due to a lack of oversight and governance .

executive - level governance and oversight across the government has often been ineffective , specifically from chief information officers ( cio ) .

for example , we have reported that not all cios had the authority to review and approve the entire agency it portfolio and that cios' authority was limited .

recognizing the severity of issues related to government - wide management of it , fitara was enacted in december 2014 .

the law was intended to improve agencies' acquisitions of it and enable congress to monitor agencies' progress and hold them accountable for reducing duplication and achieving cost savings .

fitara includes specific requirements related to seven areas .

federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) .

agencies are required to provide omb with a data center inventory , a strategy for consolidating and optimizing the data centers ( to include planned cost savings ) , and quarterly updates on progress made .

the law also requires omb to develop a goal for how much is to be saved through this initiative , and provide annual reports on cost savings achieved .

enhanced transparency and improved risk management .

omb and agencies are to make detailed information on federal it investments publicly available , and agency cios are to categorize their it investments by level of risk .

additionally , in the case of major it investments rated as high risk for 4 consecutive quarters , the law requires that the agency cio and the investment's program manager conduct a review aimed at identifying and addressing the causes of the risk .

agency cio authority enhancements .

agency cios are required to ( 1 ) approve the it budget requests of their respective agencies , ( 2 ) certify that omb's incremental development guidance is being adequately implemented for it investments , ( 3 ) review and approve contracts for it , and ( 4 ) approve the appointment of other agency employees with the title of cio .

portfolio review .

agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness and identify potential waste and duplication .

in establishing the process associated with such portfolio reviews , the law requires omb to develop standardized performance metrics , to include cost savings , and to submit quarterly reports to congress on cost savings .

expansion of training and use of it acquisition cadres .

agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to address supporting the timely and effective acquisition of it .

in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres .

government - wide software purchasing program .

the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software .

in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user .

maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative .

federal agencies are required to compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative .

omb is also required to issue related regulations .

in june 2015 , omb released guidance describing how agencies are to implement fitara .

omb's guidance is intended to , among other things: assist agencies in aligning their it resources with statutory establish government - wide it management controls that will meet the law's requirements , while providing agencies with flexibility to adapt to unique agency processes and requirements ; clarify the cio's role and strengthen the relationship between agency cios and bureau cios ; and strengthen cio accountability for it cost , schedule , performance , and security .

the guidance identified several actions that agencies were to take to establish a basic set of roles and responsibilities ( referred to as the common baseline ) for cios and other senior agency officials , which are needed to implement the authorities described in the law .

for example , agencies were required to conduct a self - assessment and submit a plan describing the changes they intended to make to ensure that common baseline responsibilities are implemented .

agencies were to submit their plans to omb's office of e - government and information technology by august 15 , 2015 , and make portions of the plans publicly available on agency websites no later than 30 days after omb approval .

as of november 2016 , all agencies had made their plans publicly available .

in addition , in august 2016 , omb released guidance intended to , among other things , define a framework for achieving the data center consolidation and optimization requirements of fitara .

the guidance includes requirements for agencies to: maintain complete inventories of all data center facilities owned , operated , or maintained by or on behalf of the agency ; develop cost savings targets due to consolidation and optimization for fiscal years 2016 through 2018 and report any actual realized cost savings ; and measure progress toward meeting optimization metrics on a quarterly basis .

the guidance also directs agencies to develop a data center consolidation and optimization strategic plan that defines the agency's data center strategy for fiscal years 2016 , 2017 , and 2018 .

this strategy is to include , among other things , a statement from the agency cio stating whether the agency has complied with all data center reporting requirements in fitara .

further , the guidance indicates that omb is to maintain a public dashboard that will display consolidation - related costs savings and optimization performance information for the agencies .

in february 2015 , we introduced a new government - wide high - risk area , improving the management of it acquisitions and operations .

this area highlights several critical it initiatives in need of additional congressional oversight , including ( 1 ) reviews of troubled projects ; ( 2 ) efforts to increase the use of incremental development ; ( 3 ) efforts to provide transparency relative to the cost , schedule , and risk levels for major it investments ; ( 4 ) reviews of agencies' operational investments ; ( 5 ) data center consolidation ; and ( 6 ) efforts to streamline agencies' portfolios of it investments .

we noted that implementation of these initiatives has been inconsistent and more work remains to demonstrate progress in achieving it acquisitions and operations outcomes .

further , in our february 2015 high - risk report , we identified actions that omb and the agencies need to take to make progress in this area .

these include implementing fitara , as well as implementing at least 80 percent of our recommendations related to the management of it acquisitions and operations within 4 years .

as noted in that report , we made multiple recommendations to improve agencies' management of it acquisitions and operations , many of which are discussed later in this statement .

specifically , between fiscal years 2010 and 2015 , we made 803 recommendations to omb and federal agencies to address shortcomings in it acquisitions and operations , including many to improve the implementation of the recent initiatives and other government - wide , cross - cutting efforts .

as of october 2016 , omb and the agencies had fully implemented about 46 percent of these recommendations .

this is a 23 percent increase compared to the percentage we reported as being fully implemented in 2015 .

figure 1 summarizes the progress that omb and the agencies have made in addressing our recommendations , as compared to the 80 percent target .

in addition , in fiscal year 2016 , we made 202 new recommendations , thus further reinforcing the need for omb and agencies to address the shortcomings in it acquisitions and operations .

agencies have taken steps to improve the management of it acquisitions and operations by implementing key fitara initiatives .

however , agencies would be better positioned to fully implement the law , and thus realize additional management improvements , if they addressed the numerous recommendations we have made aimed at improving data center consolidation , increasing transparency via omb's it dashboard , and incremental development .

one of the key initiatives to implement fitara is data center consolidation .

omb established fdcci in february 2010 to improve the efficiency , performance , and environmental footprint of federal data center activities .

in a series of reports over the past 5 years , we determined that while data center consolidation could potentially save the federal government billions of dollars , weaknesses existed in several areas , including agencies' data center consolidation plans and omb's tracking and reporting on cost savings .

in total , we have made 111 recommendations to omb and agencies to improve the execution and oversight of the initiative .

most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comments .

in march 2016 , we reported that the 24 agencies participating in fdcci collectively had made progress on their data center closure efforts .

specifically , as of november 2015 , these agencies had identified a total of 10,584 data centers , of which they reported closing 3,125 through fiscal year 2015 .

notably , the departments of agriculture , defense , the interior , and the treasury accounted for 84 percent of these total closures .

further , the agencies have reported that they are planning to close additional data centers by the end of fiscal year 2019 .

in addition , we noted that 19 of the 24 agencies had reported achieving an estimated $2.8 billion in cost savings and avoidances from their data center consolidation and optimization efforts from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 .

the departments of commerce , defense , homeland security , and the treasury accounted for about $2.4 billion ( or about 86 percent ) of the total .

further , 21 agencies collectively reported planning an additional $5.4 billion in cost savings and avoidances , for a total of approximately $8.2 billion , through fiscal year 2019 .

figure 2 summarizes agencies' reported achieved and planned cost savings and avoidances from fiscal years 2011 through 2019 .

to better ensure that federal data center consolidation and optimization efforts improve governmental efficiency and achieve cost savings , we recommended that 10 of the 24 agencies take actions to complete their planned data center cost savings and avoidance targets for fiscal years 2016 through 2018 .

we also recommended that 22 of the 24 agencies take actions to improve optimization progress , including addressing any identified challenges .

fourteen agencies agreed with our recommendations , 4 did not state whether they agreed or disagreed , and 6 stated that they had no comments .

to facilitate transparency across the government in acquiring and managing it investments , omb established a public website — the it dashboard — to provide detailed information on major investments at 26 agencies , including ratings of their performance against cost and schedule targets .

among other things , agencies are to submit ratings from their cios , which , according to omb's instructions , should reflect the level of risk facing an investment relative to that investment's ability to accomplish its goals .

in this regard , fitara includes a requirement for cio's to categorize their major it investment risks in accordance with omb guidance .

over the past 6 years , we have issued a series of reports about the it dashboard that noted both significant steps omb has taken to enhance the oversight , transparency , and accountability of federal it investments by creating its it dashboard , as well as issues with the accuracy and reliability of data .

in total , we have made 47 recommendations to omb and federal agencies to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the it dashboard and to increase its availability .

most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comments .

most recently , in june 2016 , we determined that agencies had not fully considered risks when rating their major investments on the it dashboard .

specifically , our assessments of risk for 95 investments at 15 selected agencies matched the cio ratings posted on the dashboard 22 times , showed more risk 60 times , and showed less risk 13 times .

figure 3 summarizes how our assessments compared to the selected investments' cio ratings .

aside from the inherently judgmental nature of risk ratings , we identified three factors which contributed to differences between our assessments and the cio ratings: forty of the 95 cio ratings were not updated during the month we reviewed , which led to more differences between our assessments and the cios' ratings .

this underscores the importance of frequent rating updates , which help to ensure that the information on the dashboard is timely and accurately reflects recent changes to investment status .

three agencies' rating processes spanned longer than 1 month .

longer processes mean that cio ratings are based on older data , and may not reflect the current level of investment risk .

seven agencies' rating processes did not focus on active risks .

according to omb's guidance , cio ratings should reflect the cio's assessment of the risk and the investment's ability to accomplish its goals .

cio ratings that do no incorporate active risks increase the chance that ratings overstate the likelihood of investment success .

as a result , we concluded that the associated risk rating processes used by the agencies were generally understating the level of an investment's risk , raising the likelihood that critical federal investments in it are not receiving the appropriate levels of oversight .

to better ensure that the dashboard ratings more accurately reflect risk , we recommended that the 15 agencies take actions to improve the quality and frequency of their cio ratings .

twelve agencies generally agreed with or did not comment on the recommendations and three agencies disagreed .

omb has emphasized the need to deliver investments in smaller parts , or increments , in order to reduce risk , deliver capabilities more quickly , and facilitate the adoption of emerging technologies .

in 2010 , it called for agencies' major investments to deliver functionality every 12 months and , since 2012 , every 6 months .

subsequently , fitara codified a requirement that agency cios certify that it investments are adequately implementing omb's incremental development guidance .

in may 2014 , we reported that 66 of 89 selected investments at five major agencies did not plan to deliver capabilities in 6-month cycles , and less than half of these investments planned to deliver functionality in 12-month cycles .

we also reported that only one of the five agencies had complete incremental development policies .

accordingly , we recommended that omb develop and issue clearer guidance on incremental development and that the selected agencies update and implement their associated policies .

four of the six agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comments ; the remaining two agencies partially agreed or disagreed with the recommendations .

more recently , in august 2016 , we reported that agencies had not fully implemented incremental development practices for their software development projects .

specifically , we noted that , as of august 31 , 2015 , 22 federal agencies had reported on the it dashboard that 300 of 469 active software development projects ( approximately 64 percent ) were planning to deliver usable functionality every 6 months for fiscal year 2016 , as required by omb guidance .

regarding the remaining 169 projects ( or 36 percent ) that were reported as not planning to deliver functionality every 6 months , agencies provided a variety of explanations for not achieving that goal .

these included project complexity , the lack of an established project release schedule , or that the project was not a software development project .

table 1 lists the total number and percent of federal software development projects for which agencies reported plans to deliver functionality every 6 months for fiscal year 2016 .

in reviewing seven selected agencies' software development projects , we determined that 45 percent of the projects delivered functionality every 6 months for fiscal year 2015 and 55 percent planned to do so in fiscal year 2016 .

however , significant differences existed between the delivery rates that the agencies reported to us and what they reported on the it dashboard .

for example , in four cases ( commerce , education , hhs , and treasury ) , the percentage of delivery reported to us was at least 10 percentage points lower than what was reported on the it dashboard .

these differences were due to ( 1 ) our identification of fewer software development projects than agencies reported on the it dashboard and ( 2 ) the fact that information reported to us was generally more current than the information reported on the it dashboard .

figure 4 compares the software development projects' percentage of planned delivery every 6 months reported on the it dashboard and to us .

we concluded that by not having on the it dashboard up - to - date information about whether the project is a software development project and the extent to which projects are delivering functionality , these seven agencies were at risk that omb and key stakeholders may make decisions regarding the agencies' investments without the most current and accurate information .

finally , while omb has issued guidance requiring agency cios to certify that each major it investment's plan for the current year adequately implements incremental development , only three agencies ( the departments of commerce , homeland security , and transportation ) had defined processes and policies intended to ensure that the department cio certifies that major it investments are adequately implementing incremental development .

officials from three other agencies ( the departments of education , health and human services , and the treasury ) reported that they were in the process of updating their existing incremental development policy to address certification , while the department of defense's policies that address incremental development did not include information on cio certification .

we concluded that until all of the agencies we reviewed define processes and policies for the certification of the adequate use of incremental development , they will not be able to fully ensure adequate implementation of , or benefit from , incremental development practices , as required by fitara .

to improve the reporting of incremental data on the it dashboard and policies for cio certification of adequate incremental development , we made 12 recommendations to seven agencies and omb .

five agencies agreed with our recommendations .

in addition , the department of defense partially agreed with one recommendation and disagreed with another , omb did not agree or disagree , and the department of the treasury did not comment on the recommendations .

in summary , with the enactment of fitara , the federal government has an opportunity to improve the transparency and management of it acquisitions and operations , and to strengthen the authority of cios to provide needed direction and oversight .

to their credit , agencies have taken steps to improve the management of it acquisitions and operations by implementing key fitara initiatives , including data center consolidation , efforts to increase transparency via omb's it dashboard , and incremental development ; and they have continued to address recommendations we have made over the past several years .

however , additional improvements are needed , and further efforts by omb and federal agencies to implement our previous recommendations would better position them to fully implement fitara .

to help ensure that these efforts succeed , continued congressional oversight of omb's and agencies' implementation of fitara is essential .

in addition , we will continue to monitor agencies implementation of our previous recommendations .

chairmen meadows and hurd , ranking members connolly and kelly , and members of the subcommittees , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or at pownerd@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are kevin walsh ( assistant director ) , chris businsky , rebecca eyler , and bradley roach ( analyst in charge ) .

information technology reform: agencies need to increase their use of incremental development practices , gao - 16-469 .

washington , d.c.: august 16 , 2016 .

it dashboard: agencies need to fully consider risks when rating their major investments , gao - 16-494 .

washington , d.c.: june 2 , 2016 .

data center consolidation: agencies making progress , but planned savings goals need to be established .

gao - 16-323 .

washington , d.c.: march 3 , 2016 .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 15-290 .

washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2015 .

data center consolidation: reporting can be improved to reflect substantial planned savings .

gao - 14-713 .

washington , d.c.: september 25 , 2014 .

information technology: agencies need to establish and implement incremental development policies .

gao - 14-361 .

washington , d.c.: may 1 , 2014 .

it dashboard: agencies are managing investment risk , but related ratings need to be more accurate and available .

gao - 14-64 .

washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2013 .

data center consolidation: strengthened oversight needed to achieve cost savings goal .

gao - 13-378 .

washington , d.c.: april 23 , 2013 .

information technology dashboard: opportunities exist to improve transparency and oversight of investment risk at select agencies .

gao - 13-98 .

washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2012 .

data center consolidation: agencies making progress on efforts , but inventories and plans need to be completed .

gao - 12-742 .

washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2012 .

it dashboard: accuracy has improved , and additional efforts are under way to better inform decision making .

gao - 12-210 .

washington , d.c.: november 7 , 2011 .

data center consolidation: agencies need to complete inventories and plans to achieve expected savings .

gao - 11-565 .

washington , d.c.: july 19 , 2011 .

federal chief information officers: opportunities exist to improve role in information technology management .

gao - 11-634 .

washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2011 .

information technology: omb has made improvements to its dashboard , but further work is needed by agencies and omb to ensure data accuracy .

gao - 11-262 .

washington , d.c.: march 15 , 2011 .

information technology: omb's dashboard has increased transparency and oversight , but improvements needed .

gao - 10-701 .

washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2010 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

