i am pleased to be here today to discuss the future of the missile defense agency's ( mda's ) testing program .

mda has been charged with developing and fielding the ballistic missile defense system ( bmds ) , a system expected to be capable of defending the united states , deployed troops , friends , and allies against ballistic missiles of all ranges in all phases of flight .

in fulfilling this charge , mda placed an initial set of missile defense components in the field in december 2005 .

the national defense authorization acts for fiscal years 2002 , 2007 and 2008 mandated that we prepare annual assessments of mda's ongoing cost , schedule , testing , and performance progress .

in march 2009 , we plan to issue our report covering mda's progress toward achieving its goals during fiscal year 2008 as well as its efforts to improve transparency , accountability , and oversight .

additionally , in september 2008 , we issued a report on mda's target program .

my statement today will focus on the testing - related issues covered in both reports .

we conducted these performance audits from february 2008 to february 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the missile defense agency's mission is to develop an integrated and layered bmds to defend the united states , its deployed forces , allies , and friends .

in order to meet this mission , mda is developing a highly complex system of systems — land , sea and space based sensors , interceptors and battle management .

since its initiation in 2002 , mda has been given a significant amount of flexibility in executing the development and fielding of the bmds .

to enable mda to field and enhance a missile defense system quickly , the secretary of defense in 2002 delayed the entry of the bmds program into the department of defense's traditional acquisition process until a mature capability was ready to be handed over to a military service for production and operation .

therefore , the program concurrently develops , tests and fields assets .

this approach helped mda rapidly deploy an initial capability .

on the other hand , because mda can field assets before all testing is completed , it has fielded some assets whose capability is uncertain .

because mda develops and fields assets continuously , it combines developmental testing with operational testing .

in general , developmental testing is aimed at determining whether the system design will satisfy the desired capabilities ; operational testing determines whether the system is effective , survivable , and suitable in the hands of the user .

mda conducts testing both on the ground and in flight .

the most complex of these is an end - to - end flight test that involves a test of all phases of an engagement including detecting , tracking and destroying a target with an interceptor missile .

an end - to - end intercept involves more than one mda element .

for example , a recent intercept test involved a target flown out of kodiak , alaska , tracked by the an / tpy - 2 radar located in alaska , and the beale upgraded early warning radar located in california , the sea - based x - band radar and an aegis radar located at different points in the pacific .

all of the radars communicated with fire control centers in alaska to guide an interceptor launched from california to hit the target over the pacific ocean .

due to the complexity , scale , safety constraints , and cost involved , mda is unable to conduct a sufficient number of flight tests to fully understand the performance of the system .

therefore , mda utilizes models and simulations , anchored by flight tests , to understand both the developmental and operational performance of the system .

to ensure confidence in the accuracy of modeling and simulation the program goes through a process called accreditation .

the models are validated individually using flight and other test data and accredited for their intended use .

models and simulations are used prior to a flight test to predict performance , the flight test is then run to gather data and verify the models , and then data is analyzed after the flight and reconstructed using the models and simulations to confirm their accuracy .

mda intends to group these models into system - level representations according to user needs .

one such grouping is the annual performance assessment , a system - level end - to - end simulation that assesses the performance of the bmds configuration as it exists in the field .

the performance assessment integrates element - specific models into a coherent representation of the bmds .

fundamentally , performance assessments anchored by flight tests are a comprehensive means to fully understand the performance capabilities and limitations of the bmds .

in addition to testing , modeling and simulation , and performance assessments , mda also has a formal process for determining when a newly fielded asset or group of assets can be declared operational — that is , cleared for use by the warfighter in operational situations .

mda uses a variety of information as a basis to assess a new capability for declaration .

for example , mda will define in advance tests , models , and simulations it will use to base a specific decision on whether an asset or capability can be declared ready for fielding .

each capability designation so designated represents upgraded capacity to support the overall function of bmds in its mission as well as the level of mda confidence in the system's performance .

to assess testing related progress in fiscal year 2008 , we examined the accomplishments of ten bmds elements that mda is developing and fielding .

our work included examining documents such as program execution reviews , test plans and reports , and production plans .

we also interviewed officials within each element program office and within mda functional directorates .

in addition , we discussed each element's test program and its results with dod's office of the director , operational test and evaluation .

we also interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics .

mda continues to experience difficulties achieving its goals for testing .

during fiscal year 2008 , while several tests showed progress in individual elements and some system level capabilities , all bmds elements experienced test delays or shortfalls .

most were unable to accomplish all objectives and performance challenges continued for many .

table 1 summarizes test results and target performance for the bmds elements during the year .

because of delays in flight test and a key ground test , mda was unable to achieve any of the six knowledge points the mda director had scheduled for fiscal year 2008 .

in may 2007 , the mda director established key system - level and element - level knowledge points , each based on an event that was to provide critical information — or knowledge — for a decision requiring his approval .

for example , two knowledge points that mda had to defer because of testing problems were confirmation of a new target's performance and assessment of the sm - 3 block 1a missile's ability to engage and intercept a long range target .

gmd in particular continues to experience testing problems and delays .

based on its september 2006 plan , mda had expected to conduct 7 gmd interceptor flight tests from the start of fiscal year 2007 through the first quarter of fiscal year 2009 .

mda however was only able to conduct two , as shown in figure 1 .

gmd was unable to conduct either of its planned intercept attempts during fiscal year 2008 – ftg - 04 and ftg - 05 .

mda first delayed and then later cancelled the ftg - 04 test in may 2008 due to a problem with a telemetry component in the interceptor's exoatmospheric kill vehicle .

the cancellation of ftg - 04 removed an important opportunity to obtain end - game performance data needed to develop gmd models and to verify the capability of the fielded capability enhancement i ( ce - i ) ekv .

moreover , mda planned to test the ce - i ekv against a dynamic target scene with countermeasures in both the ftg - 04 and ftg - 05 flight tests .

however , since ftg - 04 was cancelled and the target failed to release the countermeasure in ftg - 05 , the fielded ce - i's ability against countermeasures still has not been verified .

according to mda no more ce - i ekv flight tests have been approved .

the test delays led mda to restructure its flight test plan for fiscal year 2009 , increasing the number of tests , compressing the amount of time to analyze and prepare for subsequent tests , and increasing the scope of individual tests .

for example , mda plans to conduct 14 of 18 flight tests in the third and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 .

past testing performance raises questions about whether this is realistic .

in fiscal year 2008 , mda had planned to conduct 18 flight tests , but it only accomplished 10 , and delayed several flight tests into 2009 .

in the next gmd end - to - end flight test — ftg - 06 in fourth quarter fiscal year 2009 to first quarter fiscal year 2010 — mda is accepting a higher level of risk than it previously expected in conducting this first test of an enhanced configuration of the kill vehicle called the capability enhancement ii ( ce - ii ) because it will include several objectives that had planned to be previously tested , but have not been .

for example , the ftg - 06 flight test will be the first gmd test assessing both a ce - ii ekv and a complex target scene .

adding to the risk , it will be only the second test using a newly developed ftf lv - 2 target .

moreover , mda in january 2008 had merged ftg - 06 and ftg - 07 , thereby eliminating an additional opportunity to gather important information from an intercept .

ftg - 07 will instead be an intercept test of the two - stage interceptor intended for the european site .

problems with the reliability and availability of targets ( which are themselves ballistic missiles ) have increasingly affected bmds development and testing since 2006 .

as mda recently acknowledged , target availability became , in some cases , a pacing item for the overall test program .

as was noted in table 1 , problems with targets have reduced testing of gmd , sensors , and thaad during 2008 .

repeated target problems and test cancellations have particularly reduced opportunities to demonstrate the ability of sensors to discriminate the real target from countermeasures .

in the mid - course of flight , a more sophisticated threat missile could use countermeasures in an attempt to deceive bmds radars and interceptor sensors as to which is the actual reentry vehicle .

in order to improve the effectiveness of the bmds against evolving threats , mda elements are developing advanced discrimination software in their component's sensors to distinguish the threat reentry vehicle from countermeasures and debris .

the cancellation of ftg - 04 and subsequent target problems during ftx - 03 and ftg - 05 prevented opportunities to gather data to test how well discrimination software performs in an operational environment .

the current fielded configuration of the gmd kill vehicle has not been tested against countermeasures .

to address the growing need for more sophisticated and reliable targets for the future bmds test program , mda has been developing a new set of targets called the flexible target family ( ftf ) , which was intended to provide new short , medium , and long - range targets with ground , air , and sea launch capabilities .

it was viewed as a family in the sense that the different target sizes and the variants within those sizes would use common components .

mda embarked on this major development without estimating the cost to develop the family of target missiles .

mda proceeded to develop and even to produce some ftf targets without a sound business case and , consequently , their acquisition has not gone as planned .

the funds required for the ftf were spent sooner than expected and were insufficient for the development .

development of all ftf sizes and variants has been discontinued except for the 72-inch diameter ground - launched target , referred to as the lv - 2 .

with guidance from the missile defense executive board , mda is currently conducting a comprehensive review of the targets program to determine the best acquisition strategy for future bmds targets .

it is expected to be completed in mid - 2009 .

whether or not mda decides to restart the acquisition of the 52-inch diameter targets , or other ftf variants , depends on the results of this review .

the process of qualifying ftf target components for the lv - 2 was more difficult than expected .

while many of the lv - 2's components are found on existing systems , their form , fit , function , and the environment they must fly in are different .

consequently , many critical components initially failed shock and vibration testing and other qualification tests and had to be redesigned .

mda has acknowledged that the component qualification effort ran in parallel with design completion and initial manufacturing .

so far , the resultant delays in the lv - 2 target have had two consequences .

first , a planned test flight of the lv - 2 itself for the space tracking and space surveillance program was delayed and instead its first flight will be as an actual target for an aegis bmd intercept .

second , because the lv - 2 was not ready , that aegis intercept test was deferred from fiscal year 2008 to third quarter fiscal year 2009 .

in addition to delaying progress on individual elements , testing problems have had other consequences for bmds .

specifically , the reduced productivity of testing has delayed understanding the overall performance of bmds , production and fielding have in some cases gotten ahead of testing , and declarations of capabilities ready for fielding have been made based on fewer tests and less modeling and simulation than planned .

the overall performance of the bmds cannot yet be assessed because mda lacks a fully accredited end - to - end model and simulation capability and , according to the bmds operational test agency , it will not have that capability until 2011 at the earliest .

the lack of sufficient flight test data has inhibited the validation of the models and simulations needed for the ground tests and the simulation .

mda's modeling and simulation program enables it to assess the capabilities and limitations of how bmds performs under a wider variety of conditions than can be accomplished through the limited number of flight tests conducted .

flight tests alone are insufficient because they only demonstrate a single collection data point of element and system performance .

flight tests are , however , an essential tool used to both validate performance of the bmds and to anchor the models and simulations to ensure they accurately reflect real performance .

computer models of individual elements replicate how those elements function .

these models are then aggregated into various combinations that simulate the bmds engagement of enemy ballistic missiles .

developing an end - to - end system - level model and simulation has been difficult .

mda's first effort to bring together different element models and simulations to produce a fully accredited , end - to - end model and simulation was for the first annual performance assessment of the fielded bmds configuration in 2007 .

performance assessment 2007 was unsuccessful primarily because of inadequate data , particularly flight test data , for verification and validation to support accreditation .

instead , performance assessment 2007 used several models and simulations that represented different aspects of the bmd system and were not fully integrated .

consequently , acting on a joint recommendation between mda and the operational test agency , mda officials cancelled the 2008 performance assessment in april 2008 because of developmental risks associated with modeling and simulations , focusing instead on testing and models for performance assessment 2009 .

according to the bmds operational test agency's january 2009 modeling and simulation accreditation report , confidence in mda's modeling and simulation efforts remains low although progress was made during the year .

out of 40 models , the bmds operational test agency recommended in january 2009 full accreditation for only 6 models , partial accreditation for 9 models , and no accreditation for 25 models .

mda is now exercising stronger central leadership to provide guidance and resources as they coordinate the development of verified and validated models and simulations .

mda intends to verify and validate models and simulations by december 2009 for performance assessment 2009 .

however , bmds operational test agency officials stated that there is a high risk that the performance assessment 2009 analysis will be delayed because of remaining challenges and mda's delayed progress in accreditation .

mda does not expect to have a single end - to - end simulation for use in performance assessments until 2010 .

testing problems have contributed to a concurrent development , manufacturing and fielding strategy in which assets are produced and fielded before they are fully demonstrated through testing and modeling .

for example , although a test of the ability of the sm - 3 block 1a missile to engage and intercept a long range ballistic target was delayed until the third quarter of fiscal year 2009 , mda purchased 20 of the missiles in fiscal year 2008 ahead of schedule .

while the gmd program has only been able to conduct two intercepts since 2006 for assessing the fielded configuration , the production of interceptors has continued .

from the beginning of fiscal year 2007 through the first quarter of fiscal year 2009 , mda planned to conduct 7 flight tests and field 16 new ground - based interceptors .

the plan included a test that would utilize two ground - based interceptors against a single target , known as a salvo test .

by january 2009 , gmd had conducted only 2 flight tests and dropped the salvo test ; yet it fielded 13 ground - based interceptors .

moreover , the gmd program had planned to conduct an intercept test to assess the enhanced version of the ekv called the capability enhancement ii ( ce - ii ) in the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 , months before emplacing any interceptors with this configuration .

however , developmental problems with the new configuration's inertial measurement unit and the target delayed the first flight test with the ce - ii configuration — ftg - 06 — until at least fourth quarter fiscal year 2009 .

despite these delays , emplacements will proceed ; mda expects to have emplaced five ce - ii interceptors before this flight test .

more importantly , gmd projects that the contractor will have manufactured and delivered 10 ce - ii ekvs before that first flight test demonstrates the ce - ii capability .

this amounts to over half of the ce - ii ekv deliveries that are currently under contract .

when mda determines that a capability can be considered for operational use it does so through a formal declaration .

mda bases its declarations on , among other things , a combination of models and simulations — such as end - to - end performance assessments ( from missile launch to attempted intercept ) — and ground tests all anchored to flight test data .

in fiscal year 2008 , mda declared it had fielded 7 of 17 bmds capabilities planned for 2008 ( postponing 10 ) .

in doing so mda largely reduced the basis for the declarations due in part to test problems and delays .

specifically , mda had intended to use a gmd flight test that was cancelled , a key ground test that was delayed and a performance assessment that was cancelled .

mda had to shift the basis of the 7 declarations to previous flight and ground tests .

mda has undertaken a three - phase review of the entire bmds modeling , simulation , and test program .

according to mda , the three phases involve identifying critical variables that have not been proven to date , determining what test scenarios are needed to collect the data , and developing an affordable and prioritized schedule of flight and ground tests .

mda intends to complete all three phases of the review by may 2009 .

at this point , our knowledge of the review is limited , as we have only had an introductory briefing on it .

nonetheless , the review appears to offer a sound approach for closing the gaps that exist between testing , modeling , and simulation .

further , the involvement of test and evaluation organizations is encouraging .

while sound , the success of this approach hinges on providing sufficient resources , ensuring robustness , and anticipating contingencies .

in addition to linking the critical modeling and simulation variables with test events , the review will have to address the factors that have limited the productivity of the current test approach , such as the availability and performance of targets .

mda's current approach to testing could be characterized as a just - in - time approach to having the test assets , such as targets , ready .

this left little margin to solve issues that arise leading up to the tests .

accordingly , the third phase of mda's new approach — properly resourcing the tests with sufficient time , funding and reliable targets — will be key .

mda has indicated that its revision will result in a more robust test plan , providing more margin to conduct the tests through , for example , having spare interceptors and targets available .

other contingencies that a new approach to modeling , simulation , and testing should anticipate include unexpected or incomplete test results , and problems in accrediting the models that are needed for aggregated simulations , such as performance assessments .

an important consideration in this regard is for modeling , simulation , and testing events to be re - synchronized so that they properly inform decisions on producing , fielding , and declaring assets operational .

contingency plans could then be formed for adjusting the pace of these decisions should shortfalls occur in modeling , simulation , or testing .

mda has indicated that this new approach to testing will take time to implement , with partial implementation in fiscal year 2010 and full implementation not occurring until fiscal year 2011 .

therefore , mda must manage the transition to the new testing approach .

in particular , the ambitious fiscal year 2009 flight test plan may need to be reassessed with the goal of establishing a robust series of tests that can withstand some delays without causing wholesale changes to the test plan during the transition .

in the mean time , mda will have to be prudent in making decisions to produce and field additional assets .

our annual report on missile defense is in draft and with dod for comment .

it will be issued in final by march 13 , 2009 .

in that report , we are recommending additional steps to further improve the transparency , accountability , and oversight of the missile defense program .

our recommendations include actions to improve cost reporting as well as testing and evaluation .

dod is in the process of preparing a formal response to the report and its recommendations .

madame chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have .

for questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or francisp@gao.gov .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include david b .

best , assistant director ; steven b. stern ; latonya d. miller ; thomas mahalek ; ivy hübler ; meredith allen kimmett ; kenneth e. patton ; and alyssa weir .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

