i am pleased to be here today to discuss our april 2006 report on alaska native corporation ( anc ) 8 ( a ) firms .

in december 1971 , congress enacted the alaska native claims settlement act to resolve long - standing aboriginal land claims and to foster economic development for alaska natives .

this legislation created ancs , which would become the vehicle for distributing land and monetary benefits to alaska natives in lieu of a reservation system .

as of december 2005 , there were 13 regional ancs and 182 village , urban , and group corporations .

in 1986 , legislation was enacted that allowed anc - owned firms to participate in the small business administration's ( sba ) 8 ( a ) program — one of the federal government's primary means for developing small businesses owned by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

since then , congress has extended special procurement advantages to anc firms .

for example , anc firms are permitted to receive noncompetitive contracts for any amount , whereas other 8 ( a ) companies are subject to competitive thresholds of $5 million for manufacturing contracts or $3 million for all other contracts .

ancs can also own multiple subsidiaries participating in the 8 ( a ) program , unlike other 8 ( a ) firms that may own only one in a lifetime and no more than 20 percent of another 8 ( a ) firm .

our 2006 report on 8 ( a ) anc contracting identified ( 1 ) trends in contracting with anc firms , ( 2 ) the reasons agencies have awarded 8 ( a ) sole - source contracts to anc firms and the facts and circumstances behind some of these contracts , and ( 3 ) how ancs are using the 8 ( a ) program .

we also evaluated sba's oversight of 8 ( a ) anc firms .

we made a number of recommendations to sba and also recommended that the agencies in our review work with sba to develop training for their contracting personnel .

today i will discuss the highlights of our report and provide an update on actions sba and the other agencies have taken to address our recommendations .

to address the objectives of our 2006 report , we obtained data on federal 8 ( a ) contracting with ancs .

it is important to note that there is no readily available central source of information on anc 8 ( a ) contracting activity .

we obtained each anc firm's data universal numbering system ( duns ) number and used this information to obtain data from the federal procurement data system ( fpds ) and agencies .

to assess the reliability of the procurement data , we ( 1 ) compared fpds and agency data to verify its accuracy , ( 2 ) reviewed related documentation , including contract files , and ( 3 ) worked closely with agency officials to identify and resolve any data problems .

when we found discrepancies , we brought them to the agency's attention and worked with them to correct the discrepancies before conducting our analyses .

we also analyzed 16 large , sole - source 8 ( a ) contracts awarded to anc firms from the departments of defense , energy , the interior , state , transportation , and homeland security and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) .

we selected the contracts based on high ultimate award values and high dollar obligations that represented a variety of contractors and services .

we traveled to alaska and met with executives of 13 regional ancs and 17 village or urban corporations .

the report on which this testimony is based was prepared in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

our work did not include within its scope an objective or analyses that either support or challenge special anc advantages within the 8 ( a ) program .

the program has been established in law and any changes are up to the congress .

8 ( a ) anc contracting represents a small amount of total federal procurement spending .

however , dollars obligated to anc firms through the 8 ( a ) program grew from $265 million in fiscal year 2000 to $1.1 billion in 2004 .

overall , during the 5-year period , the government obligated $4.6 billion to anc firms , of which $2.9 billion , or 63 percent , went through the 8 ( a ) program .

during this period , six federal agencies — the departments of defense , energy , the interior , state , and transportation and nasa — accounted for almost 85 percent of total 8 ( a ) anc obligations .

obligations for 8 ( a ) sole - source contracts by these agencies to anc firms increased from about $180 million in fiscal year 2000 to about $876 million in fiscal year 2004 .

ancs use the 8 ( a ) program as one of many tools to generate revenue with the goal of benefiting their shareholders .

some ancs are heavily reliant on the 8 ( a ) program for revenues , while others approach the program as one of many revenue - generating opportunities , such as investments in stocks or real estate .

ancs are using the congressionally authorized advantages afforded to them , such as ownership of multiple 8 ( a ) subsidiaries , sometimes in diversified lines of business .

from fiscal year 1988 to 2005 , numbers increased from one 8 ( a ) subsidiary owned by one anc to 154 subsidiaries owned by 49 ancs .

figure 1 shows the recent growth in ancs' 8 ( a ) subsidiaries .

ancs use their ability to own multiple businesses in the 8 ( a ) program , as allowed by law , in different ways .

for example , some ancs create a second subsidiary in anticipation of winning follow - on work from one of their graduating subsidiaries ; wholly own their 8 ( a ) subsidiaries , while others invest in partially - diversify their subsidiaries' capabilities to increase opportunities to win government contracts in various industries .

our review of 16 large sole - source contracts awarded by 7 agencies found that agency officials view contracting with 8 ( a ) anc firms as a quick , easy , and legal way to award contracts while at the same time helping their agencies meet small business goals .

memoranda of understanding ( partnership agreements ) between sba and agencies delegate the contract execution function to federal agencies , although sba remains responsible for implementing the 8 ( a ) program .

we found that contracting officials had not always complied with requirements to notify sba when modifying contracts , such as increasing the scope of work or the dollar value , and to monitor the percentage of the work performed by the 8 ( a ) firms versus their subcontractors .

for example: federal regulation requires that when 8 ( a ) firms subcontract under an 8 ( a ) service contract , they incur at least 50 percent of the personnel costs with their own employees .

the purpose of this provision , which limits the amount of work that can be performed by the subcontractor , is to ensure that small businesses do not pass along the benefits of their contracts to their subcontractors .

for the 16 files we reviewed , we found almost no evidence that the agencies are effectively monitoring compliance with this requirement .

in general , the contracting officers we spoke with were confused about whose responsibility it is .

agencies are also required to notify sba of all 8 ( a ) contract awards , modifications , and exercised options where the contract execution function has been delegated to the agencies in the partnership agreements .

we found that not all contracting officers were doing so .

in one case , the department of energy contracting officer had broadened the scope of a contract a year after award , adding 10 additional lines of business that almost tripled the value of the contract .

these changes were not coordinated with sba .

we reported in 2006 that sba had not tailored its policies and practices to account for ancs' unique status and growth in the 8 ( a ) program , even though officials recognize that anc firms enter into more complex business relationships than other 8 ( a ) participants .

sba officials told us that they have faced a challenge in overseeing the activity of the 8 ( a ) anc firms because ancs' charter under the alaska native claims settlement act is not always consistent with the business development intent of the 8 ( a ) program .

the officials noted that the goal of ancs — economic development for alaska natives from a community standpoint — can be in conflict with the primary purpose of the 8 ( a ) program , which is business development for individual small , disadvantaged businesses .

sba's oversight fell short in that it did not: track the primary business industries in which anc subsidiaries had 8 ( a ) contracts to ensure that more than one subsidiary of the same anc was not generating the majority of its revenue under the same primary industry code ; consistently determine whether other small businesses were losing contracting opportunities when large sole - source contracts were awarded to 8 ( a ) anc firms ; adhere to a statutory and regulatory requirement to ascertain whether 8 ( a ) anc firms , when entering the 8 ( a ) program or for each contract award , had , or were likely to obtain , a substantial unfair competitive advantage within an industry ; ensure that partnerships between 8 ( a ) anc firms and large firms were functioning in the way they were intended under the 8 ( a ) program ; and maintain information on anc 8 ( a ) activity .

sba officials from the alaska district office had reported to headquarters that the makeup of their 8 ( a ) portfolio was challenging and required more contracting knowledge and business savvy than usual because the majority of the firms they oversee are owned by ancs and tribal entities .

the officials commented that these firms tend to pursue complex business relationships and tend to be awarded large and often complex contracts .

we found that the district office officials were having difficulty managing their large volume and the unique type of work in their 8 ( a ) portfolio .

when we began our review , sba headquarters officials responsible for overseeing the 8 ( a ) program did not seem aware of the growth in the anc 8 ( a ) portfolio and had not taken steps to address the increased volume of work in their alaska office .

in 2006 , we reported that ancs were increasingly using the contracting advantages congress has provided them .

our work showed that procuring agencies' contracting officers are in need of guidance on how to use these contracts while exercising diligence to ensure that taxpayer dollars are spent effectively .

equally important , we stated , significant improvements were needed in sba's oversight of the program .

without stronger oversight , we noted the potential for abuse and unintended consequences .

in our april 2006 report , we made 10 recommendations to sba on actions that can be taken to revise its regulations and policies and to improve practices pertaining to its oversight of anc 8 ( a ) procurements .

our recommendations and sba's june 2007 response are as follows .

we recommended that the administrator of sba: 1 .

ascertain and then clearly articulate in regulation how sba will comply with existing law to determine whether and when one or more anc firms are obtaining , or are likely to obtain , a substantial unfair competitive advantage in an industry .

sba response: sba is exploring possible regulatory changes that would address the issue of better controlling the award of sole - source 8 ( a ) contracts over the competitive threshold dollar limitation to joint ventures between tribally and anc - owned 8 ( a ) firms and other business concerns .

2 .

in regulation , specifically address sba's role in monitoring ownership of anc holding companies that manage 8 ( a ) operations to ensure that the companies are wholly owned by the anc and that any changes in ownership are reported to sba .

sba response: sba is building a business development management information system to electronically manage all aspects of the 8 ( a ) program .

according to sba , this system , scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2008 , will monitor program participants' continuing eligibility in the 8 ( a ) program and could include an anc element in the electronic annual review that would monitor the ownership of anc holding companies that manage 8 ( a ) operations and ensure that any changes in ownership are reported to sba .

3 .

collect information on ancs' 8 ( a ) participation as part of required overall 8 ( a ) monitoring , to include tracking the primary revenue generators for 8 ( a ) anc firms to ensure that multiple subsidiaries under one anc are not generating their revenue in the same primary industry .

sba response: the planned electronic annual review can collect information on ancs' multiple subsidiaries to ensure that they are not generating the majority of their revenues from the same primary industry .

further , to ensure that an anc - owned firm does not enter the 8 ( a ) program with the same north american industry classification system ( naics ) code as another current or former 8 ( a ) firm owned by that anc , the anc - owned applicant must certify that it operates in a distinct primary industry and must demonstrate that fact through revenues generated .

sba notes that the planned annual electronic reviews can validate this information .

4 .

revisit regulation that requires agencies to notify sba of all contract modifications and consider establishing thresholds for notification , such as when new naics codes are added to the contract or there is a certain percentage increase in the dollar value of the contract .

once notification criteria are determined , provide guidance to the agencies on when to notify sba of contract modifications and scope changes .

sba response: sba stated that its revisions to its partnership agreements with federal agencies address this recommendation .

however , we note that the revised agreement does not establish thresholds or include new criteria for when agencies should send sba contract modifications or award documentation .

the agreement states that agencies “shall provide a copy of any contract…including basic contracts , orders , modifications , and purchase orders” to sba .

5 .

consistently determine whether other small businesses are losing contracting opportunities when awarding contracts through the 8 ( a ) program to anc firms .

sba response: sba stated that it plans to require the contracting agencies to include impact statements in their contract offer letters to sba .

6 .

standardize approval letters for each 8 ( a ) procurement to clearly assign accountability for monitoring of subcontracting and for notifying sba of contract modifications .

sba response: sba agreed with the recommendation but did not indicate an action taken or planned .

7 .

tailor wording in approval letters to explain the basis for adverse impact determinations .

sba response: sba agreed with the recommendation but did not indicate an action taken or planned .

8 .

clarify memorandums of understanding ( known as partnership agreements ) with procuring agencies to state that it is the agency contracting officer's responsibility to monitor compliance with the limitation on subcontracting clause .

sba response: sba has implemented this recommendation by revising the partnership agreements with the procuring agencies .

it added several provisions that delineate the agencies' responsibilities for oversight , monitoring , and compliance with procurement laws and regulations governing 8 ( a ) contracts , including the limitation on subcontracting clause .

9 .

evaluate staffing levels and training needed to effectively oversee anc participation in the 8 ( a ) program and take steps to allocate appropriate resources to the alaska district office .

sba response: sba stated that the planned business development management information system should help the alaska district office more effectively oversee anc participation in the 8 ( a ) program .

it stated that it is providing training to the alaska district office .

however , no plans were in place to evaluate staffing levels at the office .

10 .

provide more training to agencies on the 8 ( a ) program , specifically including a component on anc 8 ( a ) participation .

sba response: sba has provided training to agencies on the revised 8 ( a ) partnership agreements ; however , our review of the slides sba used for the training found no reference to anc 8 ( a ) firms specifically .

according to an sba official , sba will include a component on anc 8 ( a ) participants in future training sessions .

we also recommended that procuring agencies provide guidance to contracting officers to ensure proper oversight of anc contracts .

the procuring agencies generally agreed with the recommendation .

some agencies are waiting for sba to implement our recommendations before they take their own actions , but others have taken steps to tighten their oversight of contracts with 8 ( a ) anc firms .

the department of homeland security , for example , recently issued an “acquisition alert” requiring that its heads of contracting activities provide guidance and training on the use of 8 ( a ) firms owned by ancs .

the alert provides that use of the authority to award sole - source 8 ( a ) contracts to ancs must be judicious with appropriate safeguards to ensure that the cost / price is fair and reasonable , that the anc has the technical ability to perform the work , that the anc will be performing the required percentage of the work and that the award is in the best interests of the government .

the department of energy revised its acquisition guidance regarding small business programs to remind contracting officers to use care in awarding and administering anc contracts , to include notifying sba of contract modifications and monitoring the limits on subcontracting .

the department also provided training on the 8 ( a ) program , to include contracting with anc firms .

by providing contracting officers with appropriate training on these issues , the government is taking steps to ensure that the anc firms are operating in the program as intended , thereby mitigating the risk of unintended consequences or abuse of some of the privileges provided to these firms .

this concludes my testimony .

i would be happy to answer any questions you may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact katherine v. schinasi at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or schinasik@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

key contributors were michele mackin , sylvia schatz , and tatiana winger .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

