i am pleased to be here today to participate in the subcommittee's hearing on the status of the department of defense's ( dod ) major tactical aircraft fighter programs , the f / a - 22 and the f - 35 , also known as the joint strike fighter ( jsf ) .

both programs are intended to replace aging tactical fighter aircraft with highly advanced , stealthy aircraft .

the f / a - 22 and jsf represent a substantial potential investment for dod — about $280 billion .

any discussion of dod's sizeable investment that remains in the f / a - 22 and jsf programs must also be viewed within the context of the fiscal imbalance facing the nation within the next 10 years .

there are important competing priorities , both within and external to dod's budget , that require a sound and sustainable business case for dod's acquisition programs based on clear priorities , comprehensive needs assessments , and a thorough analysis of available resources .

funding specific programs or activities will undoubtedly create shortfalls in others .

the federal government's future resource needs are staggering .

for example , efforts to ensure homeland security has resulted in the creation of the department of homeland security — the largest government reorganization in more than 50 years , involving 170,000 employees and a $40 billion budget .

also , legislation was enacted to modernize the medicare program to include a prescription drug benefit , at a potential cost of more than $500 billion over the next 10 years alone .

given these and other important national priorities and relatively weak economic performance , historic budget deficits have returned and are projected to continue for the next decade .

these important demands on our nation increasingly require policymakers to distinguish wants from needs and to judge what the nation can afford , both now and in the longer term .

these two fighter programs require substantial investments as shown in the figure 1 .

they must compete inside dod with other important dod major acquisition investments that will likely dominate future budget calls , including missile defense systems , the army's future combat systems , and larger investments in space programs to transform communication , intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities .

my statement today is primarily based on our recently issued report on the f / a - 22 .

specifically , i will highlight significant changes in the development program , the readiness to begin initial operational testing and full rate production , and the sufficiency of dod's current business case to justify the need for and the affordability of quantities necessary to carry out intended missions .

additionally , based on more limited work we have completed on the jsf , i will discuss the status of the jsf program , make some observations based on broad comparisons of its current acquisition approach to the acquisition experiences of the f / a - 22 program , and identify additional challenges attendant with international cooperation .

we performed the work associated with this statement in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in summary , because of the many changes that have occurred in the f / a - 22 program and the remaining investment still to be made , we believe decision makers would benefit from a new business case that justifies the need for the full air - to - air and air - to - ground capabilities and the quantities needed that dod can afford .

regarding the jsf , we understand that program managers are considering a delay in its critical design review to attain greater design stability in its airframe .

in addition to seeking greater design stability , leadership in dod could reap the benefits of its new acquisition policy that embraces the best practice concepts of knowledge - based , evolutionary acquisition by actively promoting and maintaining a disciplined approach to its acquisitions throughout the remaining critical decision points over the next few years .

the air force began the f / a - 22 development program in 1986 and expected to complete development in 9 years for an estimated cost of $12.6 billion .

today , after being in development for almost two decades , the estimated development cost is $28.7 billion , a 127 percent increase .

the average unit procurement cost to buy the f / a - 22 has also increased 122 percent .

the result of these changes has been a loss of buying power that has reduced the initial buy quantity from 750 to 277 aircraft .

table 1 shows the changes in the development program from 1986 to 2002 .

we have reported in the past that the f / a - 22 acquisition approach was a major contributor to the cost increases and delays in schedule that led to reduced buying power .

in testimony last year , we identified lessons to be learned in the f / a - 22 program , which did not follow a knowledge - based acquisition approach used by successful commercial firms .

leading commercial firms that we studied employ an acquisition approach that evolves a product to its ultimate capabilities on the basis of mature technologies and available resources .

these firms then ensure that high levels of knowledge exist at three critical junctures in a development program .

first , a match must be made between a customer's needs and the available resources — technology , engineering knowledge , time , and funding — before a new development program is launched .

second , a product's design must demonstrate its ability to meet performance requirements and be stable about midway through development .

third , the developer must show that the product can be manufactured within cost , schedule , and quality targets and is demonstrated to be reliable before production begins .

dod issued new acquisition policy in may 2003 that governs the development of major acquisition systems .

this new policy embraces the best practice concepts of knowledge - based , evolutionary acquisition and represents a good first step toward achieving better outcomes from major acquisition programs .

the initial f - 22 acquisition strategy did not employ an evolutionary approach .

instead , it sought to develop revolutionary capabilities from the outset of the program taking on significant risk and onerous technology challenges .

three critical technologies were immature at the start of the program — low - observable materials , propulsion , and integrated avionics .

integrated avionics has been a source of major schedule delays and cost increases in the f / a - 22 program .

starting the program with these immature technologies prevented the program from knowing cost , schedule , and performance ramifications until late in the development program , after significant investments had already been made .

efforts to mature technology cascaded into development , delaying attainment of design and production maturity .

the jsf , which started in 1996 , is not as far along in its development , but is experiencing problems that could similarly threaten dod's investment .

it is at a critical crossroad , one that , based on our prior work , was approached and passed by several other dod programs without capturing the appropriate knowledge for the sizable investment decisions being made .

while the jsf program started with higher risks by failing to mature its technologies , it is considering a delay to its investment decision that determines the need to invest in tooling , labor , and facilities to manufacture aircraft until the airframe design has become more stable .

the basic mission of the f / a - 22 , initially focused on air - to - air dominance , has changed to include a significantly greater emphasis on attacking ground targets .

to accomplish this expanded mission , the air force will need additional investments to develop and expand air - to - ground attack capabilities for the f / a - 22 .

moreover , the efforts to expand its capability will also add risks to an already challenged program .

to accommodate planned changes will also require a new computer architecture and processor to replace the current less capable ones .

the expanded air - to - ground attack capability will allow the f / a - 22 to engage a greater variety of ground targets , such as surface - to - air missile systems , that have posed a significant threat to u.s. aircraft in recent years .

this was not previously considered a primary role for the aircraft as it was intended to be primarily an air - to - air fighter to replace the f - 15 .

from the outset the f / a - 22 was built to counter expected large numbers of new advanced soviet fighter aircraft , but this expected threat never materialized .

the air force has a modernization program to improve the capabilities of the f / a - 22 focused largely on a more robust air - to - ground capability .

it intends to do so using five developmental spirals planned over more than a 10-year period , with the initial spiral started in 2003 .

in march 2003 , the office of secretary of defense's cost analysis improvement group ( caig ) estimated that the air force would need $11.7 billion for the planned modernization program .

the caig estimate included costs for development , production , and the retrofit of some aircraft .

as of march 2003 , the air force f / a - 22 approved program baseline did not include estimated costs for the full modernization effort .

instead , the air force estimate included $3.5 billion for modernization efforts planned through fiscal year 2009 .

table 2 shows each spiral as currently planned .

to complete the planned enhancements , the f / a - 22 will also need a new computer architecture and avionics processors .

current architecture and processors will be upgraded to support enhancement through the global strike enhanced development spiral .

however , because the current architecture and processors are old and obsolete and do not have sufficient capacity to meet the increased processing demands required for planned new air - to - ground capabilities beyond the global strike enhanced spiral , they must be replaced .

rather than start a new development program , the f / a - 22 program office plans to leverage two other ongoing air force development or modification programs for this new processing capability: the new architecture being developed for the jsf and the new commercial off - the - shelf general - purpose processors designed for newer versions of the f - 16 .

according to f / a - 22 program officials , they do not expect the new architecture to be fully developed and ready for installation in the f / a - 22 for at least 5 to 6 years .

additional risks are likely because the new processor and architecture are being developed by other major aircraft programs and will require extensive integration and operational testing to ensure that the f / a - 22 program does not encounter similar problems that have delayed integration and testing of the f / a - 22's current avionics suite .

f / a - 22 program officials acknowledge that this mass changeover of the f / a - 22 computer architecture and avionics processor will be a time - consuming and costly effort and will likely create additional program risks .

air force cost estimates are not yet available , but program officials estimate the nonrecurring engineering costs alone could be at least $300 million .

at the time of our review , the air force had not made a decision about retrofitting aircraft equipped with the old microprocessor .

the air force schedule includes plans to make the full rate production decision in december 2004 , but initial operational test and evaluation ( iot&e ) has not started .

the air force's efforts to stabilize avionics software and improve its performance have not been sufficiently demonstrated to start iot&e , and the planned entrance criterion was changed .

in addition , the f / a - 22 program is not performing as expected in some other key performance areas like system reliability .

these problems have contributed to the need for a new test schedule and an additional 7- month delay in the start iot&e .

together these problems increase the potential for additional development costs and delays in the full rate production decision .

since our report in march 2003 , the air force has corrected some key design problems identified at that time , but others remain .

the stability and performance of f / a - 22 avionics has been a major problem causing delays in the completion of developmental testing and the start of iot&e .

because the f / a - 22 avionics encountered frequent shutdowns over the last few years , many test flights were delayed .

as a result , the air force operational test and evaluation center wanted assurances that the avionics would work before it was willing to start the iot&e program .

it established a requirement for a 20-hour performance metric that was to be demonstrated before iot&e would begin .

this metric was subsequently changed to a 5-hour metric that included additional types of failures , and it became the defense acquisition board's criterion to start iot&e .

in turn , congress included the new metric , known as mean time between avionics anomaly or mtbaa , in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 .

as of january 2004 , the air force had not been able to demonstrate that the avionics could meet either of these criteria .

testing as of january 2004 showed the program had achieved 2.7 hours — 54 percent of the 5-hour stability requirement to begin iot&e .

while the air force has not been able to meet the new criteria , major failures , resulting in a complete shutdown of the avionics system , have significantly diminished .

these failures are occurring only about once every 25 hours on average .

this is the result of a substantial effort on the part of the air force and the contractor to identify and fix problems that led to the instability in the f / a - 22 avionics software .

however , less serious failures are still occurring frequently .

the f / a - 22 program is not meeting its requirements for a reliable aircraft , and it is not using a knowledge - based approach .

the air force established reliability requirements to be achieved at the completion of development and at system maturity .

as a measure of the system's overall reliability , the air force established a requirement for 1.95-hours mean time between maintenance by the completion of development and 3-hours mean time between maintenance at system maturity .

this measure of reliability represents the average flight time between maintenance actions .

as of october 2003 , the air force had only been able to demonstrate a reliability of about 0.5 flying hours between maintenance actions or about 26 percent of the development requirement and 17 percent of system maturity requirement .

this has led to test aircraft spending more time than planned on the ground undergoing maintenance .

in addition to the high level of maintenance required , failures in f / a - 22 parts and components also caused reliability problems .

during 2003 , the air force identified 68 parts that had a high rate of failure causing them to be removed or replaced and affecting the f / a - 22 system reliability .

the contractor has initiated programs to eliminate the high failure rates experienced by these parts .

the canopy has also been experiencing failures during testing , allowing it to achieve only about 15 percent of its expected 1,600-hour life .

the air force is considering using a second manufacturer for canopies , but until it has passed qualification testing , it cannot be used as an alternative source for the high - failing canopies .

the f / a - 22 program began limited production before demonstrating reliability .

our work has shown that product development engineers from leading commercial firms expect to achieve reliability requirements before entering production .

they told us reliability is attained through an iterative process of design , testing , analysis , and redesign .

commercial firms understand that once a system enters production , the costs to achieve reliability through this iterative design change process become significantly more expensive .

the f / a - 22 aircraft has been in production since fiscal year 1999 , and the air force has on contract 52 production aircraft , and an additional 22 aircraft on long lead contracts representing 27 percent of the planned buy quantity .

with 83 percent of the reliability requirement yet to be achieved through this iterative design change process , the air force can expect to incur additional development and design change costs .

if the air force fails to improve the f / a - 22's reliability before fielding the aircraft , the high failure rates will result in higher operational and support costs to keep the aircraft available for training or combat use .

avionics and reliability problems were the major contributors to delays in f / a - 22 flight - testing in 2003 .

as a result , the start of iot&e was delayed an additional 7 months .

realizing the air force would not be ready to enter initial operational testing as previously planned , the office of the secretary of defense requested the f / a - 22 program to establish a new operational test plan that includes measures to ensure the aircraft and its avionics are ready before entering operational testing .

in response , the air force put in place a two - phase operational test program .

phase 1 , also called an operational assessment , is not the official start of operational testing .

it is intended to assess the f / a - 22's readiness for iot&e .

started in october 2003 , it calls for testing two f / a - 22 aircraft .

phase 2 testing is considered the actual start of iot&e .

to begin this phase , the air force must meet a number of criteria .

perhaps most importantly , it must demonstrate that the f / a - 22's integrated avionics will be able to operate for sufficient lengths of time , without shutting down .

figure 2 compares the changes in the planned test program since our march 2003 report .

according to air force test officials , results of some phase 1 tests could be used to satisfy iot&e requirements if the aircraft and software configurations do not change for iot&e testing .

this could reduce the scope of the test effort planned during iot&e .

the defense acquisition board is scheduled to review the f / a - 22's readiness for iot&e later this month .

at the present time , the air force expects to complete iot&e in october 2004 , before the full rate production decision , now expected in december 2004 .

the time allotted to complete iot&e under the new test plan , however , has been compressed by 4 months , assuming phase 1 testing results are not permitted to be used for iot&e .

this means the air force would have less time than previously planned to complete the same amount of testing .

if the air force continues to experience delays in testing prior to iot&e , then the full rate production decision would also have to be delayed until iot&e is complete and the beyond low rate initial production report is delivered to congress .

the air force has corrected design problems discussed in our march 2003 report .

to correct the movement or buffeting of the vertical fins in the tail section of the aircraft , the air force designed and implemented modifications , which strengthen the fin and hinge assemblies .

because of this problem , the air force placed restrictions on flights below 10,000 feet .

testing was done above and below 10,000 feet , and the flight restrictions were removed .

likewise , the air force modified the aircraft to prevent overheating concerns in the rear portion of the aircraft by adding thermal protection and strengthened strategic areas in the aft tail sections .

the air force also plans to modify later production aircraft using a new venting approach to resolve the heat problems .

we reported that the air force had also experienced separations in the horizontal tail materials .

after additional testing , the air force deemed that the original tails met requirements established for the life of the airframe .

however , the air force redesigned the tail to reduce producibility costs .

tests will be performed on the redesigned tail in late 2004 .

the business case made to justify the f / a - 22 program at its outset is no longer valid .

since that time , program cost and schedule have grown substantially and affordable quantities have been reduced by 60 percent .

the expected threat , for which this aircraft was originally designed , never materialized , and new , more demanding ground threats , like surface - to - air missile systems , have evolved , requiring expanded capabilities that will require significant new developmental investments .

in addition , technical problems have not been resolved , and uncertainty about the outcome of operational testing could lead to additional development costs and further delays .

today , the air force estimates the total f / a - 22 acquisition program will cost about $72 billion , excluding about $8 billion estimated by the caig to complete modernization activities .

including these costs brings the estimated total investment for the f / a - 22 program to about $80 billion .

through fiscal year 2004 , about one - half of this investment has been funded , leaving key investment decisions in the near future on the remaining $40 billion for aircraft production and upgrades in capability .

last year , in light of the changes in the program and investments that remained , the subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations of the house committee on government reform asked dod to provide a new business case justifying the air force's planned number of f / a - 22s ( 276 at that time ) as well as how many f / a - 22s are affordable .

in its response , dod did not sufficiently address key business case questions such as how many f / a - 22s are needed , how many are affordable , and if alternatives to planned investments increasing the f / a - 22 air - to - ground capabilities exist .

instead , dod stated it planned to buy 277 f / a - 22s based on a “buy to budget” concept that determines quantities on the availability and efficient use of funds by the f / a - 22 program office .

furthermore , justification for expanding the capability to a more robust air - to - ground attack capability was not addressed in dod's response .

while ground targets such as surface - to - air missile systems are acknowledged to be a significant threat today , the response did not establish a justification for this investment or state what alternatives were considered .

for example , the jsf aircraft is also expected to have an air - to - ground role , as are planned future unmanned combat air vehicles .

these could be viable alternatives to this additional investment in f / a - 22 capability .

while the business case information submitted to the subcommittee called for 277 aircraft , dod stated it could only afford to acquire between 216 and 218 aircraft within the congressionally imposed cap on production costs — currently at $36.8 billion .

dod expects improvements in manufacturing efficiencies and other areas will provide it with sufficient funds to buy additional f / a - 22 aircraft .

however , this seems to be an unlikely scenario given the program's history .

previously , dod , under its “buy to budget” approach , used $876 million mostly from production funds to cover increases in development costs , thus reducing aircraft quantities by 49 .

with testing still incomplete and many important performance areas not yet demonstrated , the possibility for additional increases in development costs is likely .

the analysis and conclusions in our recent report led us to recommend that dod complete a new business case that justifies the need for the f / a - 22 and that determines the quantities needed and affordable to carry out its air - to - air and air - to - ground mission .

in preparing the business case , we also recommended dod look at alternatives to the f / a - 22 for dealing with the ground threats that were driving the need for an expanded air - to - ground capability .

in response to a draft of that report , dod partially concurred , stating that it evaluates the f / a - 22 business case elements as part of the annual budget process .

additionally , dod's response acknowledged that this year the department is undertaking a broader set of reviews under the joint capabilities review process and that the f / a - 22 will be a part of that review .

in our report , as part of the evaluation of dod's comments , we noted that an independent and in - depth study of the f / a - 22 program has been requested by the office of management and budget and that such a study provided an opportunity for completing a business case analysis .

the jsf acquisition program is approaching a key investment decision point in its development as it prepares to stabilize the design for its critical design reviews .

the program has many demands and requirements to satisfy before it is completed .

it is the most expensive acquisition program in dod's history with plans to buy almost 2,500 aircraft for an estimated acquisition cost of about $200 billion .

the design plans are for three variants for the air force , navy , and marine corps , with development partners and potential customers that span the globe .

upcoming investment decisions will be a prominent indicator of the risk program management and senior leadership will assume for this program .

the program's size — in terms of funding , number of aircraft , and program participants — will create challenges for decision makers over the next several years .

they will face decisions that need to be guided by a sound business case and an evolutionary , knowledge - based acquisition process that will provide more predictable cost , schedule , and performance outcomes .

the jsf is a joint , multi - national acquisition program for the air force , navy , marine corps , and eight cooperative international partners .

the program's objective is to develop and deploy an affordable weapon system that satisfies a variety of war fighters with different needs .

the system is intended to consist of a family of highly common and affordable strike aircraft designed to meet an advanced threat and a logistics system to enable the jsf to be self - sufficient or part of a multisystem and multiservice operation .

this family of strike aircraft will consist of three variants: conventional takeoff and landing , aircraft carrier suitable , and short take off and vertical landing .

the jsf program began in november 1996 .

after a five - year competitive concept demonstration phase between boeing and lockheed - martin , dod awarded lockheed - martin a contract in october 2001 to begin system development and demonstration .

we are aware that program managers are contemplating changes to the program that could delay the schedule and increase costs , but confirmation and details are not yet available .

nonetheless , current program office estimates do provide some insights .

since the jsf acquisition program began in 1996 , the cost of development has grown by about 80 percent .

as shown in figure 3 , the majority of this cost growth , from an estimated $24.8 to $34.4 billion , was recognized at the time the program transitioned from concept development to system development and demonstration in 2001 .

the program office cited schedule delays , implementation of a new block development approach that extended the program by 36 months , and a more mature cost estimate as the major causes for the increase .

since the start of system development and demonstration , the estimate has increased by an additional $10.3 billion because of continued efforts to achieve international commonality , optimize engine interchangeability , further refinements to the estimating methodology , and schedule delays for additional design work .

in both 2000 and 2001 , when the program was making the critical decision to move into system development and demonstration , we reported and testified that technologies had not been sufficiently demonstrated to reduce risk to a level commensurate with a decision to commit major capital and time to product development .

while some of these technologies continue to be troublesome , in march 2003 , the program's preliminary design review revealed significant issues related to aircraft design maturity .

weight has become the most significant design risk for the program as it approaches its critical design review .

the increased weight of each variant design could degrade aircraft range and maneuverability if not brought under control .

according to the program office , the airframe design has matured more slowly than anticipated and software development and integration is posing a significant design challenge .

also , in a 2003 annual report , the director of operational test & evaluation stated that weight growth is a significant design risk for all the variants , that the development schedule is aggressive , and that efforts to reduce weight have eroded a large part of the schedule .

we also note that the program's funding profile assumes almost $90 billion of funding over the next 10 years , an average of almost $9 billion a year .

this will require the jsf program to compete with many other large programs for scarce funding during this same time frame .

sustaining this level of high funding for such a long period will be a challenge .

the jsf program's latest planned funding profile for development and procurement — as of december 2002 — is shown in figure 4 .

the jsf program faces critical decisions over the next 24 months .

decisions made today will greatly influence the efficiency of the rest of its funding — almost 90 percent of the total .

as a result of current concerns over system integration risk , the program office is currently restructuring the development program , which will add significant cost and delay the development schedule .

for example , it is considering delaying its critical design reviews , its first flights of development aircraft , and its limited rate production decision to allow more time to mitigate design risk and gather more knowledge before moving forward with continued major investments .

while no one wants to delay critical reviews , now is the time to get the design right rather than later .

going forward with an incomplete review may cause more problems later in the effort .

indeed , based on our past best practices work and lessons learned from the f / a - 22 development effort , we have seen many examples where programs moved forward past their critical design review without gathering the knowledge needed to verify that their design was stable .

this has led to poor cost and delivery outcomes for these programs .

we have also seen the reverse , where programs have gathered appropriate knowledge before their critical design review .

these programs had much more predictable cost and schedule outcomes .

the f / a - 22 program held its critical design review in 1995 with only about 26 percent of its design drawings complete .

best practice criteria calls for 90 percent of drawings to be complete before a design can be considered stable enough to commit to additional significant investments of time , labor , material , and capital .

figure 5 shows the engineering drawing completion history of the f / a - 22 along with changes to development cost estimates as the program progressed .

an incomplete f / a - 22 critical design review contributed to several design and manufacturing problems that resulted in design changes , labor inefficiencies , cost increases , and schedule delays .

since the time of its critical design review , the f / a - 22's development costs have increased by about 50 percent .

the jsf program has the opportunity to avoid a similar situation .

we believe that , given the apparent design challenges at this point in the program , a delay to gather more knowledge before increasing the investment is warranted and may help to reduce turbulence later in development , before the program begins “bending metal” for development aircraft .

the jsf program is at a pivotal point , one in which the effort will turn from a paper design to actually manufacturing a product , something that requires considerably more money .

while we believe the program moved forward with too much technology risk up to this point , it has an opportunity now to achieve critical design knowledge by taking the time to develop a mature design before moving into manufacturing .

the program can use lessons learned from the f / a - 22 acquisition right now to keep on track and deliver an affordable , high quality weapon system sooner rather than later .

the jsf program is based on a complex set of relationships among all three services and governments and industries from eight foreign partners .

the program is expected to benefit the united states by reducing its share of development costs , increasing future aircraft sales , giving it access to foreign industrial capabilities , and improving interoperability among the services and allies .

for their part , partner governments expect to benefit from relationships with u.s. aerospace companies , access to jsf program data , and influence over aircraft requirements .

they will also benefit financially by obtaining waivers of nonrecurring aircraft costs on an aircraft they could otherwise not afford to develop on their own .

the partners expect a return on their investment through jsf contract awards for their industries that will improve their defense industrial capability , a critical condition for their participation .

they have agreed to contribute about $4.5 billion to the jsf development program and are expected to purchase several hundred aircraft once it enters production .

with these mutual benefits come challenges .

support for the program from our international partners hinges in large part on expectations for financial returns , technology transfer , and information sharing .

if these expectations are not met , that support could deteriorate .

in addition , a large number of export authorizations are needed to share information and execute contracts .

these authorizations must be done in a timely manner to maintain schedule and ensure competition .

finally , transfer of sensitive u.s. military technologies needed to achieve commonality and interoperability goals will push the boundaries of u.s. disclosure policies .

dod is not immune to efforts to address the fiscal imbalance confronting the nation and will continue to face challenges based on competing priorities , both within and external to its budget .

this will require decisions based on a sound and sustainable business case for dod's acquisition programs based on clear priorities , comprehensive needs assessments , and a thorough analysis of available resources .

in addition , it will require an acquisition process that provides for knowledge - based decisions at critical investment junctures in order to maximize available dollars .

dod has instituted a new acquisition policy that embraces evolutionary and knowledge - based acquisition concepts .

however , policy alone will not solve the problems dod faces .

this will also require disciplined actions on the part of dod's leadership to employ the concepts established in its new policy .

while it is too late for the f / a - 22 to go back and follow these concepts , there still is time to evaluate the need for additional aircraft ; over fifty f / a - 22's are presently on contract .

because of the nation's fiscal challenges , tough choices will need to be made regarding future spending priorities , including the remaining potential $40 billion investment in the f / a - 22 .

in light of this substantial investment and the many changes that have occurred in the f / a - 22 program , we believe decision makers would benefit from a new business case that justifies the need for the full air - to - air and air - to - ground capabilities and the quantities needed and affordable .

the jsf program has a greater opportunity to make critical investment decisions using a knowledge - based approach .

while the program started off with a high - risk approach by not maturing technologies before starting system development , it has the opportunity to manage the system development phase and stabilize the design before committing to large investments in manufacturing capability — tooling , labor , and facilities — to build test aircraft .

the jsf program is considering a delay in its critical design review to attain greater design stability in its airframe .

in addition to seeking greater design stability , leadership in dod can reap the benefits of its new acquisition policy by actively promoting and maintaining a disciplined approach throughout the remaining critical decision points over the next few years .

with these activities in place , dod will be in a better position to request continued jsf funding and support .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

if you have future questions about our work on the f / a - 22 or jsf , please call allen li at ( 202 ) 512-4841 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

