thank you for the opportunity to discuss acquisition management at the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , as well as to discuss some lessons learned from our prior work comparing the department of defense's ( dod ) acquisition practices to those of leading commercial companies .

as you know , we have highlighted dhs acquisition management issues in our high - risk list since 2005 .

over the past several years , our work has identified significant shortcomings in the department's ability to manage an expanding portfolio of major acquisitions , and in response to our recommendations , dhs has taken steps to improve acquisition management .

we believe it is important for dhs to continue to address these shortcomings because the department invests extensively in acquisition programs to help it execute its many critical missions .

dhs and its underlying components are acquiring systems to help secure the border , increase marine safety , screen travelers , enhance cyber security , improve disaster response , and execute a wide variety of other operations .

in 2011 , dhs reported to congress that it planned to ultimately invest $167 billion in its major acquisition programs .

in fiscal year 2013 alone , dhs reported it planned to spend more than $9.6 billion on these programs .

my statement today draws from our prior work on dhs acquisition management and leading commercial companies' approach to managing their large investments , work we have done in the context of dod's approach to managing its large acquisitions .

the statement also includes observations from our ongoing review of dhs's acquisition funding process , which we are conducting at the request of this subcommittee .

this statement discusses ( 1 ) dhs's acquisition policy and how it has been implemented ; and ( 2 ) dhs's mechanisms for managing emerging affordability issues .

for our prior work , we surveyed all 77 major acquisition program offices that dhs identified in 2011 and achieved a 92 percent response rate .

we also reviewed all available department - level acquisition decisions from november 2008 to april 2012 and interviewed acquisition officials at dhs headquarters and components .

to determine the extent to which dhs has policies in place to effectively manage individual acquisition programs , as well as the department's acquisition portfolio as a whole , we compared our key acquisition management practices to dhs acquisition policy , and identified the extent to which dhs has implemented its policy .

more detailed information on our scope and methodology for our prior work can be found in the relevant reports .

to support our ongoing audit , from march to september 2013 , we reviewed key documentation and interviewed acquisition and financial management officials at dhs headquarters and components to understand dhs's affordability issues and the department's plans to address these issues .

we are also following up on prior recommendations .

the work underlying this statement was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

dhs acquisition management directive 102-01 ( md 102 ) and an accompanying instruction manual establish the department's policies and processes for managing major acquisition programs .

while dhs has had an acquisition management policy in place since october 2004 , the department issued the initial version of md 102 in 2008.leaders in the department are responsible for acquisition management functions , including managing the resources needed to fund major programs .

dhs's chief acquisition officer — currently the under secretary for management ( usm ) — is responsible for the management and oversight of the department's acquisition policies and procedures .

the acquisition decision authority is responsible for approving the movement of programs through the acquisition life cycle at key milestone events .

the usm or deputy secretary serve as the decision authority for programs with life cycle cost estimates of $1 billion or greater , while the cognizant component acquisition executive may serve as the decision authority for a program with a lower cost estimate .

the dhs acquisition review board ( arb ) supports the acquisition decision authority by reviewing major acquisition programs for proper management , oversight , accountability , and alignment with the department's strategic functions at the key acquisition milestones and other meetings as needed .

the arb is supported by the office of program accountability and risk management ( parm ) , which reports to the usm and is responsible for dhs's overall acquisition governance process .

in march 2012 , parm issued its first quarterly program accountability report ( qpar ) , which provided an independent evaluation of major programs' health and risks .

since that time , parm has issued two additional qpars , most recently in july 2013 , and plans to issue a fourth by the end of september 2013 .

parm also prepares the comprehensive acquisition status reports , which are to be submitted to the appropriations committees with the president's budget proposal and updated quarterly .

the office of program analysis and evaluation ( pa&e ) , within the office of the chief financial officer , is responsible for advising the usm , among others , on resource allocation issues .

pa&e also oversees the development of the future years homeland security program ( fyhsp ) .

the fyhsp is dhs's 5-year funding plan for programs approved by the secretary that are to support the department's strategic plan .

dhs acquisition policy reflects many key program management practices intended to mitigate the risks of cost growth and schedule slips .

however , we previously found that the department did not implement the policy consistently .

officials explained that dhs's culture emphasized the need to rapidly execute missions more than sound acquisition management practices , and we found that senior leaders did not bring to bear the critical knowledge needed to accurately track program performance .

most notably , we found that most programs lacked approved acquisition program baselines , which are critical management tools that establish how systems will perform , when they will be delivered , and what they will cost .

we also reported that most of the department's major programs were at risk of cost growth and schedule slips as a result .

in our past work examining dod weapon acquisition issues and best practices for product development , we have found that leading commercial firms pursue an acquisition approach that is anchored in knowledge , whereby high levels of product knowledge are demonstrated by critical points in the acquisition process .

while dod's major acquisitions have unique aspects , our large body of work in this area has established knowledge - based principles that can be applied to government agencies and can lead to more effective use of taxpayer dollars .

a knowledge - based approach to capability development allows developers to be reasonably certain , at critical points in the acquisition life cycle , that their products are likely to meet established cost , schedule , and performance objectives .

this knowledge provides them with information needed to make sound investment decisions .

over the past several years , our work has emphasized the importance of obtaining key knowledge at critical points in major system acquisitions and , based on this work , we have identified eight key practice areas for program management .

these key practice areas are summarized in table 1 , along with our assessment of dhs's acquisition policy .

as indicated in table 1 , dhs acquisition policy establishes several key program - management practices through document requirements .

md 102 requires that major acquisition programs provide the arb documents demonstrating the critical knowledge needed to support effective decision making before progressing through the acquisition life cycle .

figure 1 identifies acquisition documents that must be approved at the department level and their corresponding key practice areas .

dhs acquisition policy has required these documents since november 2008 , but in september 2012 , we reported that the department generally had not implemented this policy as intended , and had not adhered to key program management practices .

for example , we reported that dhs had only approved 4 of 66 major programs' required documents in accordance with the policy .

see figure 2 .

in september 2012 , we reported that dhs leadership had , since 2008 , formally reviewed 49 of the 71 major programs for which officials had responded to our survey .

of those 49 programs , dhs permitted 43 programs to proceed with acquisition activities without verifying the programs had developed the knowledge required under md 102 .

additionally , we reported that most of dhs's major acquisition programs lacked approved acquisition program baselines , as required .

these baselines are critical tools for managing acquisition programs , as they are the agreement between program - , component - , and department - level officials , establishing how systems will perform , when they will be officials from half of the eight delivered , and what they will cost.components' acquisition offices we spoke with , as well as parm officials , noted that dhs's culture had emphasized the need to rapidly execute missions more than sound acquisition management practices .

parm officials explained that , in certain instances , programs were not capable of documenting knowledge , while in others , parm lacked the capacity to validate that the documented knowledge was adequate .

as a result , we reported that senior leaders lacked the critical knowledge needed to accurately track program performance , and that most of the department's major programs were at risk of cost growth and schedule slips .

we also reported that dhs's lack of reliable performance data not only hindered its internal acquisition management efforts , but also limited congressional oversight .

we made five recommendations to the secretary of homeland security at that time , identifying specific actions dhs should take to mitigate the risk of poor acquisition outcomes and strengthen the department's investment management activities .

dhs concurred with all five recommendations , and is taking steps to address them , most notably through policy updates .

since that time , we have continued to assess dhs's acquisition management activities and the reliability of the department's performance data .

we currently have a review underway for this subcommittee assessing the extent to which dhs is executing effective executive oversight and governance ( including the quality of the data used ) of a major effort to modernize an information technology system , tecs .

tecs is a major border enforcement system used for preventing terrorism , providing border security and law enforcement information about people who are inadmissible or may pose a threat to the security of the united states .

we are ( 1 ) determining the status of the modernization effort , including what has been deployed and implemented to date , as well as the extent to which the modernization is meeting its cost and schedule commitments , including the quality of schedule estimates ; and ( 2 ) assessing requirements management and risk management practices .

we plan to issue our report in early november .

according to dhs officials , its efforts to implement the department's acquisition policy were complicated by the large number of programs initiated before the department was created , including 11 programs that parm officials told us in 2012 had been fielded and were in the sustainment phase when md 102 was signed.work , we found that , in may 2013 , the usm waived the acquisition documentation requirements for 42 major acquisition programs that he identified as having been already fielded for operational use when md 102 was issued in 2008 .

in a memo implementing the waiver , the usm explained that it would be cost prohibitive and inefficient to recreate documentation for previous acquisition phases .

however , he stated that the programs will continue to be monitored , and that they must comply with md 102 if any action is taken that materially impacts the scope of the current program , such as a major modernization or new acquisition .

we plan to obtain more information on this decision and its effect on the department's management of its major acquisitions .

in september 2012 , we reported that most of dhs's major acquisition programs cost more than expected , took longer to deploy than planned , or delivered less capability than promised .

we reported that these outcomes were largely the result of dhs's lack of adherence to key knowledge - based program management practices .

as part of our ongoing work , we analyzed a recent parm assessment that suggests many of the department's major acquisition programs are continuing to struggle .

in its july 2013 quarterly program assessment , parm reported that it had assessed 112 major acquisition programs .

parm reported that 37 percent of the programs experienced no cost variance at the end of fiscal year 2012 , but it also reported that a large percentage of the programs were experiencing cost or schedule variances at that time .

see table 2 .

however , as we reported in september 2012 , dhs acquisition programs generally did not have the reliable cost estimates and realistic schedules needed to accurately assess program performance .

we will continue to track dhs's efforts to improve the quality of its program assessments moving forward .

we have previously reported that cost growth and schedule slips at the individual program level complicated dhs's efforts to manage its investment portfolio as a whole .

when programs encountered setbacks , the department often redirected funding to troubled programs at the expense of others , which in turn were more likely to struggle .

dhs's chief financial officer recently issued a memo stating that dhs faced a 30 percent gap between funding requirements for major acquisition programs and available resources .

dhs has efforts underway to develop a more disciplined and strategic portfolio management approach , but the department has not yet developed key portfolio management policies and processes that could help the department address its affordability issues , and dhs's primary portfolio management initiative may not be fully implemented for several years .

in september 2012 , we noted that dhs's acquisition portfolio may not be affordable .

that is , the department may have to pay more than expected for less capability than promised , and this could ultimately hinder dhs's day - to - day operations.dhs's chief financial officer issued an internal memo in december 2012 , shortly after our report was issued , stating that the aggregate 5- year funding requirements for major acquisitions would likely exceed available resources by approximately 30 percent .

this acknowledgment was a positive step toward addressing the department's challenges , in that it clearly identified the need to improve the affordability of the department's major acquisition portfolio .

additionally , the chief financial officer has required component senior financial officers to certify that they have reviewed and validated all current - , prior - , and future - year funding information presented in arb materials , and ensure it is consistent with the fyhsp .

additionally , through our ongoing work , pa&e officials told us that the magnitude of the actual funding gap may be even greater than suggested because only a small portion of the cost estimates that informed the chief financial officer's analysis had been approved at the department level , and expected costs may increase as dhs improves the quality of the estimates .

this is a concern we share .

while holding components accountable is important , without validated and department - approved documents — such as acquisition program baselines and life cycle cost estimates — efforts to fully understand and address the department's overall funding gap will be hindered .

in september 2012 , we reported that dhs largely made investment decisions on a program - by - program and component - by - component basis .

dhs did not have a process to systematically prioritize its major investments to ensure that the department's acquisition portfolio was consistent with anticipated resource constraints .

in our work at dod , we have found this approach hinders efforts to achieve a balanced mix of programs that are affordable and feasible and that provide the greatest return on investment .

in our past work focused on improving weapon system acquisitions , we found that successful commercial companies use a disciplined and integrated approach to prioritize needs and allocate resources .

as a result , they can avoid pursuing more projects than their resources can support , and better optimize the return on their investment .

this approach , known as portfolio management , requires companies to view each of their investments as contributing to a collective whole , rather than as independent and unrelated .

with an enterprise perspective , companies can effectively ( 1 ) identify and prioritize opportunities , and ( 2 ) allocate available resources to support the highest priority — or most promising — investment opportunities .

over the past several years , we have examined the practices that private and public sector entities use to achieve a balanced mix of new projects , and based on this work , we have identified key practice areas for portfolio management .

one i would like to highlight today is that investments should be ranked and selected using a disciplined process to assess the costs , benefits , and risks of alternative products to ensure transparency and comparability across alternatives .

in this regard , dhs established the joint requirements council ( jrc ) in 2003 , to identify crosscutting opportunities and common requirements among dhs components and help determine how dhs should use its resources .

but the jrc stopped meeting in 2006 after the chair was assigned to other duties within the department .

in 2008 , we recommended that it be reinstated , or that dhs establish another joint requirements oversight board , and dhs officials recognized that strengthening the jrc was a top priority .

through our ongoing work , we have identified that dhs recently piloted a capabilities and requirements council ( crc ) to serve in a similar role as the jrc .

the crc began reviewing a portfolio of cyber capabilities in the summer of 2013 .

the pilot is intended to inform the department's fiscal year 2015 budget request ; therefore , it is too soon to assess the outcomes of this new oversight body .

it is also unknown at this time how dhs will sustain the crc over time or what its outcomes will be .

in addition to private and public sector practices , which we discuss above , our prior work at dod has identified an oversight body similar to the crc's expected function .

the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) has a number of statutory responsibilities related to the identification , validation , and prioritization of joint military requirements .

this body , which has been required by law since 1997 , and its supporting organizations review requirements documents several times per year , prior to major defense acquisition programs' key milestones .

through these reviews , proposed acquisition programs are scrutinized prior to their initiation and before decisions are made to begin production .

the jroc also takes measures to help ensure the programs are affordable .

in 2011 , we reported that the jroc required the military services to show that their proposed programs were fully funded before it validated requirements for five of the seven proposed programs we reviewed .

the two other proposed programs were funded at more than 97 and 99 percent , respectively .

this full funding requirement is similar to the funding certification requirement dhs's cfo established in december 2012 .

while some dod acquisition programs continue to experience cost growth and schedule delays , as identified in our annual report on weapon systems acquisitions , the department does have in place mechanisms that dhs could adopt to improve the affordability of its acquisition portfolio , and put its acquisition programs in a better position to achieve successful outcomes .

in september 2012 , we reported that the crc is one of several new councils and offices that dhs would establish as part of its integrated investment life cycle model ( iilcm ) , which is intended to improve portfolio management at dhs through the identification of priorities and capability gaps .

this model , which the department proposed in january 2011 , would provide a framework for information to flow between councils and offices responsible for strategic direction , requirements development , resource allocation , and program governance .

dhs explained that the iilcm would ensure that mission needs drive investment decisions .

while the iilcm , as envisioned , could improve dhs management decisions by better linking missions to acquisition outcomes , our ongoing work indicates that its full implementation may be several years away .

from january 2011 to june 2012 , the schedule for initiating iilcm operations slipped by a year , and in may 2013 , a dhs official responsible for the iilcm told us he was unsure when the iilcm would be fully operational .

we also found that some component acquisition officials are not aware of how the iilcm would apply to their own acquisition portfolios .

some of the officials we interviewed told us that dhs leadership needs to conduct more outreach and training about the iilcm and how it is expected to work , and a dhs headquarters official told us that the department is in the process of implementing an initial department - wide iilcm communications strategy .

we will continue to assess the department's progress in implementing what it views as a very important management model .

chairman duncan , ranking member barber , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact michele mackin at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony include katherine trimble ( assistant director ) , nate tranquilli , steve marchesani , mara mcmillen , and sylvia schatz .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

