i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the recent increase in the number of lawsuits filed by individuals or groups alleging violations of the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

the flsa sets minimum wage and overtime pay standards applicable to most u.s. workers .

the department of labor's ( dol ) wage and hour division ( whd ) is responsible for ensuring that employers comply with the flsa , and workers may also file private lawsuits to recover wages they claim they are owed because of a violation of the act , such as an employer's failure to pay overtime compensation to workers who are entitled to it .

in recent years , the number of flsa lawsuits has increased and questions have been raised about the effect of flsa litigation on employers and workers and about whd's enforcement and compliance assistance efforts .

whd enforces the flsa by conducting investigations , assessing penalties , supervising payment of back wages , and bringing suit in court on behalf of employees .

in addition to responding to complaints of alleged flsa violations it receives from workers or their representatives , whd also initiates enforcement actions in an effort to target employers likely to violate the flsa and where workers may be particularly vulnerable .

however , whd cannot investigate all of the thousands of complaints it receives each year because of its limited capacity .

therefore , the agency informs workers whose complaints of flsa violations are not investigated or otherwise resolved by whd of their right to file a lawsuit .

workers filing an flsa lawsuit may file in one of the 94 federal district courts , which are divided into 12 regional circuits across the country .

whd encourages compliance with the flsa by providing training for employers and workers and creating online tools and fact sheets that explain the requirements of the law and related regulations , among other efforts .

the agency refers to these efforts collectively as compliance assistance .

one form of flsa compliance assistance whd provides is written interpretive guidance that attempts to clarify the agency's interpretation of a statutory or regulatory provision .

whd disseminates this guidance to those who request it — such as employers and workers — and posts it on the whd website for public use .

whd's interpretive guidance includes opinion letters which apply to a specific situation .

in 2010 , whd stopped issuing opinion letters and indicated that it would instead provide administrator interpretations , which are more broadly applicable .

my statement today examines what is known about the number of flsa lawsuits filed and how whd plans its enforcement and compliance assistance efforts .

the statement is based on a report we issued in december 2013 .

to conduct our prior work , we analyzed federal district court data compiled by the federal judicial center — the research and education agency of the federal judicial system — from fiscal years 1991 to 2012 .

to assess the reliability of the data we obtained from the federal judicial center , we reviewed documentation related to the collection and processing of the data , interviewed officials at the administrative office of the u.s. courts and the federal judicial center , and performed electronic testing to identify any missing data , outliers , and obvious errors .

we determined that the data included in our report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

in addition , we reviewed selected documents from a nationally representative sample of 97 flsa lawsuits filed in federal all estimates from our sample had a 95 district court in fiscal year 2012.percent confidence interval of within plus or minus 10 percentage points .

we also reviewed dol's planning and performance documents and interviewed dol officials , as well as stakeholders , including federal judges , plaintiff and defense attorneys who specialize in flsa cases , officials from organizations representing workers and employers , and academics about flsa litigation trends and whd's enforcement and compliance assistance efforts .

further details on our scope and methodology are available in the previously published report .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

over the past two decades — from 1991 through 2012 — there was a substantial increase in the number of flsa lawsuits filed , with most of the increase occurring in the period from fiscal year 2001 through 2012 .

as shown in figure 1 , in 1991 , 1,327 lawsuits were filed ; in 2012 , that number had increased over 500 percent to 8,148 .

flsa lawsuits can be filed by dol on behalf of employees or by private individuals .

private flsa lawsuits can either be filed by individuals or on behalf of a group of individuals in a type of lawsuit known as a “collective action” .

the court will generally certify whether a lawsuit meets the requirements to proceed as a collective action .

the court may deny certification to a proposed collective action or decertify an existing collective action if the court determines that the plaintiffs are not “similarly situated” with respect to the factual and legal issues to be decided .

in such cases , the court may permit the members to individually file private flsa lawsuits .

collective actions can serve to reduce the burden on courts and protect plaintiffs by reducing costs for individuals and incentivizing attorneys to represent workers in pursuit of claims under the law .

they may also protect employers from facing the burden of many individual lawsuits ; however , they can also be costly to employers because they may result in large amounts of damages .

for fiscal year 2012 , we found that an estimated 58 percent of the flsa lawsuits filed in federal district court were filed individually , and 40 percent were filed as collective actions .

an estimated 16 percent of the flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 ( about a quarter of all individually - filed lawsuits ) , however , were originally part of a collective action that was decertified ( see fig .

2 ) .

federal courts in most states experienced increases in the number of flsa lawsuits filed between 1991 and 2012 , but large increases were concentrated in a few states , including florida , new york , and alabama .

of all flsa lawsuits filed since 2001 , more than half were filed in these three states , and in 2012 , about 43 percent of all flsa lawsuits were filed in florida ( 33 percent ) or new york ( 10 percent ) .

in both florida and new york , growth in the number of flsa lawsuits filed was generally steady , while changes in alabama involved sharp increases in fiscal years 2007 and 2012 with far fewer lawsuits filed in other years ( see fig .

3 ) .

each spike in alabama coincided with the decertification of at least one large collective action , which likely resulted in multiple individual lawsuits .

for example , in fiscal year 2007 , 2,496 flsa lawsuits ( about one - third of all flsa lawsuits ) were filed in alabama , up from 48 flsa lawsuits filed in alabama in fiscal year 2006 .

in august 2006 , a federal district court in alabama decertified a collective action filed by managers of dollar general stores .

in its motion to decertify , the defendant estimated the collective to contain approximately 2,470 plaintiffs .

in fiscal year 2012 , an estimated 97 percent of flsa lawsuits were filed against private sector employers , and an estimated 57 percent of flsa lawsuits were filed against employers in four industry areas: accommodations and food services ; manufacturing ; construction ; and “other services” , which includes services such as laundry services , domestic work , and nail salons .

almost one - quarter of all flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 ( an estimated 23 percent ) were filed by workers in the accommodations and food service industry , which includes hotels , restaurants , and bars .

at the same time , almost 20 percent of flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 were filed by workers in the manufacturing industry .

in our sample , most of the lawsuits involving the manufacturing industry were filed by workers in the automobile manufacturing industry in alabama , and most were individual lawsuits filed by workers who were originally part of one of two collective actions that had been decertified .

flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 included a variety of different types of alleged flsa violations and many included allegations of more than one type of violation .

an estimated 95 percent of the flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 alleged violations of the flsa's overtime provision , which requires certain types of workers to be paid at one and a half times their regular rate for any hours worked over 40 during a workweek .

almost one - third of the lawsuits contained allegations that the worker or workers were not paid the federal minimum wage .

we also identified more specific allegations about how workers claimed their employers violated the flsa .

for example , nearly 30 percent of the lawsuits contained allegations that workers were required to work “off - the - clock” so that they would not need to be paid for that time .

in addition , the majority of lawsuits contained other flsa allegations , such as that the employer failed to keep proper records of hours worked by the employees , failed to post or provide information about the flsa , as required , or violated requirements pertaining to tipped workers such as restaurant wait staff ( see fig .

4 ) .

an estimated 14 percent of flsa lawsuits filed in federal district court in fiscal year 2012 included an allegation of retaliation .

limitations for filing an flsa claim is 2 years ( 3 years if the violation is “willful” ) , new york state law provides a 6-year statute of limitations for filing state wage and hour lawsuits .

a longer statute of limitations may increase potential financial damages in such cases because more pay periods are involved and because more workers may be involved .

adding a new york state wage and hour claim to an flsa lawsuit in federal court could expand the potential damages , which , according to several stakeholders , may influence decisions about where and whether to file a lawsuit .

in addition , according to multiple stakeholders we interviewed , because florida lacks a state overtime law , those who wish to file a lawsuit seeking overtime compensation generally must do so under the flsa .

ambiguity in applying the law and regulations .

ambiguity in applying the flsa statute or regulations — particularly the exemption for executive , administrative , and professional workers — was cited as a factor by a number of stakeholders .

in 2004 , dol issued a final rule updating and revising its regulations in an attempt to clarify this exemption and provided guidance about the changes , but a few stakeholders told us there is still significant confusion among employers about which workers should be classified as exempt under these categories .

industry trends .

as mentioned previously , about one - quarter of flsa lawsuits filed in fiscal year 2012 were filed by workers in the accommodations and food service industry .

nationally , service jobs , including those in the leisure and hospitality industry , increased from 2000 to 2010 , while most other industries lost jobs during that period .

federal judges in new york and florida attributed some of the concentration of such litigation in their districts to the large number of restaurants and other service industry jobs in which wage and hour violations are more common than in some other industries .

an academic who focuses on labor and employment relations told us that changes in the management structure in the retail and restaurant industry may have contributed to the rise in flsa lawsuits .

for example , frontline managers who were once exempt have become nonexempt as their nonmanagerial duties have increased as a portion of their overall duties .

we also reviewed dol's annual process for determining how to target its enforcement and compliance assistance resources .

the agency targets industries for enforcement that , according to its recent enforcement data , have a higher likelihood of flsa violations , along with other factors .

in addition , according to whd internal guidance , the agency's annual enforcement plans should contain strategies to engage related stakeholders in preventing such violations .

for example , if a whd office plans to investigate restaurants to identify potential violations of the flsa , it should also develop strategies to engage restaurant trade associations about flsa - related issues so that these stakeholders can help bring about compliance in the industry .

however , dol does not compile and analyze relevant data , such as information on the subjects or the number of requests for assistance it receives from employers and workers , to help determine what additional or revised guidance employers may need to help them comply with the in developing its guidance on the flsa , whd does not use a flsa.systematic approach that includes analyzing this type of data .

in addition , whd does not have a routine , data - based process for assessing the adequacy of its guidance .

for example , whd does not analyze trends in the types of flsa - related questions it receives .

this type of information could be used to develop new guidance or improve the guidance whd provides to employers and workers on the requirements of the flsa .

because of these issues , we recommended that whd develop a systematic approach for identifying areas of confusion about the requirements of the flsa that contribute to possible violations and improving the guidance it provides to employers and workers in those areas .

this approach could include compiling and analyzing data on requests for guidance on issues related to the flsa , and gathering and using input from flsa stakeholders or other users of existing guidance through an advisory panel or other means .

while improved dol guidance on the flsa might not affect the number of lawsuits filed , it could increase the efficiency and effectiveness of its efforts to help employers voluntarily comply with the flsa .

a clearer picture of the needs of employers and workers would allow whd to more efficiently design and target its compliance assistance efforts , which may , in turn , result in fewer flsa violations .

whd agreed with our recommendation that the agency develop a systematic approach for identifying and considering areas of confusion that contribute to possible flsa violations to help inform the development and assessment of its guidance .

whd stated that it is in the process of developing systems to further analyze trends in communications received from stakeholders such as workers and employers and will include findings from this analysis as part of its process for developing new or revised guidance .

in closing , while there has been a significant increase in flsa lawsuits over the last decade , it is difficult to determine the reasons for the increase .

it could suggest that flsa violations have become more prevalent , that flsa violations have been reported and pursued more frequently than before , or a combination of the two .

it is also difficult to determine the effect that the increase in flsa lawsuits has had on employers and their ability to hire workers .

however , the ability of workers to bring such suits is an integral part of flsa enforcement because of the limits on dol's capacity to ensure that all employers are in compliance with the flsa .

chairman walberg , ranking member courtney , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have .

for further information regarding this statement , please contact andrew sherrill at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or sherrilla@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony include betty ward - zukerman ( assistant director ) , catherine roark ( analyst in charge ) , david barish , james bennett , sarah cornetto , joel green , kathy leslie , ying long , sheila mccoy , jean mcsween , and amber yancey - carroll .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

