the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) established the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program — a loan program intended to foster the creation of new , consumer - governed , nonprofit health insurance issuers , known as co - ops , to offer qualified health plans to individuals and small employers .

for this purpose , ppaca appropriated funding for the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that administers the co - op program , to award loans totaling more than $2.4 billion .

the funding disbursed under these loans helped establish 23 co - ops that began offering health insurance in 2014 .

 ( see appendix i for a list of the 23 co - ops. ) .

the co - op program is intended to enhance competition in the states' markets for health insurance sold directly to individuals and small employers — which potentially could reduce health plan premiums — while improving choice for consumers and encouraging accountability to members .

however , 12 co - ops ceased operations on or before january 1 , 2016 , renewing questions previously raised about the long - term sustainability of the co - ops and the effects that they will ultimately have on states' health insurance markets .

such questions led to our first review of the co - op program .

in april 2015 , we reported that as of january 2015 , cms disbursed more than two - thirds of the $2.4 billion in co - op program loans awarded .

we also reported that while the average premiums for co - op health plans were generally lower than those for other issuers , most co - ops did not meet their initial enrollment projections during the first enrollment period ( october 1 , 2013 , through march 31 , 2014 ) .

given that questions about co - op sustainability and their ultimate impact continue , you asked us as the first co - op began to cease operations in early 2015 to conduct a follow - up review of the co - op program .

in this report , we examine the following 1 .

how does cms monitor the co - ops' performance and sustainability ? .

2 .

how did premiums for co - op health plans change from 2014 to 2015 , and in 2015 , how did they compare to premiums for other health plans ? .

3 .

how did enrollment in co - op health plans change from 2014 to 2015 , and in 2015 , how did it compare to projections ? .

to examine how cms monitors the co - ops' performance and sustainability , we reviewed cms policies and procedures regarding its monitoring activities , as well as documentation from cms related to the implementation of those activities .

in particular , we reviewed documentation regarding eight co - ops selected to reflect differences in the total amount of loan awards , the total amount of loan awards disbursed , actual enrollment in early 2015 , geographic location , and the type of health insurance exchange ( i.e. , a federally facilitated or state - based exchange ) operated in the state or states where the co - op offered health plans .

we also interviewed officials from cms regarding the agency's oversight activities from 2013 , prior to the first enrollment period , through the beginning of the open enrollment period in november 2015 , including their monitoring of the 12 co - ops that ceased operations and other co - ops the agency considered at risk .

we assessed cms monitoring activities in the context of internal control standards .

to examine how 2015 premiums for co - op health plans differed from 2014 premiums , we analyzed data regarding premiums on the health insurance exchanges of the 23 states where co - ops operated in 2015 .

this data included premium data that we obtained from cms for the 16 states that either had a federally facilitated exchange or a federally supported state - based exchange where co - ops participated during the 2015 open enrollment period ( november 15 , 2014 , through february 15 , 2015 ) .

we also obtained comparable premium data from the 7 states that had state - based exchanges where co - ops participated .

for the 20 states where co - ops offered health plans on an exchange during both the 2015 open enrollment period and the 2014 open enrollment period ( october 1 , 2013 , through march 31 , 2014 ) , we calculated and compared the state - wide average co - op premium for silver tier health plans — the most commonly selected of the five levels of benefit coverage , including plans specified by metal level , as well as catastrophic plans — for 30-year - old individuals in 2014 and 2015 .

to examine how 2015 premiums for co - op health plans compared to the premiums for other health plans in the 23 states where co - ops operated in 2015 , we calculated and compared the average co - op premium with the average premium for other health plans for each rating area ( geographical areas established by states and used , in part , by issuers to set premium rates ) and for each health plan tier .

we did this for eight different categories of policyholder: 30 , 40 , and 60-year - old individuals and couples , and 30 and 50-year - old couples with two children .

to examine how enrollment in co - op health plans changed from 2014 to 2015 , we obtained data from the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) on quarterly statements dated june 30 , 2015 , and annual statements dated december 31 , 2014 , filed by each of the co - ops that operated in 2015 .

we then compared enrollment as of june 30 , 2014 , to enrollment as of june 30 , 2015 , for each co - op .

to examine how co - op 2015 enrollments compared to projections , we obtained from cms estimates of projected enrollment made by each co - op .

we compared actual 2015 enrollment as of june 30 , 2015 , to the co - ops' estimates of projected enrollment .

to assess the reliability of the data we obtained from cms on co - op program loans , co - op and other issuer premiums , and co - op enrollment , we performed manual and electronic testing to identify missing data and other anomalies , and interviewed agency officials to confirm our understanding of the data .

to assess the reliability of the data we obtained from states on co - op and other issuer premiums , we performed manual and electronic testing to identify missing data and other anomalies , and followed up with state officials and incorporated corrections as necessary .

to assess the reliability of the co - op enrollment data we obtained from naic , we compared naic data to similar data obtained from cms for consistency .

based on these procedures , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to march 2016 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

ppaca established certain conditions governing participation in the co - op program .

specifically , ppaca defines a co - op as a health insurance issuer organized under state law as a nonprofit , member corporation of which the activities substantially consist of the issuance of qualified health plans in the individual and small group markets in the state where the co - op is licensed to issue such plans .

ppaca prohibits organizations that were health insurance issuers on july 16 , 2009 , or sponsored by a state or local government , from participating in the co - op program .

ppaca also requires that ( 1 ) governance of a co - op be subject to a majority vote of its members ; ( 2 ) the governing documents of a co - op incorporate ethics and conflict of interest standards protecting against insurance industry involvement and interference ; and ( 3 ) the operation of a co - op have a strong consumer focus , including timeliness , responsiveness , and accountability to its members .

consistent with ppaca , cms established two types of co - op program loans: start - up loans and solvency loans .

start - up loans cover approved start - up costs including salaries and wages , fringe benefits , consultant costs , equipment , supplies , staff travel , and certain indirect costs .

disbursements were made according to a schedule established in the loan agreement between cms and the loan recipient , and were contingent upon the loan recipient's achievement of program milestones .

milestones included obtaining health insurance licensure and submitting timely reporting information in the required format .

each disbursement for a start - up loan must be repaid within 5 years of the disbursement date .

solvency loans assist co - ops in meeting states' solvency and reserve requirements .

co - ops may request disbursements of solvency loans “as needed” to meet these requirements and obligations under their loan agreement with cms .

reasons for a co - op's need for additional solvency disbursements could include enrollment growth or higher than anticipated claims from members .

co - op requests are subject to cms review of necessity and sufficiency .

each disbursement of a solvency loan must be repaid within 15 years of the disbursement date .

ppaca appropriated $6 billion for the co - op program ; however , a series of subsequent laws reduced the appropriation by about 80 percent and limited program participation .

specifically , in 2011 , two separate appropriations acts rescinded $2.6 billion of the original co - op appropriation .

additionally , in january 2013 , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 rescinded $2.3 billion in unobligated co - op program appropriations , and as a result , about $1.1 billion of the original appropriation was available for the costs associated with the $2.4 billion in loans awarded and program administration .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 transferred any remaining appropriations to a contingency fund for cms to provide assistance and oversight to co - op loan awardees , which meant that no additional co - ops could be funded through the co - op program .

the participation of co - ops in states' health insurance exchanges has varied since their establishment: for 2014 , 22 co - ops offered health plans on the health insurance exchanges of 22 states .

one co - op participated in both the iowa and the nebraska exchanges , and two co - ops offered health plans on the exchange in oregon .

the co - op for ohio offered plans off the exchange , but did not participate in the state's exchange .

for 2015 , 22 co - ops offered health plans on the exchanges of 23 states .

while the ohio co - op participated in the exchange for ohio for the first time , the co - op that offered plans on both the iowa and the nebraska exchanges withdrew from participation .

in addition , the co - ops in maine and massachusetts both expanded to the new hampshire exchange and the co - op from montana expanded to the idaho exchange .

for 2016 , 11 co - ops continued to offer health plans on the exchanges of 13 states as of january 4 , 2016 .

the co - ops that offered health plans in arizona , colorado , kentucky , louisiana , michigan , nevada , new york , south carolina , tennessee , and utah , and one of the co - ops that offered health plans in oregon , ceased operations on or before january 1 , 2016 .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

cms awarded the 11 co - ops that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , about $1.2 billion in combined start - up and solvency loans , and awarded about the same amount to the 12 co - ops that ceased operations .

for the 11 co - ops that continued to operate , cms disbursed , as of november 2015 , about $897 million ( 74 percent ) of the co - op program loans awarded .

specifically , it disbursed 100 percent of the loans awarded to 2 co - ops , and from 57 percent to 91 percent of the loans awarded to the other 9 co - ops .

this range primarily reflects differences in the percentage of solvency loan awards disbursed to each co - op , as disbursements of the start - up loan awards totaled nearly 100 percent .

disbursements of solvency loan awards to the 9 co - ops that received less than 100 percent of their awards ranged from 49 percent to 89 percent .

for the 12 co - ops that ceased operations , cms had disbursed 100 percent of the loan awards to 8 co - ops , while the percentage disbursed to the other 4 co - ops ranged from 84 percent to 98 percent .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

cms and state regulators have different , but complementary , roles for the co - op program .

as the agency that administers the co - op program , cms is responsible for interpreting statutory requirements and issuing regulations regarding co - op program eligibility , standards , and loan terms ; soliciting and approving loan applications of qualified applicants ; determining loan award amounts and negotiating the related loan establishing and updating co - op program policy , procedures , and approving the disbursement of loan funds to co - ops ; and monitoring co - op financial controls and compliance with applicable statutory requirements and related regulations , loan agreements , and co - op program policy and guidance .

while cms has oversight responsibilities for the co - op program , state regulators have primary oversight authority of the co - ops as health insurance issuers .

this authority includes issuing and revoking licenses to offer health plans , monitoring issuers' financial solvency and market conduct , as well as reviewing and approving premium rates and policy and contract forms .

cms requires co - ops to report any requirements from and meetings with state regulators regarding their oversight to cms .

in addition , according to a cms official , the agency has coordinated oversight activities with state regulators when appropriate .

ppaca established rules governing how issuers , including co - ops , may set premium rates .

for example , while issuers may not consider gender or health status in setting premiums , issuers may consider family size , age , and tobacco use .

also , issuers may vary premiums based on areas of residence .

states have the authority to use counties , metropolitan statistical areas , zip codes , or any combination of the three in establishing geographic locations across which premiums may vary , known as rating areas .

the number of rating areas per state varies , ranging from a low of 1 to a high of 67 .

most states have 10 or fewer rating areas .

ppaca also requires that coverage sold include certain categories of benefits at standardized levels of coverage specified by metal level — bronze , silver , gold , and platinum .

each metal level corresponds to an actuarial value — the proportion of allowable charges that a health plan , as opposed to the consumer , is expected to pay on average .

health plans within a metal level have the same actuarial value , while plans from different metal levels have different actuarial values and pay a higher or lower proportion of allowable charges .

for example , a gold health plan is more generous overall than a bronze health plan .

actuarial values for health plans under ppaca range from 60 to 90 percent by metal level as follows: bronze ( 60 percent ) , silver ( 70 percent ) , gold ( 80 percent ) , or platinum ( 90 percent ) .

issuers may also offer “catastrophic” health plans to individuals under 30 and individuals exempt from the individual mandate .

catastrophic plans have actuarial values that are less than what is required to meet any of the other metal levels .

although these plans are required to cover three primary care visits and preventive services at no cost , they generally do not cover costs for other health care services until a high deductible is met .

some ppaca provisions , such as those that prohibit issuers from considering gender and health status in setting premiums and from denying coverage based on health status , reduced issuers' ability to mitigate the risk of high - cost enrollees .

to limit the increased risk that issuers could face , ppaca also established three risk mitigation programs: a permanent “risk adjustment” program and two temporary programs , “reinsurance” and “risk corridors” .

each of these programs uses a different mechanism intended to both improve the functioning of the health insurance markets and stabilize the premiums that issuers charge for health coverage .

for example , the risk adjustment program transfers funds from issuers with lower risk enrollees to those with higher risk enrollees , and the risk corridor program transfers funds from issuers with high profits to those with high losses .

since it began awarding co - op loans , cms's oversight has evolved from monitoring the establishment of the co - ops to monitoring their performance and sustainability .

cms also refined its monitoring activities by formalizing a framework for responding to issues at specific co - ops , and it continues to adjust its monitoring as some co - ops have ceased operations .

cms's initial activities to monitor the co - ops , starting when it began awarding co - op loans in early 2012 , tracked their progress in becoming health insurance issuers ( for example , establishing provider networks , arranging appropriate office space , and filling key management positions ) and their compliance with program requirements ( for example , establishing governance subject to a majority vote of its members and incorporating ethics and conflict - of - interest standards ) .

during this initial period , cms established two core monitoring activities to be conducted by a cms account manager — a primary point of contact at cms who is responsible for the day - to - day monitoring of individual co - ops .

these two core activities were routine teleconferences with co - ops .

the account manager participated in routine teleconferences with key stakeholders from each co - op .

key co - op stakeholders could have , for example , included the chief executive officer , chief financial officer , chief operating officer , or the chief information officer .

cms policy initially required that these meetings take place on at least a bi - weekly basis .

according to cms officials , the frequency of these meetings varied across co - ops depending on the progress demonstrated by the co - op .

items discussed during these meetings could have , for example , included the co - op's implementation of its business plan or progress in achieving the milestones of its disbursement schedule , as well as any challenges , issues , concerns , and questions the co - op had .

cms account managers maintained documentation of these teleconferences electronically .

standard reporting .

cms required each co - op to submit standard reports that provide financial and other performance related information .

 ( see table 1. ) .

cms account managers tracked the timely submission and completeness of each report .

reports submitted by the co - op were maintained electronically for cms officials to review , as needed .

in addition , cms hired an independent auditor to review each co - op's compliance with its loan agreement ; key federal and state requirements , such as those related to governance of the co - op , the use of loan funding , types of investments ; and the documentation that supported financial reporting .

cms officials stated that these reviews were completed in 2013 and 2014 .

according to officials , cms used the information obtained from these initial monitoring activities to assess loan recipients' progress in establishing start - up health insurance issuers and compliance with co - op program requirements .

from the time loans were granted through november 2014 , if there was a problem that presented a significant risk to a recipient's viability or a pattern of noncompliance with program requirements , cms required an improvement plan .

cms policy states that an improvement plan could include ( 1 ) a corrective action plan to resolve noncompliance with program requirements or the terms and conditions of a loan agreement ; ( 2 ) an enhanced oversight plan requiring stronger and more frequent cms review of operations and financial status ; ( 3 ) technical assistance to help improve performance , meet program requirements , or fulfill terms and conditions of the loan agreement ; or ( 4 ) withholding of loan disbursements until milestones were achieved .

according to cms officials , the agency required improvement plans for five different co - ops during this time period .

officials stated that these plans generally focused on issues with meeting start - up milestones , including the co - op's capability to obtain licensure or comply with program requirements when establishing contractual relationships with providers or vendors for necessary services , such as information technology .

as co - ops began enrolling members , cms supplemented its initial monitoring activities with additional tools to evaluate co - op performance and sustainability .

cms also formalized a framework for responding to financial or operational issues identified at specific co - ops and enhanced its reporting requirements to support the newly developed tools .

cms officials told us that they expect to monitor co - ops that have ceased operations to the extent possible .

cms developed two tools that analyze enrollment and financial data , and other information collected from the co - ops: direct analysis .

cms officials developed a tool to analyze various aspects of performance , including enrollment , net income , premium revenues , claims and administrative expenses , and financial information related to risk mitigation programs and reserves .

according to cms officials , they conduct this analysis on a quarterly basis and compare the information with co - op projections and — when possible — to industry benchmarks .

according to cms officials , if direct analysis indicates that an individual co - op deviates appreciably from projections or otherwise signals a potential difficulty , then cms officials perform additional review and analyses .

cms officials also noted that the direct analysis may , at times , be focused on particular areas of concerns .

for example , during 2015 , cms looked closely at the co - ops' expectations related to risk mitigation programs: cms officials monitored the extent to which each co - op's financial projections relied on estimated payments from risk mitigation programs .

cms officials told us that because of these analyses , they were able to identify co - ops that would likely face increased financial difficulties when the agency announced on october 1 , 2015 , that issuers eligible for payments through the risk corridor program would likely receive only a portion — 12.6 percent — of the total amounts they claimed .

cms officials told us that they worked with these co - ops to address concerns associated with these payments .

risk assessment .

cms also developed a tool to assess risk based on data collected through its established monitoring activities .

cms officials told us that they use this tool on a quarterly basis to assess risk across seven factors: 1 .

long - term sustainability .

cms assesses risk based on whether a co - op expects to break even financially by 2017 and , if so , the extent to which a co - op expects to repay start - up loans while maintaining required reserve levels .

cms officials told us that although some viable co - ops might not expect to break even by 2017 , they selected this date , in part , to provide a common basis for developing a risk score , because the first repayments of co - op loans are due in 2017 .

2 .

working capital .

cms assesses risk based on whether a co - op expects to generate net revenues from premiums , risk mitigation programs , or other funding sufficient to cover operating expenses over the next 12 months and , if not , the extent to which the co - op plans to rely on the disbursement of any remaining solvency loan funds .

3 .

profitability .

cms assesses risk based on whether the co - op's performance is consistent with the projections in its business plan .

this risk category does not measure current profitability .

4 .

compliance with state requirements .

cms assesses risk based on whether a state department of insurance determined that a co - op was non - compliant with state requirements and , if so , the extent to which remedial action has been implemented .

cms also considers whether the co - op has had a history of non - compliance and the severity of any regulatory action taken by a department of insurance .

5 .

compliance with co - op program requirements .

cms assesses risk based on whether the agency has determined that a co - op was non - compliant with co - op program loan terms and provisions and , if so , the extent to which the co - op has been responsive to cms officials' requests .

cms also considers whether the co - op experienced any legal compliance issues that would affect participation in the program .

6 .

co - op management .

cms assesses risk based on whether the agency identified conflicts of interest with co - op management and performance concerns including high turnover , fraud , or a lack of appropriate internal controls .

7 .

co - op infrastructure issues .

cms assesses risk based on whether the agency identified concerns involving the co - op's key operating systems — including claims , enrollment and billing , customer service , and utilization management .

for quantitative factors included in the risk assessment , cms officials told us they compare individual co - op data to benchmarks and assign a risk level ( high , medium - high , medium , and low ) based on the extent of deviation from the benchmarks .

for qualitative factors , cms officials told us they assign co - ops a risk level based on responses to a standard set of questions completed by account managers .

to help ensure the most current data are available to be used in the direct analysis and risk assessment tools , cms enhanced certain reporting requirements associated with the core monitoring activities it previously established .

while the agency continues to require routine teleconferences with co - ops and standard reporting , cms enhanced its initial reporting requirements to include submission of enrollment and selected financial data on a monthly basis rather than on a quarterly basis .

cms also now requires co - ops to provide certain financial projections quarterly rather than annually .

to respond to issues identified at individual co - ops using the direct analysis and risk assessment tools , as well as its other monitoring activities , in november 2014 , cms formally established a framework , known as an escalation plan , for evaluating and responding to concerns .

the identification of an issue at a co - op is the first of four steps described in the written guidance for establishing and implementing the escalation plan .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

issue identification .

cms initiates the escalation plan when the agency identifies an issue of potential concern at a co - op .

identification may be based on information obtained through a variety of sources , including internal channels ( eg , the core monitoring activities , direct analysis , and risk assessments described above ) and external channels ( eg , communication with state regulators ) .

issue assessment .

a cms account manager conducts a preliminary assessment of the severity , urgency , and nature of the identified issue .

using a standard set of questions , the account manager assesses the issue in light of five sets of considerations: ( 1 ) whether the issue was self - reported by the co - op and the frequency with which the co - op experienced the same or other issues , ( 2 ) the potential impact on the co - op's state licensure and exchange participation , ( 3 ) the potential impact on the co - op's approved business plan , ( 4 ) the potential impact on the co - op's compliance with program requirements , and ( 5 ) the potential impact on the co - op's members and markets where it participates .

answers to questions about these considerations result in a score that indicates whether the issue's severity and urgency is of minor , moderate , elevated , or greatest concern .

the account manager then refers the preliminary assessment for review and approval by other cms officials , including a team that has responsibility for evaluating co - op program integrity .

enforcement action .

cms determines an enforcement action based on the final assessment of the issue as of minor , moderate , elevated , or greatest concern .

enforcement actions generally require a corresponding response from the co - op to resolve the issue .

if the co - op's response to an enforcement action does not result in an acceptable resolution to an issue , the agency may elevate the assessment to a higher level and require additional responses from the co - op .

minor .

cms communicates with co - op officials to resolve the issue and prevent a recurrence .

examples of issues that might be assessed as minor — if no other issues were identified — would be challenges in submitting a required report or a divergence of less than 20 percent between the co - op's actual enrollment and its most recently projected enrollment .

moderate .

cms sends a formal written notice of the issue , known as a warning letter , to co - ops that have an issue assessed as a moderate concern .

in response , co - op officials are required to submit evidence of the development and implementation of a plan to resolve the issue .

as of november 9 , 2015 , cms had issued warning letters to 11 co - ops , of which 7 continue to operate .

according to cms officials , issues for which cms issued warning letters included the execution of a contract that is core to the co - op's business activity ( eg , a contract for a top executive ) without the requisite prior cms approval , and the submission of incomplete data for one of the risk mitigation programs .

elevated .

cms sends co - ops a formal written notice that a corrective action plan is required , an enhanced oversight plan will be implemented , or both .

according to cms officials , they generally require the co - op to develop a corrective action plan when they determine that the co - op can take action to address the issue and that the action and its effect can be documented ; the corrective action plan is subject to cms approval and monitoring .

cms officials implement an enhanced oversight plan when the issue is urgent or has the potential to become more severe .

in response to an enhanced oversight plan , a co - op may be required to submit additional reports or may be subjected to additional audits .

as of november 9 , 2015 , cms had required corrective action plans or implemented enhanced oversight plans ( or both ) for 15 co - ops , of which 8 continue to operate in 2016 .

issues for which these were required include co - ops failing to comply with state laws and experiencing high enrollment and significant losses .

cms noted that some of the corrective action plans and enhanced oversight plans were the result of unresolved issues that required stronger enforcement actions .

greatest .

cms sends co - ops a formal written notice , and if a correction action plan and / or enhanced oversight plan cannot resolve the issue , cms may consider terminating the co - op from the program or taking other enforcement measures , such as withholding loan disbursements .

as of november 9 , 2015 , cms officials had identified an issue of greatest concern at two co - ops .

for one co - op , it required a corrective action plan , and for the other co - op , it issued a termination letter .

cms officials noted that these two co - ops had issues involving serious and pervasive management problems or financial losses substantial enough to question the co - op's sustainability .

both co - ops ceased operations on , or before , january 1 , 2016 .

resolution .

cms monitors the co - op's progress for resolving an identified issue through status calls , additional reporting requirements , or other actions as appropriate .

for some issues determined to be of elevated or greatest concern , cms may conduct an on - site visit .

if cms determines that an issue has been resolved , cms returns to a more routine level of monitoring , mindful of the history that the co - op had with the issue .

if the problem is not resolved , or if the process of investigating an issue reveals other issues , cms can re - assess the issue and take further actions , and it has done so with several co - ops .

as already noted , cms may ultimately determine that a satisfactory resolution is not likely and therefore pursue the option to terminate its loan agreement with the co - op .

as of november 1 , 2015 , cms had issued one termination letter following use of the escalation plan .

escalation plan case study: louisiana health cooperative , inc. cms officials learned in december 2014 , through routine communication with the co - op and the louisiana department of insurance ( ldi ) , that ldi was preparing to notify the co - op that it had been found in a condition that would render continuance of its business hazardous to policyholders , creditors , or others .

cms had previously noted certain risks with the co - op's finances .

cms assessed the issue as an elevated concern and issued a letter in january 2015 requiring the co - op to provide information and a corrective action plan .

the co - op responded in february 2015 , citing problems with its third - party administrator — an entity with which the co - op had contracted to process claims — and describing its corrective action plan .

cms determined that the plan was not sufficient and issued a letter in march 2015 requesting revisions .

the co - op submitted a revised corrective action plan , which cms officials also found insufficient .

meanwhile , in response to ldi , the co - op submitted updated enrollment and financial data , which led cms to question whether enrollment was sufficient for financial stability .

cms issued another letter in april 2015 , asking for information and a corrective action plan to address these issues and stating that cms would conduct a site visit .

during that visit , cms officials observed a number of serious and pervasive deficiencies .

in response , cms reassessed the issue as one of greatest concern and issued a letter in june 2015 , summarizing its findings and stating that a complete and quick resolution was necessary to avoid termination of the loan agreement ; the letter included specific milestones and dates .

the co - op's board met in july and decided to cease operations by the end of 2015 .

according to cms officials , the agency continues to monitor and oversee the co - op as the co - op and ldi work to cease operations with as few negative consequences as possible .

in addition to developing the tools to evaluate performance and sustainability and the escalation plan , cms formed a committee that , according to cms officials , is to look at the co - op program as a whole — beyond individual issues or co - ops .

the committee is to identify and address risks to , and concerns about , the program and make recommendations to address any risks or concerns identified .

cms officials told us that the committee consists of officials from across the agency with actuarial , health insurance , financial , legal , and health insurance exchange experience and expertise .

cms is also using an independent auditor to conduct another review of co - ops , focusing on compliance and financial management .

a preliminary audit phase was conducted to determine whether each co - op had established and documented controls and processes for five key areas , in accordance with the naic market conduct examination standards: ( 1 ) claims , ( 2 ) policyholder service , ( 3 ) complaint handling , ( 4 ) provider credentialing , and ( 5 ) marketing and sales .

based on the results of the preliminary phase , the auditor is to perform one of two types of reviews — a general review or a focused review — at each co - op ; a more focused review is to be performed at co - ops that did not appear to have initially met the naic market conduct examination standards .

cms officials told us that the preliminary phase was completed in june 2015 , and that the second phase is on - going and is expected to be completed by the middle of 2016 for the 11 co - ops that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 .

cms officials told us that prior to the start of the 2016 open enrollment period , they assessed the co - ops with particular attention to their sustainability through 2016 .

according to cms officials , they worked with co - ops and states' departments of insurance to address concerns relating to co - op sustainability .

the goal of these efforts was to provide some assurance that co - ops with serious financial or operational difficulties ( or both ) took timely and effective action to address those difficulties or made plans to cease operations before the 2016 open enrollment period , which began on november 1 , 2015 .

in addition , cms officials told us that , to the extent possible , they plan to monitor co - ops that have ceased operations .

when a co - op closes , the state's department of insurance takes the lead responsibility in winding down operations .

cms officials told us that their goal is to work with the co - ops and their states' departments of insurance to bring operations to an end in a way that minimizes negative effects on members , as well as to recover program loan funding to the extent possible .

our analysis showed that in most of the 20 states where co - ops offered health plans on the exchange during both the 2014 and 2015 open enrollment periods , the state - wide average monthly premium for a 30-year - old individual to purchase a co - op silver health plan was lower for 2015 than for the previous year .

specifically , there were 14 states where the state - wide average monthly premium for silver plans offered by co - ops decreased , with decreases ranging from $1.47 per month in kentucky to $180.44 per month in arizona .

in 9 of these states , the decrease in the state - wide average premium was more than $30 per month .

of the 6 states where the state - wide average premium for silver plans offered by co - ops increased , the increases did not exceed $20 per month .

as table 2 shows , the pattern of changes in average premiums for co - ops that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , is similar to the pattern of change for co - ops that have ceased operations .

of the 11 states where co - ops no longer operate , 5 had decreases in the co - op's average monthly premium of more than $30 , while the other 6 had increases or decreases less than $30 .

in the 10 states where co - ops continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , 4 had decreases in the co - op's average monthly premium of more than $30 , while the other 6 had increases or decreases of less than $30 .

for 2016 , the state - wide average premiums for silver health plans increased from 2015 in 8 of 10 states where co - ops continue to operate .

 ( see appendixes ii through xiv for more details on the range of premiums in 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 for silver health plans in the states where co - ops continued operate as of january 4 , 2016. ) .

in the 23 states where co - ops offered health plans on the states' health insurance exchanges in 2015 , our analysis showed that the average monthly premiums for co - op health plans in all tiers were lower than the average monthly premiums for other health plans for 30-year - old individuals in most rating areas .

co - ops offered bronze , silver , and gold tier health plans in 94 percent of the rating areas where they offered plans ; they offered catastrophic and platinum tier health plans in fewer rating areas .

for all five tiers , the average premiums for co - op health plans were lower than the average premiums for other health plans in more than 75 percent of ratings areas where both a co - op and at least one other issuer offered health plans .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

as shown in figure 4 , the average monthly premiums for co - op health plans in all tiers were lower than for other issuers in a higher percentage of rating areas in 2015 than in 2014 .

moreover , the number of ratings areas where a co - op and at least one other issuer offered health plans , and the number of rating areas where the average monthly co - op premium was lower than the average monthly premium from other issuers both increased from 2014 to 2015 .

as shown in figure 5 , we found this same pattern of premiums when we restricted our analysis to the states where co - ops continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 .

although average co - op premiums for 30-year - old individuals were lower than those of other insurers in most rating areas , the percentage of rating areas where we found this difference varied substantially across states for silver health plans .

in 10 states , the average monthly premium for co - op silver plans was lower than for other silver plans in 100 percent of the states' rating areas .

of these 10 states , co - ops continued to operate in 7 as of january 4 , 2016 .

in two states where the co - ops did not offer silver plans in each rating area , but continued to operate , the average premiums for co - ops were lower than for other issuers in all of the rating areas where the co - ops offered silver health plans .

for five states , the average premium for co - op silver health plans was equal to or higher than for other silver plans in 50 percent of the rating areas or more .

the percentage of rating areas where the average premium for co - op silver plans was equal to or higher than for other silver plans tended to be higher in the 11 states where co - ops no longer operate than in those where co - ops continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 .

 ( see fig .

6 and appendixes ii through xiv for more details on how the co - ops were priced in relation to other health plans in each of the states where co - ops continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016. ) .

the 22 co - ops that participated in the 2015 open enrollment period together reported , as of june 30 , 2015 , enrollment of over 1 million — more than double the total enrollment reported at the same time the previous year .

specifically , the 22 co - ops gained 610,420 net new members , with all but one co - op experiencing an increase in enrollment .

the 11 co - ops that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , reported about 391,855 in enrollment in 2015 — representing about 38 percent of the combined co - op enrollment .

increases in enrollment for these 11 co - ops ranged from 11,139 to 56,889 .

the 3 co - ops that reported the largest enrollment as of june 30 , 2015 , are among those co - ops that no longer operate .

 ( see table 3. ) .

overall , our analysis showed that co - ops' combined enrollment for 2015 exceeded their projections by more than 6 percent , but half of the co - ops did not meet or exceed their individual projections .

as figure 7 shows , of the 11 co - ops that have ceased operations , 6 did not meet their individual enrollment projections , while 5 co - ops exceeded their projections .

 ( see fig .

7. ) .

further , of the 11 co - ops that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , 6 exceeded their 2015 enrollment projections by june 30 , 2015 .

 ( see fig .

8. ) .

our analysis , however , also found that 4 co - ops had not yet reached a program benchmark of enrolling at least 25,000 members .

according to cms officials , exceeding this benchmark can be important for co - ops , because that number of enrollees should better allow a health insurance issuer to cover its fixed costs .

cms officials told us that they are monitoring the co - ops' enrollment with attention to this benchmark .

we provided a draft of this report to hhs for comment .

in its written comments , which appear in appendix xv , hhs stated its commitment to co - op beneficiaries and taxpayers in managing the co - op program , noted the achievements of the co - op program to date , and described developments in the department's oversight activities .

in addition , hhs stated its goal to help facilitate the acquisition of additional capital or the development of other business relationships that could assist those co - ops that continue to operate in achieving their goals and described its efforts to support them .

hhs also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix xvi .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services awarded consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program loans totaling more than $2.4 billion , of which about $358 million was awarded for start - up loans and about $2.1 billion was awarded for solvency loans .

table 4 provides the total amounts awarded to each of the 23 co - ops established with funds disbursed under the co - op program loans .

as of january 4 , 2016 , 11 co - ops continued to operate while , 12 co - ops had ceased operations .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in connecticut decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $33 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $32 .

 ( see table 5. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in connecticut offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's eight rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 9 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in connecticut were generally among the most expensive premiums for catastrophic health plans .

for gold health plans , the co - op's premiums were among the least expensive or in the middle .

the co - op's premiums for bronze and silver health plans were among the least expensive premiums in some rating areas , while ranging from the middle to among the most expensive premiums in others .

the consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) from montana offered health plans on the idaho health insurance exchange for the first time in 2015 .

the state - wide average monthly premium for co - op silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase was about $57 .

 ( see table 6. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in idaho offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's seven rating areas , but offered platinum health plans in only three .

figure 10 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in idaho were generally in the middle with premiums in some rating areas ranging from the least expensive to the middle .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in illinois decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $80 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $61 .

 ( see table 7. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in illinois offered bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's 13 rating areas .

the co - op offered platinum health plans in three rating areas , but did not offer any catastrophic health plans .

figure 11 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in illinois tended to be among the least expensive or in the middle .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in maine increased from 2014 to 2015 , but decreased slightly from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase from 2014 to 2015 was about $8 , and the average decrease from 2015 to 2016 was about $1 .

 ( see table 8. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in maine offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's four rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 12 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for catastrophic , silver , and bronze health plans offered by the co - op in maine were among the most expensive in some rating areas , the least expensive in some , and in the middle in others .

premiums for gold health plans were among the least expensive .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in maryland decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $33 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $18 .

 ( see table 9. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in maryland offered bronze , silver , gold , and platinum health plans in each of the state's four rating areas , but did not offer catastrophic health plans .

figure 13 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in maryland were generally in the middle .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in massachusetts decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $19 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $7 .

 ( see table 10. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in massachusetts offered plans in all tiers in five of the state's seven rating areas .

figure 14 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in massachusetts were among the least expensive across all tiers and rating areas .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in montana decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $17 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $75 .

 ( see table 11. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in montana offered plans in all tiers in each of the state's four rating areas .

figure 15 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the co - op premiums for catastrophic health plans offered by the co - op in montana were generally in the middle .

the co - op premiums were among the least expensive premiums or in the middle for silver , gold , and platinum plans .

co - op premiums for bronze plans ranged from among the least to most expensive .

the consumer operated and oriented plans ( co - op ) from maine and massachusetts both offered health plans on the new hampshire health insurance exchange for the first time in 2015 .

the state - wide average premiums for co - op silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase was about $33 .

 ( see table 12. ) .

for 2015 , co - ops in new hampshire offered health plans in all tiers except for platinum in the state's single rating area .

figure 16 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in the state's single rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the two co - ops in new hampshire varied widely .

co - op premiums for bronze , silver , and gold health plans ranged from the least to the most expensive .

premiums for catastrophic plans ranged from the middle to the most expensive .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in new jersey decreased from 2014 to 2015 , but increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $71 and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $54 .

 ( see table 13. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in new jersey offered a health plan in all tiers in the state's single rating area .

figure 17 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in the state's single rating area .

the premiums for the health plans offered by the co - op in new jersey were among the less expensive premiums for bronze and silver health plans and in the middle for catastrophic plans .

co - op premiums for gold and platinum health plans ranged from among the least to the most expensive .

appendix x: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in new jersey appendix x: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in new jersey rating area 1 includes atlantic , bergen , burlington , camden , cape may , cumberland , essex , gloucester , hudson , hunterdon , mercer , middlesex , monmouth , morris , ocean , passaic , salem , somerset , sussex , union , and warren counties .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in new mexico decreased from 2014 to 2015 and decreased again from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average decrease from 2014 to 2015 was about $9 and the average decrease from 2015 to 2016 was about $7 .

 ( see table 14. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in new mexico offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's five rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 18 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for silver and gold health plans offered by the co - op in new mexico varied widely , ranging from among the least to the most expensive premiums .

co - op premiums were often among the less expensive premiums for bronze health plans , and were generally in the middle for catastrophic plans .

appendix xi: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in new mexico rating area 1 includes bernalillo , sandoval , torrance , and valencia counties .

appendix xi: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in new mexico rating area 2 includes san juan county .

rating area 3 includes don ana county .

rating area 4 includes santa fe county .

rating area 5 includes catron , chaves , cibola , colfax , curry , debaca , eddy , grant , guadalupe , harding , hidalgo , lea , lincoln , los alamos , luna , mckinley , mora , otero , quay , rio arriba , roosevelt , san miguel , sierra , socorro , taos , and union counties .

the consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) in ohio offered health plans on the state's exchange for the first time in 2015 .

the state - wide average monthly premium for co - op silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals increased from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $43 .

 ( see table 15. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in ohio offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's 17 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 19 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for health plans offered by the co - op in ohio were often in the middle or among the most expensive premiums .

appendix xii: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in ohio appendix xii: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in ohio rating area 1 includes defiance , fulton , henry , lucas , williams , and wood counties .

rating area 2 includes allen , auglaize , hancock , hardin , mercer , paulding , putnam , and van wert counties .

appendix xii: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in ohio rating area 3 includes champaign , clark , darke , greene , miami , montgomery , preble , and shelby counties .

rating area 4 includes butler , hamilton , and warren counties .

rating area 5 includes adams , brown , clermont , clinton , and highland counties .

rating area 6 includes erie , huron , ottawa , sandusky , seneca , and wyandot counties .

rating area 7 includes crawford and richland counties .

rating area 8 includes marion and morrow counties .

rating area 9 includes delaware , fairfield , fayette , franklin , knox , licking , logan , madison , pickaway , and union counties .

rating area 10 includes galia , jackson , lawrence , pike , ross , scioto , and vinton counties .

rating area 11 includes ashtabula , cuyahoga , geauga , lake , and lorain counties .

rating area 12 includes ashland , medina , portage , and summit counties .

rating area 13 includes columbiana , mahoning , and trumbull counties .

rating area 14 includes holmes and wayne counties .

rating area 15 includes carroll and stark counties .

rating area 16 includes belmont , coshocton , guernsey , harrison , jefferson , monroe , morgan , muskingum , noble , perry , and tuscarawas counties .

rating area 17 includes athens , hocking , meigs , and washington counties .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the two consumer operated and oriented plans' ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in oregon increased from 2014 to 2015 and , for the one co - op that continued to operate in 2016 , increased again from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase from 2014 to 2015 was about $1 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 about $54 .

 ( see table 16. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in oregon that continued to operate as of january 4 , 2016 , offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in each of the state's seven rating areas , but offered no platinum health plans .

figure 20 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for bronze and silver health plans offered by the co - op varied widely , ranging from among the least to the most expensive premiums .

the premiums for gold health plans tended to be in the middle or among the most expensive premiums , except in rating area 1 .

appendix xiii: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plans relative to premiums for other health plans in oregon rating area 1 includes clackamas , multnomah , washington , and yamhill counties .

rating area 2 includes benton , lane , and linn counties .

rating area 3 includes marion and polk counties .

appendix xiii: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plans relative to premiums for other health plans in oregon rating area 4 includes deschutes , klamath , and lake counties .

rating area 5 includes columbia , coos , curry , lincoln , and tillamook counties .

rating area 6 includes crook , gilliam , grant , harney , hood river , jefferson , malheur , morrow , sherman , umatilla , union , wallowa , wasco , and wheeler counties .

rating area 7 includes douglas , jackson , and josephine counties .

the state - wide average monthly premium for the consumer operated and oriented plan's ( co - op ) silver health plans for 30-year - old individuals in wisconsin increased from 2014 to 2015 and increased again from 2015 to 2016 .

specifically , the average increase from 2014 to 2015 was about $19 , and the average increase from 2015 to 2016 was about $25 .

 ( see table 17. ) .

for 2015 , the co - op in wisconsin offered catastrophic , bronze , silver , and gold health plans in 6 of the state's 16 rating areas , but did not offer a platinum health plan .

figure 21 shows the percentile range in which co - op monthly premiums for 30-year - old individuals fell after rank - ordering all plans in each rating area .

the premiums for catastrophic , silver , and gold health plans offered by the co - op in wisconsin varied widely , ranging from among the least to the most expensive .

the premiums for bronze health plans tended to be among the least expensive premiums .

appendix xiv: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in wisconsin rating area 1 includes milwaukee county .

appendix xiv: premiums for the consumer operated and oriented plan relative to premiums for other health plans in wisconsin rating area 2 includes dane county .

rating area 3 includes polk , pierce , and st. croix counties .

rating area 4 includes chippewa , dunn , eau claire , and pepin counties .

rating area 5 includes ashland , bayfield , burnett , douglas , sawyer , and washburn counties .

rating area 6 includes buffalo , jackson la crosse , monroe , and trempealeau counties .

rating area 7 includes crawford , grand , iowa , lafayette , and vernon counties .

rating area 8 includes clark , price , rusk , and taylor counties .

rating area 9 includes racine and kenosha counties .

rating area 10 includes lincoln , marathon , portage , and rusk counties .

rating area 11 includes calumet , dodge , fond du lac , sheboygan , and winnebago counties .

rating area 12 includes ozaukee , washington , and waukesha counties .

rating area 13 includes florence , forest , iron , langlade , oneida , and vilas counties .

rating area 14 includes columbia , green , jefferson , rock , and walworth counties .

rating area 15 includes adams , green lake , juneau , marquette , richland , and sauk counties .

rating area 16 includes brown , door , kewaunee , manitowoc , menominee , oconto , and shawano counties .

john e. dicken , ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , robert copeland , assistant director ; kristen joan anderson ; sandra george ; giselle hicks ; aaron holling ; and drew long made key contributions to this report .

