i appreciate the opportunity to testify on the national railroad passenger corporation's ( amtrak ) acela program and the overall management of the corporation .

intercity passenger rail is at a critical crossroads regarding its future in the united states .

amtrak has struggled since its inception to earn sufficient revenues and depends heavily on federal subsidies to remain solvent .

the april 2005 action to remove the acela trainsets — the combination of locomotives and passenger cars — from service has only exacerbated problems by putting increased stress on amtrak's ability to maintain ridership and revenue levels and could make amtrak's financial condition even more precarious .

amtrak's acela program accounted for not quite one - fourth of the ridership and about 44 percent of revenue on the northeast corridor — amtrak's busiest rail route — in fiscal year 2004 .

my statement today addresses numerous issues of interest to the congress as it delves into amtrak's handling of this most recent incident involving acela , and more generally , the future of intercity passenger rail in this country .

i will cover four areas: ( 1 ) background on the problems amtrak experienced during the development of the acela program , ( 2 ) a summary of issues related to the lawsuits between amtrak and the consortium of train manufacturers ( the consortium ) , bombardier and alstom , and the subsequent settlement , ( 3 ) key challenges associated with implementing the settlement , and ( 4 ) possible broader challenges at amtrak in managing other large - scale projects .

the information i will present is primarily based on reports that we have issued over the last several years .

significant issues and controversy have impacted the acela program since its inception .

among the issues that have impacted the acela program are the following: ( 1 ) potential difficulties due to new technology , ( 2 ) impacts from new safety standards to accommodate high - speed rail , ( 3 ) manufacturing and production delays , and ( 4 ) abbreviated testing of the trains prior to placement in revenue service .

the acela trainsets are not an “off - the - shelf” piece of equipment but rather a combination of both new and existing technology .

according to the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , this was the first time this particular combination of new and existing technology had been designed as one unit .

as such , the equipment required considerable time to develop and test , and the probability of expected and unexpected problems was high .

furthermore , the trainset grew in weight and cost due to new safety regulations .

the consortium also encountered production delays .

with amtrak under considerable financial and time pressures to place the trainsets into service ; therefore , trainset testing was abbreviated .

in addition to building the acela trainsets , the consortium entered into a contractual arrangement with amtrak to manage the acela facilities and maintain the trainsets , including training and supervising amtrak employees .

since the trainsets were placed into revenue service in 2000 , unexpected problems have been encountered that have resulted in lost revenue and damaged the image of the acela program .

for example , an equipment failure forced amtrak to withdraw the acela trainsets from service for 2 months in 2002 .

as problems and difficulties mounted , increased tension between amtrak and the trainset manufacturer led to legal action against each other .

concerns about the quality of the consortium's work and amtrak's withholding of payments for the acela trainsets resulted in the parties suing each other , each seeking $200 million in damages .

amtrak and the consortium reached a negotiated settlement in march 2004 .

in general , under the settlement , the consortium must complete modifications to the trainsets and locomotives , achieve established performance requirements , provide training to amtrak staff , and provide and extend warranties .

in addition , amtrak agreed to release a portion of previously withheld funds and will conditionally assume facility management and trainset maintenance responsibilities as soon as 2006 , rather than in 2013 , as originally planned ; if the consortium satisfactorily completes its commitments under the settlement agreement .

our work evaluating the terms of the settlement led us to conclude that amtrak faces other risks and challenges to sustain the trainsets and keep them operating .

achieving a successful transition is critical to the financial well - being of amtrak , given that the acela program is such a significant source of its revenue .

the challenges include ( 1 ) completing modifications and meeting performance requirements , ( 2 ) obtaining technical expertise for maintenance and completing training , ( 3 ) sufficiently funding maintenance and integrating responsibilities , and ( 4 ) preparing a comprehensive implementation plan .

addressing and resolving these challenges will not be easy .

although the settlement agreement ensures that amtrak will be protected by the extended trainset warranties and amtrak has several methods of financial recourse if the consortium does not honor warranties , loss of revenue resulting from removal of trainsets from service is not directly recoverable .

however , the full extent of the legal liability has yet to be addressed by the parties .

amtrak officials told us that their first priority is getting the trainsets back in service .

in addition , the recent brake problems may impact the transition of the maintenance function to amtrak through such actions as delaying management training .

amtrak officials continue to believe the transition will occur in october 2006 , however .

amtrak also faces challenges in managing other large - scale projects .

as we reported in february 2004 , amtrak had difficulties managing the northeast high speed rail improvement project ( nhrip ) , a multi - year , multi - billion dollar project to electrify the tracks between boston , massachusetts , and new haven , connecticut , acquire high - speed trains , and make capital improvements .

among the problems we found were that ( 1 ) amtrak's management of this project was not comprehensive but was focused on the short term ; ( 2 ) project management focused on separate components of the project , such as electrification and acquisition of the high - speed trains , and not on the project as a whole ; and ( 3 ) amtrak did not sufficiently address major infrastructure improvements needed to attain project goals .

the overall results were that many critical elements of the project were not completed , project costs and schedules increased considerably , and the project goal of a 3-hour trip time between boston and new york city was not attained .

the rail passenger service act of 1970 created amtrak to provide intercity passenger rail service because existing railroads found such service to be unprofitable .

amtrak operates a 22,000-mile network , primarily over freight railroad tracks , providing service to 46 states and the district of columbia .

amtrak owns about 650 miles of track , primarily on the northeast corridor between boston , massachusetts , and washington , d.c .

in fiscal year 2004 , amtrak served about 25 million passengers , or about 68,640 passengers per day .

according to amtrak , about two - thirds of its ridership is wholly or partially on the northeast corridor .

the northeast corridor is the busiest passenger rail line in the country , and some 200 million amtrak and commuter rail travelers use the corridor , or some part of it , each year .

on some portions of the northeast corridor , amtrak provides high - speed rail service ( up to 150 miles per hour ) .

the high - speed acela program is the centerpiece of amtrak's intercity passenger rail system , with its financial contributions to the company exceeding that of all other routes combined .

acquisition of the acela trainsets occurred as part of nhrip .

nhrip , and its predecessor the northeast corridor improvement project , date back to the late 1970's and represented a multiyear , multibillion collection of capital improvements to the northeast corridor that included electrifying the line between new haven , connecticut , and boston , massachusetts , improving tracks , signals , and other infrastructure , and acquiring high - speed trains .

these efforts were designed to achieve a 3-hour trip time between new york city and boston .

as of march 2003 , amtrak , commuter railroads , and others had spent about $3.2 billion on the project .

in 1996 , amtrak executed contracts with train manufacturers bombardier and alstom to build 20 high - speed trainsets and 15 electric high - horsepower locomotives ; construct three maintenance facilities ; and provide maintenance services for the acela trainsets .

the trainsets , locomotives , and facilities contracts totaled $730 million .

bombardier and alstom , referred to as the consortium , created the northeast corridor management service corporation ( necmsc ) to manage the facilities and maintain the trainsets , including supervising amtrak maintenance employees .

amtrak pays necmsc a per - mile rate — that is , a fixed rate for each mile the acela trains travel — on a monthly basis to provide management and maintenance services at three maintenance facilities .

amtrak's acela program has undergone a number of events since its inception , which has included the execution of the original contracts in 1996 , delivery of the first trainset in october 2000 , and the filing of lawsuits by both bombardier and amtrak in november 2001 and 2002 , respectively ( see fig .

1 ) .

the trainsets were also withdrawn from service for several weeks in august 2002 .

in march 2004 , amtrak and bombardier signed an agreement to settle the lawsuits , which calls for amtrak to conditionally assume trainset maintenance in october 2006 , assuming conditions of the settlement have been met .

the last warranties for the trainsets expire in 2021 .

significant issues and controversy have impacted the acela program since its inception .

what started out as a relatively simple procurement of train equipment evolved into a complex high - speed rail program , according to an amtrak official .

the acela trainset is a complex piece of equipment with state - of - the - art electronics and was considered new technology for the united states .

as such , it required additional time to develop and test , and the probability of expected and unexpected problems was high .

among the issues that the acela program has encountered since its creation are the following: potential difficulties due to new technology .

instead of purchasing “off - the - shelf” technology — that is , train equipment that was already designed , engineered , and in use — amtrak decided to acquire “new” technology .

an fra official told us some components on the acela trainset ( such as power components and the tilt mechanism ) were similar to that used on train equipment in other parts of the world but much of the technology on acela trainsets was new .

in addition , many of the components , whether new or existing technology , had never been used together .

further , this official said that because the components in the acela trainsets had never before been designed as one unit , acela was not an off - the - shelf technology train .

although acela trainsets were essentially new technology and could be expected to require additional time to develop and test , amtrak developed an ambitious schedule that called for shipment of the first trainset 32 months — just over 2½ years — after the notice to proceed was issued .

according to an amtrak official , the calendar and electrification delivery date drove the planning for the trainsets .

amtrak worked backwards from these due dates to try and fit project work into the timeline .

impacts from new safety standards to accommodate high - speed rail .

during the 1996 to 2000 time frame , the same time period when the acela trainsets were being acquired and manufactured , fra , in consultation with amtrak , was developing safety regulations related to high - speed rail operations .

these included new rules covering track safety ( to accommodate speeds of up to 200 miles per hour ) , passenger car safety , and train control .

according to fra officials , amtrak was intimately involved in developing these standards to accomplish its vision of high - speed rail operations on the northeast corridor .

fra officials also noted that passenger car safety regulations did not exist prior to the mid - 1990's .

developed for safety purposes , these standards had a significant impact on the acela trainsets .

for example , the passenger car safety regulations required a crash energy management system in passenger cars that was designed to increase the strength of both car ends and side posts .

fra also prohibited the operation of high - speed trains ( up to 150 miles per hour ) in a push - pull manner .

fra officials acknowledged that the crash energy system increased the weight of the acela trainsets but said such a system resulted in safer trains .

amtrak told us that prohibiting push - pull operation caused them to obtain 20 additional power cars for acela at a cost of about $100 million .

manufacturing and production delays .

the acela program experienced a significant share of manufacturing and production delays .

under fra's 1994 master plan for nhrip , developed in response to the amtrak authorization and development act , delivery of enough high - speed trains to initiate limited 3-hour service between boston and new york city was expected by 1999 .

however , due to design and manufacturing delays , the first acela trainsets were delivered about a year late , and revenue service using the trainsets did not begin until december 2000 .

manufacturing and production delays began early in the procurement process .

for example , our review of consortium progress reports indicated that as early as october 1996 , only months after the original contract was signed , change orders and design changes ( mainly related to car interiors ) were being made that were causing delays in production .

in addition , train weight was increasing , a condition that continued to plague the trainsets throughout production .

amtrak attempted to require the consortium to prepare recovery plans to keep the program on schedule , but we found little evidence of such plans in documents we reviewed .

regardless , these plans did not prevent the trainsets from being delivered about a year late .

abbreviated testing prior to placement in revenue service .

amtrak's acela trainsets also appeared to have had abbreviated testing prior to being deployed into revenue service .

a fuller testing of the trainsets may have better identified the range of potential problems and defects that could be experienced prior to placing the trainsets in service .

the maximum testing any one acela trainset received was about 35,000 miles of testing — 20,000 miles at the transportation test center ( center ) in pueblo , colorado , and 15,000 miles on the northeast corridor between 1999 and 2000 .

however , an fra official believed testing of the trainsets was rushed and that additional testing at the center should have been conducted .

this official cited testing of amtrak's aem - 7 electric locomotive as an example of the testing that is normally done on new equipment .

this locomotive , which was a new locomotive that entered service in the early 1980's , was tested for 165,000 miles at the center prior to placement in service .

an fra official also acknowledged that there were no minimum federal testing requirements for new high - speed trainsets , like acela , only that such equipment comply with existing safety regulations .

however , this official believed amtrak was under both financial and time pressures to place the trainsets in service , in part because of delays in trainset production .

since placement into revenue service in 2000 , the acela has experienced a number of unexpected problems .

one occurrence was in august 2002 when amtrak was forced to withdraw the trains from service to address unexpected equipment problems ( yaw damper brackets ) .

the trainsets were not returned to complete service until october 2002 .

according to amtrak , this withdrawal cost the corporation a net $17 million in lost revenue .

in april 2005 , amtrak once again experienced unexpected problems with the trainsets due to equipment problems ( cracks in brake assemblies ) .

again , the trainsets have been withdrawn from service and amtrak has stated that it may be months before the trains are returned to service .

although amtrak is placing substitute equipment into service , it can be expected that there will be revenue loss as well as damage to amtrak's image .

as the procurement proceeded , tensions grew between amtrak and the consortium .

concerns about the quality of the consortium's work and amtrak's withholding of payments for the acela trainsets resulted in the parties suing each other , each seeking $200 million in damages .

in november 2001 , bombardier filed a suit alleging that amtrak improperly withheld payments , failed to provide accurate information on infrastructure conditions , and changed design specifications during contract performance .

in november 2002 , amtrak filed a suit alleging that the consortium failed to meet trainset performance requirements .

in addition , amtrak alleged that the engineering was deficient , workmanship was poor , program management and quality control were inadequate , and the consortium did not meet contract delivery schedules .

amtrak and the consortium reached a negotiated settlement in march 2004 , ending their legal dispute surrounding the acela trainsets .

as part of the settlement , amtrak agreed to release a portion of the previously withheld funds to the consortium and conditionally assume facility management and trainset maintenance responsibilities as soon as october 1 , 2006 , rather than in 2013 , as originally planned .

in general , under the settlement , the consortium must complete modifications to the trainsets and locomotives ; achieve established performance requirements for reliability , speed , and comfort ; provide training to amtrak staff ; and provide and extend warranties ( see fig .

2 ) .

the consortium is also responsible for the transfer of technical information , rights to third - party contracts , parts information , permits , and licenses to amtrak .

in addition , the settlement requires that the consortium provide technical services and information technology updates even after the transition date .

amtrak is required to create a transition plan , hire staff to manage the facilities and maintain the trainsets , and determine a parts procurement plan for the trainsets .

independent of the acela brake problem being discussed today , amtrak faces other risks and challenges to sustain the trainset and keep it operating efficiently .

achieving a successful transition is critical to the financial well - being of amtrak given that the acela program is such a significant source of its revenue .

a successful transition of maintenance and management responsibilities for the acela trainsets depends on whether amtrak and the consortium can address the numerous challenges .

key challenges include: achieving trainset modifications and performance requirements .

the consortium must complete an extensive list of modifications to the trainsets , some of which are complex , before amtrak will assume maintenance responsibilities .

although the consortium has closed three - fourths of the items , they are behind schedule on completing the work on some remaining items .

amtrak has identified certain modifications that potentially may not be completed by october 1 , 2006 , and has concerns that other modifications may affect service reliability .

the consortium is also responsible for ensuring that the trainsets continue to meet reliability , speed , and comfort performance requirements .

the trainsets have not yet met the minimum reliability performance requirement of traveling an average 17,500 miles between service failures .

according to amtrak , the period of time when the trainsets are out of service to resolve the brake problems will not likely be included in the measurement of this standard .

obtaining technical expertise for maintenance and completing training .

amtrak must secure a workforce with the technical expertise needed to maintain the trainsets .

to achieve this , amtrak is developing a new high speed rail division to assume management and maintenance responsibilities , and it plans to hire at least 50 percent of necmsc's current staff to benefit from their knowledge and expertise .

the consortium and amtrak must also develop and implement training programs needed to maintain the complex trainsets after the transition .

the trainsets are technically complex and require considerable expertise to identify and make needed repairs and to troubleshoot difficult maintenance problems .

according to amtrak officials , ensuring that technicians are properly trained is one of the most critical points of the transition .

as a result of the current brake problem , amtrak is reevaluating its training materials .

based on the latest progress report ( march 2005 ) , troubleshooting training is slightly behind schedule , and amtrak officials told us that management training has been temporarily delayed due to the brake problem .

under the transition plan , training is scheduled to be completed by october 1 , 2005 .

sufficiently funding maintenance and integrating responsibilities .

once the transition occurs , amtrak will be responsible for maintenance costs to ensure continued trainset performance , including procuring parts and performing overhaul maintenance .

amtrak has experienced problems in the past with delays in completing the maintenance necessary to provide its conventional service ; and if these problems continue , they could affect trainset performance and availability for revenue service .

at the time of our review , amtrak had not determined the level of funding necessary to provide regular maintenance and overhauls to the trainsets .

amtrak officials stated that despite the uncertainty of maintenance costs once the transition occurs , they estimate that the costs of managing the maintenance in - house will be no greater than the costs of paying necmsc to perform the work .

we believe the uncertain amount of future maintenance costs and possible lack of adequate funds may have a greater impact than anticipated .

amtrak must also successfully integrate the new maintenance responsibilities into its current organization .

development of a new division requires strategic planning , communication , and performance management .

this may prove difficult for amtrak as our past and ongoing work has shown its shortcomings in managing large - scale projects .

preparing a comprehensive implementation plan .

creating a comprehensive implementation plan that provides a blueprint of important steps ; milestones ; contingency plans if milestones are not met ; measures for achieving results ; and funding strategies will be important for a successful transition .

amtrak has created a critical path schedule for monitoring the status and completion of open items related to the settlement and holds regular meetings , both internally and with the consortium , to discuss progress and issues that arise .

although amtrak has taken actions to address the key challenges related to the settlement , these actions did not represent a comprehensive implementation plan , and we recommended in our december 2004 report that amtrak develop such a plan that encompasses all aspects of the transition in order to ensure a successful transition .

we also said that such a plan should include contingency plans , if milestones are not met .

in light of recent events , we believe a comprehensive plan that identifies contingency actions could provide the steps necessary to help prevent postponement of the transition .

amtrak officials do not believe the current brake problems will impact the october 2006 transition date , however .

although the settlement agreement ensures that amtrak will be protected by the extended trainset warranties and amtrak has several methods of financial recourse , if the consortium does not honor warranties , loss of revenue resulting from removal of trainsets from revenue service is not directly recoverable .

for example , the settlement agreement included the extension of “bumper to bumper” trainset warranties on all trainsets for the next 5 months , until october 1 , 2005 .

in addition , modifications to the trainsets that are currently under way or planned will be under warranty for 2 years after they are completed to amtrak's satisfaction .

amtrak also has several methods of financial recourse , if the consortium does not honor warranties , including letters of credit that amtrak may draw down .

however , the full extent of the legal liability associated with the april 2005 brake problem has yet to be addressed by the parties .

amtrak officials told us that their first priority is getting the trainsets back in service .

amtrak is considering a number of possible actions regarding the brake problem , including assessing liquidated damages .

as we reported in february 2004 , amtrak did not effectively manage the entire nhrip project , of which acela was a part .

among the problems we found were that ( 1 ) amtrak's management of this project was not comprehensive but was focused on the short term ; ( 2 ) project management focused on separate components of the project , such as electrification and acquisition of the high - speed trains , and not the project as a whole ; and ( 3 ) did not sufficiently address major infrastructure improvements needed to attain project trip - time goals .

we also found that amtrak lacked a comprehensive financial plan for the project and that amtrak did not fully integrate stakeholder interests ( commuter rail authorities and state governments ) , even though work that involved stakeholders was critical to achieving project goals .

the overall results of this poor management was that many critical elements of the project were not completed , project costs and schedules increased considerably , and the project goal ( 3-hour trip time from boston to new york city ) was not attained .

while there have been many benefits from the nhrip , including faster trip times between boston and new york city , amtrak's management of this project clearly demonstrates that amtrak had difficulty keeping such a large - scale project focused , on - time , and on - budget .

we also have ongoing work for this committee on amtrak'management and performance issues that we plan to report on later this year .

mr. chairman , that concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or the members of the subcommittee might have .

for further information , please contact jayetta z. hecker at heckerj@gao.gov or at ( 202 ) 512-2834 .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include kara finnegan irving , bert japikse , richard jorgenson , and randall williamson .

intercity passenger rail: issues associated with the recent settlement between amtrak and the consortium of bombardier and alstom , gao - 05- 152 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 1 , 2004 ) .

intercity passenger rail: amtrak's management of northeast corridor improvements demonstrates need for applying best practices , gao - 04-94 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 27 , 2004 ) .

intercity passenger rail: amtrak needs to improve its decisionmaking process for its route and service proposals , gao - 02-398 ( washington , d.c.: apr .

12 , 2002 ) intercity passenger rail: potential financial issues in the event that amtrak undergoes liquidation .

gao - 02-871 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 20 , 2002 ) .

financial management: amtrak's route profitability schedules need improvement , gao - 02-912r ( washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2002 ) .

intercity passenger rail: congress faces critical decisions in developing a national policy , gao - 02-522t ( washington , d.c.: apr .

11 , 2002 ) .

intercity passenger rail: the congress faces critical decisions about the role of and funding for intercity passenger rail systems , gao - 01-820t ( washington , d.c.: july 25 , 2001 ) .

intercity passenger rail: amtrak will continue to have difficulty controlling its costs and meeting capital needs , gao / rced - 00-138 ( washington , d.c.: may 31 , 2000 ) .

intercity passenger rail: issues associated with a possible amtrak liquidation , gao / rced - 98-60 ( washington , d.c.: mar .

2 , 1998 ) .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

