i am pleased to be here today to discuss our report issued today on u.s. efforts to build the capacity of iraqi ministries .

the development of competent and loyal government ministries is critical to stabilizing and rebuilding iraq .

iraq's 34 ministries are responsible for ensuring security through the armed forces and police and providing essential government services , such as electricity , water , and health care .

the ministries are iraq's largest employer , with an estimated 2.2 million government workers .

u.s. efforts to build the capacity of iraqi ministries include programs to advise and help iraqi government employees develop the skills to plan programs , execute budgets , and effectively deliver services .

in 2005 and 2006 , the united states provided $169 million for programs to help build the capacity of key civilian and security ministries .

the administration received an additional $140 million in fiscal year 2007 and requested $255 million for fiscal year 2008 .

my testimony today discusses ( 1 ) the nature and extent of u.s. efforts to develop the capacity of iraqi ministries , ( 2 ) the key challenges to these efforts , and ( 3 ) the extent to which the u.s. government has an overall integrated strategy .

this statement is based on the report we issued today .

to accomplish our report objectives , we reviewed and analyzed u.s. , iraqi , donor government , united nations ( un ) , and world bank reports and data .

we conducted fieldwork in washington , d.c. ; new york city ; baghdad , iraq ; and amman , jordan .

at these locations , we met with officials and contractors working for the departments of state ( state ) , defense ( dod ) , treasury , justice , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , the united nations ( un ) , the world bank , european union , and the iraqi government .

we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as of september 2007 , the iraqi government included 34 ministries responsible for providing security and essential government services .

u.s. capacity development programs target 12 key ministries: state and usaid focus on 10 civilian ministries while dod is responsible for the ministries of defense and interior .

these 12 ministries employ 67 percent of the iraqi government workforce and are responsible for 74 percent of the 2007 budget ( see table 1 ) .

u.s. efforts to help build the capacity of the iraqi national government are characterized by ( 1 ) multiple u.s. agencies leading individual efforts without overarching direction from a lead entity or a strategic approach that integrates their efforts with iraqi government priorities and ( 2 ) shifting time frames and priorities in response to deteriorating conditions in iraq .

as of may 2007 , six u.s. agencies were implementing about 53 projects at individual ministries and other national iraqi agencies .

state , usaid , and dod lead the largest number of programs and provide about 384 u.s. military , government , and contractor personnel to work with the ministries .

dod provides over half ( 215 ) of the personnel to the ministries of defense and interior to advise iraqi staff in developing plans and policies , building ministry budgets , and managing personnel and logistics .

state and usaid together provide an additional 169 advisors to the 10 key civilian ministries .

although state , usaid , and dod have improved the coordination of their capacity - building efforts since early 2007 , there is no lead agency or strategic plan to provide overarching guidance .

two factors explain the lack of a lead agency .

first , from their inception in 2003 , u.s. ministry capacity - building efforts evolved without an overall plan or the designation of a lead entity .

u.s. agencies provided distinct assistance to four successive governments in response to iraq's immediate needs , according to u.s. officials .

this approach first began under the coalition provisional authority whereby u.s. advisors ran the ministries using u.s. and iraqi funds and made personnel and budget decisions .

attempts to create an overall capacity development plan were dropped in late 2003 after the united states decided to transfer control of the ministries to an interim government .

a second factor has been the delay in implementing recommendations from a 2005 state assessment that characterized u.s. capacity development programs as uncoordinated , fragmented , duplicative and disorganized .

state recommended a unified effort among state , dod , and usaid , with the latter providing overall coordination and leadership .

the recommendations were not implemented .

however , in july 2007 , state named an ambassador to direct civilian capacity - building programs , including usaid efforts .

shifting priorities also have affected u.s. capacity development efforts , particularly in response to continued security problems .

in early 2007 , the u.s. mission refocused its capacity development program as part of the surge strategy associated with the administration's new way forward .

rather than focusing on 12 civilian and security ministries , state and dod targeted 6 key ministries ( interior , defense , planning , finance , oil , and electricity ) and focused on short - term improvements to address immediate problems with budget execution , procurement , and contracting .

accordingly , u.s. capacity development efforts shifted from long - term institution building to immediate efforts to help iraqi ministries spend their capital budgets and deliver better services to the iraqi people .

improvements were expected by september 2007 .

u.s. efforts to develop iraqi ministerial capacity face four key challenges that pose a risk to their success and long - term sustainability .

first , iraqi government institutions have significant shortages of personnel with the skills to perform the vital tasks necessary to provide security and deliver essential services to the iraqi people .

when the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) removed ba'athist party leaders and members from upper - level management in government , universities , and hospitals in 2003 , most of iraq's technocratic class was forced out of government .

a september 2006 u.s. embassy assessment noted that the government had significant human resource shortfalls in most key civilian ministries .

the majority of staff at all but 1 of the 12 ministries surveyed was inadequately trained for their positions , and a quarter of them relied heavily on foreign support to compensate for their human and capital resource shortfalls .

the lack of trained staff has particularly hindered the ability of ministries to develop and execute budgets .

for example , in 2006 , the iraqi government spent only 22 percent of its capital budget .

for january through july 2007 , spending levels have improved with about 24 percent of capital budgets spent .

however , as we reported in early september 2007 , it is unlikely that iraq will spend the $10 billion it allocated for 2007 for capital budgets by the end of this year .

second , iraq's government confronts significant challenges in staffing a nonpartisan civil service and addressing militia infiltration of key ministries .

in june 2007 , dod reported that militias influenced every component of the ministry of interior .

in particular , the ministry has been infiltrated by members of the supreme islamic council of iraq and its badr organization , as well as muqtada al - sadr's mahdi army .

furthermore , the iraqi civil service remained hampered by staff whose political and sectarian loyalties jeopardized the civilian ministries' abilities to provide basic services and build credibility among iraqi citizens , according to u.s. government reports and international assessments .

dod further found that government ministries and budgets were sources of power for political parties , and staff ministry positions were rewarded to party cronies .

the use of patronage hindered capacity development because it led to instability in the civil service as many staff were replaced whenever the government changed or a new minister was named , according to u.s. officials .

third , according to state , widespread corruption undermines efforts to develop the government's capacity by robbing it of needed resources , some of which are used to fund the insurgency ; by eroding popular faith in democratic institutions seen to be run by corrupt political elites ; and by spurring capital flight and reducing economic growth .

according to a state assessment , one - third of the 12 civilian ministries surveyed had problems with “ghost employees” ( that is , nonexistent staff listed on the payroll ) .

in addition , the procedures to counter corruption adopted at all but one of the civilian ministries surveyed were partly effective or ineffective .

similar problems existed in the security ministries , according to dod .

finally , the security situation remains a major obstacle to developing capacity in areas vital to the government's success .

the high level of violence hinders u.s. advisors' access to their counterparts in the ministries , increases absenteeism among ministry employees , and contributes to “brain drain” as ministry employees join the growing number of iraqis leaving the country .

according to a un report , between march 2003 and june 2007 , about 2.2 million iraqis left the country and 2 million were internally displaced .

according to u.s. and international officials , the flow of refugees exacerbates iraqi ministry capacity shortfalls because those fleeing tend to be disproportionately from the educated and professional classes .

a november 2006 un report stated that an estimated 40 percent of iraq's professional class had left since 2003 .

in february 2007 , state officials provided gao with a three - page , high - level outline proposing a u.s. strategy for strengthening iraqi ministerial capacity .

this document was a summary with few details and no timeline .

a senior usaid official indicated that it is uncertain whether the high - level summary will be developed into a strategy , although the administration received $140 million in funding for its capacity development efforts in fiscal year 2007 and requested $255 million for fiscal year 2008 .

gao has previously identified the desirable elements of a strategy: a clear purpose , scope , and methodology ; a delineation of u.s. roles , responsibilities , and coordination ; desired goals , objectives , and activities tied to iraqi priorities ; performance measures ; and a description of costs , resources needed , and risks .

table 2 summarizes the key elements of a strategy and provides examples of the status of the u.s. approach as of september 2007 .

as table 2 shows , u.s. agencies have developed some of these elements in their programs for capacity building at individual ministries , but not as part of an overall u.s. strategy .

for example: we found little evidence that the u.s. government has clearly defined the purpose , scope , and methodology for developing an overall strategy .

agencies have provided some limited information on why an overall strategy is needed , what it will cover , and how it will be developed .

a joint task force on capacity development , established in october 2006 , has helped u.s. agencies better delineate roles and responsibilities and coordinate their efforts .

however , we found no plans on how the capacity development programs of state , usaid , and dod will be unified and integrated .

while u.s. agencies have clearly identified the overall goals of capacity development at the iraqi ministries , most u.s. efforts lack clear ties to iraqi priorities for all ministries .

while dod is developing measures to assess progress at the security ministries , such measures have not been developed for iraqi civilian ministries .

u.s. agencies have not identified the costs and resources needed to complete capacity development programs beyond the budget for fiscal year 2007 and the 2008 budget request .

agencies have not provided information on how future resources will be targeted to achieve the desired end - state or how the risks we identified will be addressed .

in addition , efforts to improve cooperation with the un and other international donor nations and organizations have encountered difficulties .

for example , u.s. efforts are to be coordinated with the iraqi government and the international donor community through the capacity development working group .

however , the group did not meet for about a year after forming in late 2005 and did not meet from february through may 2007 .

current u.s. efforts to build the capacity of the iraqi government involve multiple u.s. agencies working with iraqi counterparts on many issues .

gao , for example , is working with the iraqi board of supreme audit to enhance its auditing skills and capacity .

however , u.s. efforts to improve the capacity of iraq's ministries must address significant challenges if they are to achieve their desired outcomes .

u.s. efforts lack an overall strategy , no lead agency provides overall direction , and u.s. priorities have been subject to numerous changes .

finally , u.s. efforts confront shortages of competent personnel at iraqi ministries , and sectarian ministries contend with pervasive corruption .

the risks are further compounded by the ongoing violence in iraq as u.s. civilian advisors have difficulties meeting with their iraqi counterparts and skilled iraqi professionals leave the country .

congress appropriated $140 million in may 2007 for capacity building and the administration requested up to $255 million for fiscal year 2008 .

we believe that future u.s. investments must be conditioned on the development of an overall integrated u.s. strategy that clearly articulates agency roles and responsibilities , establishes clear goals , delineates the total costs needed , and assesses the risk to u.s. efforts .

the strategy would also need to consider any expanded role of multilateral organizations , including the united nations and world bank .

gao recommends that state , in consultation with the iraqi government , complete an overall integrated strategy for u.s. capacity development efforts .

key components of an overall capacity development strategy should include a clear purpose , scope , and methodology ; a clear delineation of u.s. roles , responsibilities , and coordination , including the designation of a lead agency ; goals and objectives based on iraqi - identified priorities ; performance measures based on outcome metrics and milestones ; and a description of how resources will be targeted to achieve the desired end - state .

given the absence of an integrated capacity development strategy , it is unclear how further appropriations of funding for ministry capacity development programs will contribute to the success of overall u.s. efforts in iraq .

congress should consider conditioning future appropriations on the completion of an overall integrated strategy .

in commenting on a draft of the report accompanying this testimony , state and usaid noted ( 1 ) their concern over our recommendation to condition future appropriations for capacity development on the completion of a strategy ; ( 2 ) the recent appointment of an ambassador to supervise all short - and medium - term capacity development programs ; and ( 3 ) the need to tailor capacity development needs to each iraqi ministry .

in response to the agencies' first comment , we do not recommend stopping u.s. investment in capacity development ; the $140 million in supplemental funding appropriated in fiscal year 2007 remains available for the agencies to continue their efforts .

rather , we recommend that congress condition future funding on the development of an overall integrated strategy .

we acknowledge that state named an ambassador to coordinate the embassy's economic and assistance operations .

however , this action occurred in july 2007 , underscoring our point that u.s. capacity development efforts have lacked overall leadership and highlighting the need for an overall integrated strategy .

finally , our recommendation does not preclude u.s. agencies from tailoring capacity development efforts to meet each ministry's unique needs .

a strategy ensures that a u.s. - funded program has consistent overall goals , clear leadership and roles , and assessed risks and vulnerabilities .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members have at this time .

for questions regarding this testimony please me on ( 202 ) 512-5500 , or mr. joseph a. christoff , director , international affairs and trade , on ( 202 ) 512-8979 or christoffj@gao.gov .

other key contributors to this statement were tetsuo miyabara , patrick hickey , lynn cothern , lisa helmer , stephen lord , and judith mccloskey .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

