each year , the department of defense ( dod ) invests billions of dollars to develop and produce sophisticated weapon systems and technologies to maintain military superiority .

as such , these weapons and technologies are highly sought after and at risk of exploitation when exported , stolen , or lost or damaged during combat or routine missions .

such exploitation can weaken u.s. military advantage on the battlefield and erode the u.s. industrial base's technological competitiveness in the international marketplace .

in an effort to protect u.s. weapons and technologies from exploitation , dod established a policy in 1999 requesting each military service to implement anti - tamper techniques , which include software and hardware protective devices , when technologies are determined to be critical and vulnerable to exploitation .

in march 2004 , we reported on several difficulties program managers faced in implementing this policy , including determining which technologies were critical — the basis for considering the need for anti - tamper protection .

difficulties with implementing dod's anti - tamper policy , as well as vulnerabilities in related government programs , prompted gao to designate the effective protection of technologies critical to u.s. national security as a new high - risk area in 2007 .

the senate report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 requires us to conduct a follow - up review to our march 2004 report .

in response , we identified ( 1 ) recent actions dod has taken to implement its anti - tamper policy and ( 2 ) challenges facing program managers .

to conduct our work , we obtained information and documentation on actions dod has taken to implement its anti - tamper policy since 2004 and interviewed officials from the anti - tamper executive agent's office , military services , other dod components , and the intelligence community about these actions .

we also determined the status of our 2004 report recommendations .

we conducted structured interviews with officials from a cross - section of programs that the anti - tamper executive agent's office and dod components identified as considering and / or implementing anti - tamper protection .

we discussed with these program officials their procedures for implementing anti - tamper protection and any challenges they faced .

we also interviewed officials from program offices not identified by the anti - tamper executive agent and dod components to obtain their perspective about the anti - tamper policy .

we did not evaluate whether programs had implemented sufficient anti - tamper protection .

we conducted this performance audit ( from january 2007 to january 2008 ) in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

for more on scope and methodology , see appendix i .

to protect its critical assets , dod has established several protection measures for weapon systems .

these measures include information assurance to protect information and information systems , software protection to prevent the unauthorized distribution and exploitation of critical software , and anti - tamper techniques to help delay exploitation of technologies through means such as reverse engineering when u.s. weapons are exported or lost on the battlefield .

examples of anti - tamper techniques include software encryption , which scrambles software instructions to make them unintelligible without first being reprocessed through a deciphering technique , and hardware protective coatings designed to make it difficult to extract or dissect components without damaging them .

in 1999 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ( at&l ) issued a policy memorandum for implementing anti - tamper protection in acquisition programs .

in the following year , at&l issued a policy memorandum stating that technologies should be routinely assessed during the acquisition process to determine if they are critical and if anti - tamper techniques are needed to protect these technologies .

in 2001 , an at&l policy memorandum designated the air force as the anti - tamper executive agent .

the executive agent's office , which currently has four staff , is responsible for implementing dod's anti - tamper policy and managing anti - tamper technology development through the air force research laboratory .

the executive agent also holds periodic information sessions to educate the acquisition community about anti - tamper policy , initiatives , and technology developments .

to coordinate activities , military services and defense agencies , such as the missile defense agency , have an anti - tamper point of contact .

program managers are responsible for ensuring anti - tamper protection is incorporated on any weapon system with critical technologies that need protection .

since it is not feasible to protect every technology , program managers are to conduct an assessment to determine if anti - tamper protection is needed .

when assessing if anti - tamper protection is needed , program managers make several key decisions regarding the identification of critical technologies , assessment of threats and vulnerabilities , and determination of anti - tamper techniques or solutions .

the process begins with determining whether or not their system's critical program information includes any critical technologies .

if it is determined that the system has no critical technologies , program managers are to document the decision and request concurrence from either the office within their component that is designated with anti - tamper responsibilities or the anti - tamper executive agent .

for systems that are determined to have critical technologies , the next key steps are to identify potential threats and vulnerabilities and select anti - tamper techniques to protect those technologies .

techniques are ultimately verified and validated by a team composed of representatives from the dod components .

the program manager documents decisions in an annex of the program protection plan .

in 2004 , we reported that program managers had difficulty in carrying out dod's anti - tamper policy on individual weapons , such as identifying critical technologies and experiencing cost increases or schedule delays when applying anti - tamper techniques — particularly when the techniques are not fully developed or when the systems are already in design or production .

we made several recommendations , including increasing oversight over the identification of critical technologies across programs , improving tools and resources for program managers in identifying critical technologies , ensuring early identification of anti - tamper costs and solutions , monitoring the development of generic anti - tamper solutions and evaluating their effectiveness , and developing a business case to determine whether the current organizational structure and resources are adequate .

dod concurred or partially concurred with these recommendations .

dod has taken some steps to implement our recommendations including identifying available anti - tamper technical resources and developing a searchable spreadsheet of critical technologies , incorporating information in the defense acquisition guidebook on the need for early identification of anti - tamper solutions in a weapon system , and sponsoring a study on anti - tamper techniques and their general effectiveness .

while dod has taken these steps to address parts of the recommendations , all remain open .

dod has recently taken several actions aimed at raising awareness about its anti - tamper policy and assisting program managers in implementing anti - tamper protection on a weapon system .

despite these actions , dod still lacks departmentwide direction to implement its anti - tamper policy .

without such direction , dod components are left to develop their own initiatives to assist program managers in implementing anti - tamper protection .

while individual efforts are important , such as a database to track critical program information dod - wide , their effectiveness may be limited because they have yet to be accepted and adopted across all dod components .

since our 2004 report , dod , through the anti - tamper executive agent , has developed some resources aimed at assisting program managers as they go through the anti - tamper decision process .

dod's resources range from providing general information about the anti - tamper policy to research on anti - tamper solutions .

specifically , dod has developed a guidebook that includes a checklist to assist program managers in identifying security , management , and technical responsibilities when incorporating anti - tamper protection on a weapons system ; developed a searchable spreadsheet to assist program managers in developed a web site for program managers to provide general anti - tamper information , policy resources , conference briefings , implementation resources , and current events ; coordinated with defense acquisition university to design and launch an online learning module on anti - tamper protection ; funded sandia national laboratories to study anti - tamper techniques and their general effectiveness ; and sponsored research to develop generic anti - tamper techniques through small business innovation research , a research program that funds early - stage research and development projects at small technology companies .

dod has also updated two acquisition documents with general anti - tamper information .

the first document — dod instruction 5000.2 , operation of a defense acquisition system — currently states that one of the purposes of the system development and demonstration phase of a weapon system is to ensure affordability and protection of critical program information by implementing appropriate solutions such as anti - tamper protection .

the second document — the defense acquisition guidebook — has been updated to include some basic information on the importance of implementing anti - tamper protection early in the development of a weapon system and describes program managers' overall responsibilities for implementing the anti - tamper policy .

while dod has issued broad policy memorandums that reflect the department's desire for routinely assessing weapon systems to determine if anti - tamper protection is needed , the department has not fully incorporated the anti - tamper policy into its formal acquisition guidance .

specifically , dod instruction 5000.2 mentions anti - tamper protection , but the department has not provided direction for implementation of anti - tamper in a formal directive or instruction .

currently , the department is coordinating comments on a draft instruction ( dod instruction 5200.39 ) on protection of critical program information that includes anti - tamper implementation .

however , in commenting on the draft instruction , several dod components have raised concerns about when and how to define critical program information that warrants protection , which have contributed to long delays in finalizing the instruction .

in addition , the department has not provided specific guidance for program managers on how to implement anti - tamper protection in a dod manual because dod officials said this process cannot begin until the instruction is finalized .

the date for finalizing the instruction has not yet been determined .

officials from the executive agent's office stated that departmentwide direction would give credence to the anti - tamper policy in practice .

anti - tamper points of contact told us that the policy memorandums are not sufficient to ensure that program managers are implementing anti - tamper protection on weapon systems when necessary .

one service anti - tamper point of contact stated that program managers might disregard the policy memorandums because they are high - level and broad .

another service anti - tamper point of contact said that implementation is ultimately left up to the individual program manager .

while a program manager's decision should be approved by the milestone decision authority and documented in the program protection plan , some service and program officials said that programs are not always asked about anti - tamper protection during the review .

lacking departmentwide direction for the anti - tamper policy , dod components have been left to develop their own initiatives to assist program managers in anti - tamper implementation .

however , the usefulness of these initiatives depends on the extent to which other components participate in these efforts .

for example , the missile defense agency developed a risk assessment model to help program managers identify how much anti - tamper is needed to protect critical technologies .

specifically , the model helps program managers assess the criticality of the technology relative to the risk of exploitation .

however , when the missile defense agency sought comments on the initiative , the executive agent and services indicated that it was too lengthy and complex to use .

the executive agent , in coordination with anti - tamper points of contact from the missile defense agency and services , has taken over this effort , and it is still in development .

the navy is also implementing an initiative: a database intended to capture the information that programs across dod components have identified as critical .

many officials we spoke with pointed to this database as a potential tool to improve identification of critical program information across dod components .

to date , the navy and the army are submitting information for the database , but the missile defense agency and air force are not .

the missile defense agency anti - tamper point of contact stated that its information is classified at a level above what the database can support and its program managers will not submit information for the database unless dod requires submissions by all dod components .

however , the missile defense agency does have access to the database and uses it as a cross - check to determine if it is identifying similar critical program information .

the air force has been briefed on the initiative but does not yet have consent from all of the commands to participate .

without full participation across all dod components , the usefulness of this database as a tool to identify critical technologies that may need anti - tamper protection will be limited .

to determine whether anti - tamper protection is needed , program managers must identify which technologies are deemed critical , determine the potential threats and vulnerabilities to these technologies , and identify sufficient anti - tamper solutions to protect the technologies .

such decisions involve a certain level of subjectivity .

however , program managers lack the information or tools needed to make informed assessments at these key decision points .

as a result , some technologies that need protection may not be identified or may not have sufficient protection .

determining technologies that are critical is largely left to the discretion of the program managers .

while dod has some resources available to program managers to help identify critical technologies , they may be of limited use .

for example , the executive agent's searchable spreadsheet of critical technologies may not be comprehensive because it relies on dod's militarily critical technologies list , which we reported in 2006 was largely out of date .

also , some program offices have used a series of questions established in a 1994 dod manual on acquisition systems protection to help guide their discussions on what is critical .

however , these questions are broad and subject to interpretation , and can result in different conclusions , depending on who is involved in the decision - making process .

in addition , identifying what is critical varies by dod component and sometimes by program office .

for example , one air force program office tried various approaches , including teams of subject matter experts , over 2 years to identify its list of critical program information .

in contrast , the army took the initiative to establish a research center to assist program managers in identifying critical program information , but army officials stated that the approach used by the center has led to an underestimating of critical program information and critical technologies in programs .

at the same time , there has been limited coordination across programs on technologies that have been identified as critical — creating a stove piped process — which could result in one technology being protected under one program and not protected under another .

while informal coordination can occur , programs did not have a formal mechanism for coordinating with other programs , including those within their service .

for example , officials from one program office stated they had little interaction from programs within their service or other services to ensure protection of similar technologies .

a program under one joint program executive office had not coordinated with other programs to identify similar technologies as critical .

in addition , according to an army official , contractors who have worked on programs across services have questioned why one service is applying anti - tamper solutions to a technology that another service has not identified as critical .

finally , one program office we spoke with identified critical program information on its system but indicated that a similar system in another service had not identified any critical program information and , therefore , had no plans to implement anti - tamper protection .

despite the risk that some technologies that need protection may not be identified or may not be protected across programs , no formal mechanism exists within dod to provide a horizontal view of what is critical .

however , any effort to do so could be undermined by the programs' and services' different definitions and interpretations of “critical program information” and “critical technologies.” the anti - tamper executive agent defines critical program information as capturing all critical technologies .

in contrast , the army's interpretation is that critical program information only includes critical technologies that are state - of - the - art .

for the navy , critical program information includes software , while hardware is part of what the navy defines as critical technologies .

one program that is part of a joint program office identified critical program information as including company proprietary information .

as a result , tracking critical program information may not provide a horizontal view of all technologies services and programs have identified as needing anti - tamper protection .

once a program office identifies critical technologies , the next step in the anti - tamper decision process is to identify threats to those technologies .

dod's program manager's guidebook and checklist for anti - tamper states that multiple threat assessments should be requested from either the service intelligence organization or counterintelligence organization .

one program office we visited stated that it has requested and received multiple threat assessments from the intelligence community , which have sometimes contradicted one another , leaving the program office to decipher the information and determine the threat .

according to an anti - tamper point of contact , other programs have received contradictory information — typically relating to foreign countries' capabilities to reverse engineer .

the potential impact of contradictory intelligence reports is twofold: if the threat is deemed to be low but is actually high , the technology is susceptible to reverse engineering ; conversely , if the threat is deemed to be high and is actually low , the anti - tamper solution is more robust than needed .

to assist with the process of identifying threats , program offices may request threat assessments from a group within the defense intelligence agency .

however , this group was not able to complete assessments for approximately 6 months during 2006 .

while the group has resumed completing assessments , an agency official stated that it is not able to produce as many assessments as before due to limited resources .

the defense intelligence agency does not turn down program offices that may request assessments , but does have to put them in a queue and provide them with previous assessments , if they exist , until it can complete a full assessment for the program office .

one program office indicated that it took 6 to 9 months for the agency to complete its assessment .

program managers also lack the tools needed to identify the optimal anti - tamper solutions for those critical technologies that are vulnerable to threats .

most notably , program managers lack a risk model to assess the relative strengths of different anti - tamper solutions and a tool to help estimate their costs .

according to national security agency officials , who are available to provide support to program managers considering or implementing anti - tamper protection , program managers and contractors sometimes have difficulty determining appropriate solutions .

four of five programs we spoke with that had experience in this area of the anti - tamper decision process had difficulty identifying how much anti - tamper protection was enough to protect a critical technology .

for example , one program official told us that an anti - tamper solution developed for one of the program's critical technologies may not be sufficient to prevent reverse engineering .

another program office stated that it is difficult to choose between competing contractors without knowing how to determine the appropriate level of anti - tamper protection needed .

an anti - tamper point of contact said that program managers need a tool to help them assess the criticality of a technology versus the types of threats to that technology .

implementing a suboptimal anti - tamper solution can have cost and performance implications for the program .

specifically , if the solution provides less anti - tamper protection than is needed , the program may have to retrofit additional anti - tamper protection to allow for a more robust solution .

not only can such retrofitting add to a program's costs , it can compromise performance .

given limited resources and tools for determining anti - tamper solutions , some program office officials told us that to satisfy anti - tamper solutions they relied on other protection measures .

for example , officials in one program office stated that anti - tamper protection and information assurance were interchangeable and indicated that following the national security agency's information assurance requirements — which number in the hundreds — should be sufficient as an anti - tamper solution for this system .

this same program was not aware of anti - tamper resources and did not coordinate with an anti - tamper validation and verification team on its solutions .

also , an official from another program office indicated that anti - tamper protection and information assurance are similarly defined .

while dod and service officials agreed that some information assurance and anti - tamper measures may overlap , fulfilling information assurance requirements does not guarantee a sufficient anti - tamper solution .

in establishing various policies to protect its critical assets , dod saw anti - tamper as a key way to preserve u.s. investment in critical technologies while operating in an environment of coalition warfare and a globalized industry .

program managers are ultimately responsible for implementing dod's anti - tamper policy .

however , a lack of direction , information , and tools from dod to implement its policy has created significant challenges for program managers .

further , this policy can compete with the demands of meeting program cost and schedule objectives , particularly when the optimal anti - tamper solution is identified late in the schedule .

until dod establishes a formal directive or instruction for implementing its policy departmentwide and equips program managers with adequate implementation tools , program managers will continue to face difficulties in identifying critical technologies and implementing anti - tamper protection .

as dod examines its policies for protecting critical assets , we are recommending that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of acquisition , technology , and logistics , in coordination with the anti - tamper executive agent and the under secretary of defense for intelligence , to issue or be involved in developing and providing departmentwide direction for application of its anti - tamper policy that prescribes how to carry out the policy and establishes definitions for critical program information and critical technologies .

to help ensure the effectiveness of anti - tamper implementation , we also recommend that the secretary of defense direct the anti - tamper executive agent to identify and provide additional tools to assist program managers in the anti - tamper decision process .

in written comments on a draft of this report , dod concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the anti - tamper executive agent to identify additional tools to assist program managers in the anti - tamper decision process .

dod stated that the anti - tamper executive agent is drafting anti - tamper standard guidelines to facilitate proper implementation of anti - tamper protection across the department .

dod did not concur with our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense ( at&l ) in coordination with the anti - tamper executive agent and the under secretary of defense ( intelligence ) to issue departmentwide direction for application of its anti - tamper policy that prescribes how to carry out the policy and establishes definitions for critical program information and critical technologies .

dod stated that the under secretary of defense ( intelligence ) has primary responsibility for dod directive 5200.39 , a security and counterintelligence support directive to acquisition programs , and its successor , dod instruction 5200.39 regarding protection of critical program information .

the under secretary of defense ( intelligence ) is currently coordinating an update to this directive .

once it is issued , the department plans to update dod 5200.1-m , which provides the execution standards and guidelines to meet the dod instruction 5200.39 policy .

while dod has issued broad policy memorandums beginning in 1999 that reflect the department's desire for routinely assessing weapon systems to determine if anti - tamper protection is needed , the department has not fully incorporated anti - tamper policy into its formal acquisition guidance .

as we have reported , service officials indicated collectively that these policy memorandums are high - level , broad , and leave implementation ultimately up to the individual program manager .

dod did not indicate when the update of dod directive 5200.39 might be complete and guidance on anti - tamper implementation issued .

we continue to believe that such direction is currently needed and that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , who issued the policy memorandums and is responsible for anti - tamper policy , should be involved in developing and providing the appropriate direction whether it be the update to dod directive 5200.39 or another vehicle .

that direction should include how to implement the anti - tamper policy and how critical program information and critical technologies are defined .

we continue to believe that the direction , which has been lacking since the policy was initiated in 1999 , should not be further delayed .

if dod continues to experience delays in updating dod directive 5200.39 , it should consider interim measures to meet the immediate need for anti - tamper direction .

dod's letter is reprinted in appendix ii .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , as well as the secretary of defense ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the assistant to the president for national security affairs .

in addition , this report will be made available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or calvaresibarra@gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

others making key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

to identify actions the department of defense ( dod ) has taken to implement its anti - tamper policy since 2004 , we reviewed dod policies and guidance governing anti - tamper protection on weapon systems and obtained documents on various initiatives .

we interviewed officials from the anti - tamper executive agent , military services , and other dod components such as the missile defense agency ; acquisition , technology and logistics ; defense intelligence agency ; national security agency ; and the air force research laboratory about initiatives or actions taken regarding anti - tamper .

through these interviews and documents , we also determined the status of our 2004 anti - tamper report recommendations .

we interviewed dod officials from networks and information integration , science and technology , and counterintelligence to discuss anti - tamper protection and how it relates to other program protection measures .

to determine how program managers implemented dod's anti - tamper policy , we interviewed officials from 14 program offices .

we are not identifying the names of the programs due to classification concerns .

we conducted structured interviews with 7 of the 14 program offices to discuss and obtain documents about their experiences with implementing the anti - tamper decision process and identify any challenges they faced .

we selected 6 of these programs from a list of weapon systems identified in anti - tamper executive agent , services , and component documents as considering and / or implementing anti - tamper protection and a seventh program considering anti - tamper that we identified during the course of our fieldwork .

systems we selected represented a cross section of acquisition programs and various types of systems in different phases of development .

for the remaining programs , we interviewed 7 not identified by the anti - tamper executive agent or the services as considering and / or implementing anti - tamper to obtain their viewpoints on dod's anti - tamper policy and implementation .

we selected these programs by identifying lists of dod acquisition programs and comparing them to the anti - tamper executive agent's , services' , and components' lists of program considering and / or implementing anti - tamper .

we did not evaluate whether programs had implemented sufficient anti - tamper protection .

in addition to the contact named above , anne - marie lasowski ( assistant director ) , gregory harmon , molly whipple , karen sloan , john c. martin , and alyssa weir made major contributions to this report .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 07-310 .

washington , d.c.: january 2007 .

export controls: challenges exist in enforcement of an inherently complex system .

gao - 07-265 .

washington , d.c.: december 20 , 2006 .

defense technologies: dod's critical technologies lists rarely inform export control and other policy decisions .

gao - 06-793 .

washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2006 .

president's justification of the high performance computer control threshold does not fully address national defense authorization act of 1998 requirements .

gao - 06-754r .

washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2006 .

export controls: improvements to commerce's dual - use system needed to ensure protection of u.s .

interests in the post - 9 / 11 environment .

gao - 06-638 .

washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2006 .

defense trade: enhancements to the implementation of exon - florio could strengthen the law's effectiveness .

gao - 05-686 .

washington , d.c.: september 28 , 2005 .

industrial security: dod cannot ensure its oversight of contractors under foreign influence is sufficient .

gao - 05-681 .

washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2005 .

defense trade: arms export control vulnerabilities and inefficiencies in the post - 9 / 11 security environment .

gao - 05-468r .

washington , d.c.: april 7 , 2005 .

defense trade: arms export control system in the post - 9 / 11 environment .

gao - 05-234 .

washington , d.c.: february 16 , 2005 .

defense acquisitions: dod needs to better support program managers' implementation of anti - tamper protection .

gao - 04-302 .

washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2004 .

defense trade: better information needed to support decisions affecting proposed weapons transfers .

gao - 03-694 .

washington , d.c.: july 11 , 2003 .

