the number of people in the united states over age 65 is projected to almost double in size by 2050 , comprising 1 of every 5 people .

of the population who were over age 65 in 2016 , more than 40 percent ( 20.6 million ) were over age 75 .

as americans age , family caregivers , such as adult children and spouses , will play a critical role in supporting the needs of this population .

however , those who provide eldercare may face risks to their own long - term financial security .

for example , caregivers may take time out of the workforce or reduce their work hours to provide care , or they may stop saving for their own retirement or tap into their retirement savings to pay for out - of - pocket caregiving expenses , such as travel or medical expenses .

these caregivers may ultimately receive less in social security benefits if they reduce their workforce participation .

while men caregivers may face some of these risks , the effects of caregiving for women are compounded by lower average lifetime earnings and a longer life expectancy than men .

as a result , women caregivers are at an increased risk of outliving their savings .

you asked that we provide information about parental and spousal caregivers and to identify options that could improve their retirement security .

this report ( 1 ) examines what is known about the size and characteristics of the parental and spousal caregiving population , including differences among women and men ; ( 2 ) examines the extent to which parental or spousal caregiving affects retirement security ; and ( 3 ) identifies and discusses policy options and initiatives that could improve caregivers' retirement security .

to determine the characteristics of parental and spousal caregivers , we analyzed nationally representative survey data from the american time use survey ( atus ) eldercare module for 2011 through 2017 , the most recent available .

the atus eldercare module measures the amount of time people spend doing various activities related to eldercare .

the survey asks respondents whether they provided unpaid care or assistance more than once in the 3 to 4 months prior to the survey to a person who needed help because of a condition related to aging .

to estimate the effect of parental and spousal caregiving on caregivers' jobs , we analyzed nationally representative survey data that was used in the 2015 caregiving in the u.s. study .

the survey asks respondents whether they provided unpaid care to a relative or friend 18 years or older to help them take care of themselves , and asks whether working caregivers experienced specific job impacts due to caregiving .

to estimate the effect of caregiving on retirement security , we analyzed nationally representative survey data from the health and retirement study ( hrs ) from 2002 through 2014 .

hrs is a longitudinal survey of individuals over 50 that is conducted every 2 years .

the initial cohort of respondents was ages 51 to 61 in 1992 , and these respondents have been interviewed every 2 years since 1992 .

hrs has replenished the sample of younger cohorts every 6 years since 1992 ; however , there are some years of data that do not include younger respondents .

unlike the surveys above , which use a single definition for all types of caregivers , the definitions for parental and spousal caregivers in the hrs were different .

to identify parental caregivers , the hrs survey asks respondents whether they spent 100 hours or more since their last interview or in the last 2 years helping a parent or parent - in - law with basic personal activities such as dressing , eating , or bathing , or with household chores , errands , or transportation , among other tasks .

to identify spousal caregivers , we used the questions that ask respondents whether they received help with activities of daily living ( adls ) or with instrumental activities of daily living ( iadls ) .

we determined whether parental or spousal caregivers provided care in the 6 years leading up to ages 65 or 66 to capture the possible effect of caregiving on retirement income and assets .

to obtain information on caregivers in this time period , we started with individuals initially interviewed at age 61 who would have provided care starting at 59 , given the biennial nature of the survey .

each cohort of data includes individuals initially interviewed at age 61 , which allowed us to maximize the number of individuals we could include in the hrs sample .

however , as a result of this decision , our analysis did not cover caregiving that took place prior to age 59 .

specifically , using hrs data , we examined differences between caregivers' and non - caregivers' individual retirement account ( ira ) assets , non - ira assets , defined contribution account ( eg , 401 ( k ) ) balances , and social security income .

we also conducted regression analyses to examine whether observed differences were statistically significant when we controlled for demographic and other characteristics of parental and spousal caregivers .

for all of the survey data used in our study , we reviewed documentation , interviewed or obtained information from officials responsible for the data , and tested the data for anomalies .

we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

to identify policy options and initiatives that could improve caregivers' retirement security , we conducted an extensive literature review of journal articles , working papers , and think - tank studies on caregiving and topics related to retirement security , and conducted interviews with experts in caregiving or retirement security .

based on this information , we identified specific actions that could affect caregivers' retirement security , which we grouped into four different policy categories based on common themes .

we then conducted semi - structured interviews with a range of experts and stakeholders — including some of the experts we met with to identify specific policy actions — to obtain their views on the benefits and costs of the specific policy options and approaches we identified .

we selected experts and stakeholders who are knowledgeable about caregiving or retirement security or both , who are engaged in research or advocacy around caregiving , or who represented groups that might be affected by the identified policy approaches .

see appendix i for more detailed information about our scope and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from november 2017 to may 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

there are three main pillars of retirement income in the united states: social security benefits , employer - sponsored or other retirement savings plans , and individual savings and assets .

social security is a cash benefit that partially replaces earnings when an individual retires or becomes disabled .

the monthly benefit amount depends on a worker's earnings history and the age at which he or she chooses to begin receiving benefits , as well as other factors .

social security benefits are paid to workers who meet requirements for the time they have worked in covered employment , that is , jobs through which they have paid social security taxes .

to qualify for retirement benefits , workers must typically have earned a minimum of 40 quarters of coverage ( also referred to as credits ) over their lifetime .

social security benefits are calculated based on the highest 35 years of earnings on which workers paid social security taxes .

those who wait until the full retirement age , which has gradually increased from 65 to 67 , to claim social security receive unreduced benefits .

social security provides larger benefits , as a percentage of earnings , to lower earners than to higher earners .

social security makes up a large portion of income for many older americans , and older americans face greater risk of poverty without social security benefits .

we previously reported that data from the federal reserve board's most recent survey of consumer finances showed that in 2016 , among households age 65 and over , the bottom 20 percent , ranked by income , relied on social security retirement benefits for 81 percent of their income , on average .

according to a 2014 census report , about 43 percent of people age 65 or older would have incomes below the poverty line if they did not receive social security .

the most common type of employer - sponsored retirement plan is a defined contribution plan , such as a 401 ( k ) plan .

defined contribution plans generally allow individuals to accumulate tax - advantaged retirement savings in an individual account based on employee and employer contributions , and the investment returns ( gains and losses ) earned on the account .

individuals or employers may make contributions up to statutory limits .

individuals typically pay fees for account maintenance , such as investment management or record keeping fees .

an employee may take funds out of the account prior to age 59 ½ , but will owe taxes , possibly including an additional tax , for early withdrawal .

workers can also save for retirement through an individual retirement account ( ira ) .

iras allow workers to receive favorable tax treatment for making contributions to an account up to certain statutory limits .

most iras are funded by assets rolled over from defined benefit and defined contribution plans when individuals change jobs or retire .

individuals must have taxable earnings to contribute to an ira , and the amount of their contribution cannot exceed their earned income .

iras also have account maintenance fees , which are generally higher than those charged to participants in employer - sponsored plans .

iras are a major source of retirement assets .

as we reported in 2017 , iras held about $7.3 trillion in assets compared to $5.3 trillion held in defined contribution plans .

individuals may augment their retirement income from social security and employer - sponsored plans with their own savings , which includes any home equity and other non - retirement savings and investments .

non - retirement savings and investments might include income from interest , dividends , estates or trusts , or royalties .

through our review of literature and interviews with experts , we identified several federal and state efforts that may provide support to caregivers: medicaid .

this federal - state health financing program for low - income and medically needy individuals is the nation's primary payer of long - term services and supports for disabled and aged individuals .

within broad federal requirements , states have significant flexibility to design and implement their programs based on their unique needs , resulting in 56 distinct state medicaid programs .

under medicaid requirements governing the provision of services , states generally must provide institutional care to medicaid beneficiaries , while home and community based long - term services and supports is generally an optional service .

all 50 states and the district of columbia provide long - term care services to some medicaid beneficiaries in home and community settings under a variety of programs authorized by statute .

some of these programs include self - directed services under which participants , or their representatives if applicable , have decision - making authority over certain services and take direct responsibility for managing their services with the assistance of a system of available supports .

under one such program , participants can hire certain relatives to provide personal care services .

tax - related provisions .

caregivers may be able to use dependent care accounts , tax credits , or tax deductions for financial assistance with caregiving costs .

dependent care accounts are set up through an employer and allow individuals to set aside pre - tax funds to care for a qualifying individual , such as a spouse who is unable to care for himself or herself .

as an example of a tax credit , beginning in 2018 , caregivers may be eligible to obtain a $500 non - refundable credit for qualifying dependents other than children , such as a parent or a spouse .

as an example of a deduction , taxpayers may deduct the cost of qualifying medical expenses .

the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( fmla ) .

this act generally provides up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year for eligible employees to help care for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition or for their own serious health condition , among other things .

employees are generally eligible for fmla leave if they have worked for their employer at least 12 months , at least 1,250 hours over the past 12 months , and work at a worksite where the employer employs 50 or more employees or if the employer employs 50 or more employees within 75 miles of the worksite .

the older americans act of 1965 .

this act was passed to help older individuals remain in their homes and includes grant funding for services for older individuals .

since its reauthorization in 2000 , the older americans act of 1965 has provided supports for caregivers through programs such as the national family caregiver support program .

this program provides grants to states to fund a range of supports to help caregivers .

for example , the program provides access to respite care .

according to the national institute on aging , respite care provides in - home or facility - based care by a trained care provider to give the primary caregiver short - term relief from caregiving .

paid sick leave .

this form of leave provides pay protection to workers for short - term health needs , and paid family leave is used by employees for longer - term caregiving .

no federal sick or paid family leave policy exists .

however , as of march 2019 , 10 states ( az , ca , ct , ma , md , nj , or , ri , vt , wa ) and the district of columbia ( dc ) have guaranteed paid sick days for specific workers , according to the national partnership for women and families , with eligibility varying by state .

as of february 2019 , six states ( ca , nj , ny , ri , ma , and wa ) and dc have paid family leave laws in effect or soon will be implementing them , according to the national partnership for women and families .

the covered family relationships , wage replacement rate , and funding mechanism of these programs vary by state .

an estimated 45 million people per year provided unpaid eldercare from 2011 through 2017 , according to american time use survey ( atus ) data .

about 26 million people — roughly one in 10 adults in the u.s. population — cared for their parent or spouse , and about 22 million people cared for other relatives , such as grandparents , aunts and uncles , or non - related adults ( see fig .

1 ) .

among parental and spousal caregivers , 88 percent ( about 23.4 million people ) provided care to a parent , and 12 percent ( 3.2 million people ) provided care to a spouse .

about 7.4 million parental or spousal caregivers ( close to 30 percent ) provided care for more than one person .

we examined several demographic and economic characteristics of parental and spousal caregivers compared to the general population .

women and men were almost evenly divided in the general population , but women were more likely than men to be parental or spousal caregivers , according to atus data from 2011 through 2017 .

women made up 52 percent of the general population , but represented 56 percent of parental caregivers and 63 percent of spousal caregivers ( see fig .

2 ) .

parental caregivers were younger than spousal caregivers , but both groups were older , on average , than the general population .

the average age of parental caregivers was 50 , and the average age of spousal caregivers was 70 , according to atus data .

while about half of the general population was under 45 , most parental caregivers were over 50 , and most spousal caregivers were over 65 ( see fig .

3 ) .

while far fewer in number , spousal caregivers were considerably older than parental caregivers .

almost three - quarters of spousal caregivers were over social security claiming age for full retirement benefits compared to less than 10 percent of parental caregivers .

the racial / ethnic distribution of parental and spousal caregivers was consistent with the general population in that a significant majority of caregivers were white .

when compared to the general population , caregivers were more likely to be white and less likely to be minorities .

the distribution in the marital status of parental caregivers was similar to the general population in that most people in the general population were married , followed by single , divorced , widowed , and separated .

about two - thirds of parental caregivers were married , and not surprisingly , almost all spousal caregivers were married .

parental caregivers were more educated than spousal caregivers and the general population , according to atus data .

for example , 38 percent of parental caregivers had completed college compared to 26 percent of spousal caregivers ( see fig .

4 ) .

these differences may reflect that spousal caregivers are generally older and may come from a generation in which women were less likely to attend college .

parental caregivers were more likely to be employed and to have higher earnings than spousal caregivers and those in the general population .

over 70 percent of parental caregivers worked either full - time or part - time compared to 26 percent of spousal caregivers and 62 percent of the general population ( see fig .

5 ) .

this may be related to the older age of many spousal caregivers , as the percentage of spousal caregivers out of the labor force was about equal to the percentage over age 65 .

further , parental caregivers tended to earn higher wages than spousal caregivers .

among wage and salary workers with a single job , parental caregivers earned $931 per week while spousal caregivers earned $513 per week , and the general population earned $743 per week , according to atus data .

we found that women who provided parental or spousal care were more likely to be employed part - time and to have lower earnings than men who were parental or spousal caregivers ( see fig .

6 ) .

women caregivers were less likely to work than men caregivers , but among those who worked , women caregivers were more likely to work part - time , according to atus data .

for example , among parental caregivers , 66 percent of women were employed either full - time or part - time compared to 77 percent of men , but 17 percent of women worked part - time compared to 10 percent of men .

similarly , among spousal caregivers , women were less likely to be employed than men .

in addition , differences in the employment status of women and men caregivers are similar to differences between women and men in the general population .

when we examined the distribution of men and women caregivers in earnings quartiles , we found that men caregivers were more likely to be among the highest earners .

for parental caregivers , 43 percent of men compared to 25 percent of women were among the highest earners .

for spousal caregivers , 22 percent of men compared to 14 percent of women were among the highest earners .

regression results show that these differences between men and women caregivers were significant for parental and spousal caregivers , and remained significant after controlling for caregiver age and years of education .

in terms of education , women parental caregivers were more likely to have completed some college or more ( 69 percent ) while women spousal caregivers were less likely to have done so ( 50 percent ) compared to men parental and spousal caregivers ( 63 and 56 percent , respectively ) .

similar to the education levels of the parental and spousal caregiving populations generally , these results may reflect generational differences .

spousal caregivers were more likely to provide care daily compared to parental caregivers , and parental caregivers who lived in the same house as their parents were unsurprisingly more likely to provide care daily than those who did not , according to atus data .

the vast majority of spousal caregivers ( 81 percent ) provided care on a daily basis compared to 21 percent of parental caregivers .

when we examined the frequency of caregiving among those who lived in the same house as their parents , we found that about 63 percent of these parental caregivers provided care daily , suggesting there is a positive relationship between frequency of care and cohabitation ( see fig .

7 ) .

experts we spoke with said the frequency of care may depend on whether the care recipient has a disability and the type of disability .

for example , someone with a severe disability may be more likely to require care daily compared to someone with a less severe disability .

women and minorities tended to provide care more frequently .

among parental and spousal caregivers , 30 percent of women provided care daily compared to 25 percent of men .

while the majority of caregivers were white , as discussed above , black and hispanic caregivers were more likely to provide daily care than white caregivers — 35 percent of black caregivers and 39 percent of hispanic caregivers provided care daily compared to 26 percent of white caregivers ( see fig .

8 ) .

while most parental caregivers were married , parental caregivers who were never married were more likely to provide daily care than divorced , widowed , separated , and married caregivers .

daily caregiving may be concentrated among those with the fewest financial resources .

parental or spousal caregivers with lower levels of education and earnings were more likely to provide care daily ( see fig .

9 ) .

for example , 48 percent of caregivers without a high school degree provided care daily compared to 21 percent who had completed college .

those who worked part - time were also more likely to provide care daily compared to those who worked full - time ( 27 percent versus 18 percent , respectively ) .

those who provided care daily were also more likely to be among the lowest earners .

in addition to examining frequency of care , we also found that most parental or spousal caregivers provided care that lasted several years .

the majority of parental or spousal caregivers ( 54 percent ) provided care for at least 3 years , and 16 percent provided care for 10 years or more .

on average , parental or spousal caregivers provided care for about 5 years , regardless of gender .

the number of years of care provided increased with the age of the parental or spousal caregivers ( see fig .

10 ) .

women caregivers , spousal caregivers , and hispanic caregivers were more likely to provide long - term daily care .

among parental or spousal caregivers who said they provided care daily and provided care for at least 5 years , 61 percent were women .

in comparison , among all parental and spousal caregivers , 56 percent were women .

twenty - nine percent of spousal caregivers provided long - term daily care compared to 8 percent of parental caregivers .

in addition , 16 percent of hispanic caregivers provided long - term daily care compared to 10 percent of whites and 12 percent of blacks .

an estimated 68 percent of working parental and spousal caregivers said they experienced at least one of eight job impacts about which they were asked , according to our analysis of data used in the 2015 national alliance for caregiving and aarp sponsored study , caregiving in the u.s .

the highest percentage of parental and spousal caregivers — more than half — reported that they went in late , left early , or took time off during the day to provide care ( see fig .

11 ) .

spousal caregivers were more likely to experience adverse job impacts than parental caregivers .

about 81 percent of spousal caregivers said they experienced at least one of the eight job impacts they were asked about compared to 65 percent of parental caregivers .

spousal caregivers were more likely to reduce their work hours , give up work entirely , or retire early , compared to working parental caregivers .

for example , 29 percent of spousal caregivers said they went from working full - time to part - time or cut back their hours due to caregiving , compared to 15 percent of parental caregivers .

our prior work has reported that some older workers felt forced to retire for professional or personal reasons and that individuals approaching retirement often have to retire for reasons they did not anticipate , including caregiving responsibilities .

in addition , our prior work has reported that job loss for older workers , in general , can lead to lower retirement income , claiming social security early , and exhaustion of retirement savings .

we also found that older workers face many challenges in regaining employment .

consistent with these results , we also found that spousal caregiving was negatively associated with the number of hours caregivers worked .

specifically , spousal caregivers who were ages 59 to 66 worked approximately 20 percent fewer annual hours than married individuals of the same age who did not provide spousal care , according to hrs data from 2002 to 2014 .

we found that spousal caregivers who were at or near the age of full retirement eligibility had lower levels of ira assets , non - ira assets , and social security income compared to those who did not provide care .

we did not detect the same relationship between parental caregiving and retirement income , which may be due , in part , to the older age of the caregivers we examined .

spousal caregivers at or near retirement age had lower levels of retirement assets and income compared to married individuals who did not provide spousal care .

spousal caregivers tended to have lower levels of ira assets , non - ira assets — such as real estate or stocks — and social security income than non - caregivers ( see table 1 ) .

after controlling for certain characteristics of caregivers , we found that spousal caregivers still had less retirement assets and income than non - caregivers .

for example , spousal caregivers had an estimated 39 percent less in non - ira assets than non - caregivers , after controlling for characteristics such as level of education and race / ethnicity .

when we compared women and men spousal caregivers , we found both had less in ira and non - ira assets than non - caregivers , but only women had less in social security income .

specifically , we found that women and men caregivers had 37 to 54 percent less in ira and non - ira assets than non - caregivers , after controlling for demographic and other characteristics .

however , the effect of spousal caregiving on social security income was only significant among women .

women caregivers had 15 percent less in social security income than married women who did not provide care .

many older americans rely on social security for a significant portion of their retirement income .

therefore , a lower social security benefit could have serious consequences for these individuals' retirement security .

one possible explanation experts offered for why spousal caregivers may have less in retirement income and assets than non - caregivers is that the care recipient may be in poor health , resulting in reduced workforce participation of both members of the household , which could then have a large negative impact on household wealth .

this scenario could leave spousal caregivers in a precarious financial situation heading into retirement .

we did not find that parental caregivers at or near retirement age had lower levels of retirement assets or income than non - caregivers .

we compared the retirement assets and income of parental caregivers to the retirement assets and income of individuals who did not provide parental care and did not find a statistically significant effect of parental caregiving on ira assets , non - ira assets , defined contribution balances , or social security income .

see appendix i for more information on this analysis .

we may not have seen a significant effect of parental caregiving for a few reasons .

first , because of the scope of the hrs data we used , we limited the analysis to individuals who provided care in the 6 years leading up to ages 65 or 66 .

therefore , this analysis does not capture the possible effects of parental caregiving prior to age 59 , which may be during the middle of a person's career or during their peak earning years .

second , similar to spousal caregivers , experts said a caregiver may reduce their workforce participation to care for a parent ; however , parental caregiving may not affect household income because married caregivers' spouses may be able to continue working and offset any lost earnings .

in addition , unlike spousal care , parental care may be provided by multiple individuals , so the effect on retirement security may be distributed across siblings .

our analysis could not definitively identify the causal effect or lack of effect of caregiving on retirement income due to three main limitations .

first , because caregiving is not random but is a function of an individual's circumstances , it is difficult to isolate its effect .

for example , individuals who provide care may do so because they have jobs that are more flexible , or because they have better family support .

second , there may be other ways of providing care beyond an individual giving their time that were not captured in the hrs data and therefore could not be included in our analysis .

for example , a child may provide financial assistance to a parent rather than providing time .

however , the hrs does not capture whether financial help to parents was specifically used for caregiving expenses .

third , common to analyses of this type , alternate measures of certain variables may produce different estimates .

for example , we controlled for a caregiver's level of education based on data included in the hrs ; however , a measure of education that included the type of education , such as whether the person was a trained caregiver , might have changed our estimates .

as a result of these limitations , our estimates may not capture the effect of caregiving on retirement income for the broader population .

our analysis of literature and expert interviews found that parental or spousal caregivers could face several retirement security challenges: caregivers may have high out – of - pocket expenses .

caregivers may face immediate out - of - pocket expenses that could make it difficult to set aside money for retirement or that could require them to prematurely withdraw funds from existing retirement accounts .

these financial burdens can include , for example , travel and medical expenses for a care recipient .

aarp's study , family caregiving and out - of - pocket costs , estimated that family caregivers spent an average of nearly $7,000 on caregiving costs in 2016 .

caregiving costs amounted to about 14 percent of income for white family caregivers and 44 percent and 34 percent for hispanic and black caregivers , respectively .

caregivers may reduce their workforce participation .

in addition to foregone earnings , caregivers who reduce their workforce participation may also lose access to employer - provided retirement benefits , such as participating in an employer - sponsored 401 ( k ) plan or receiving an employer's matching contributions .

about 68 percent of working parental and spousal caregivers reported job impacts due to caregiving responsibilities , which included reducing their workforce participation .

for those who leave the workforce , re - entry can be challenging , and wages and retirement savings can be negatively affected long - term .

caregivers may not contribute to retirement accounts .

caregivers may face challenges contributing to retirement accounts due to caregiving , and some working caregivers may not be eligible for employer - sponsored retirement benefits .

for example , some part - time employees may not be eligible to participate in employer - sponsored retirement plans , or some employees may lose access if they reduce their workforce participation .

individual and employer - sponsored retirement accounts serve as important supplements to social security as income replacements in retirement .

caregivers may have lower social security benefits .

caregivers may have less in social security benefits if they reduce their workforce participation .

social security benefits are calculated using the highest 35 years of earnings .

if a caregiver retires after working for 33 years , he or she would have 2 years of zero income in their benefit calculation , which would result in lower benefits throughout retirement compared to what their benefit would have been if they had a full 35- year earnings history .

social security makes up a large portion of retirement income from many older americans , so a lower social security benefit could have significant consequences for financial security .

we identified four policy categories that could potentially address retirement security challenges faced by caregivers .

to do so , we identified specific actions that could improve caregivers' retirement security based on a review of literature and interviews with experts .

we then grouped these actions into four categories: 1 ) decrease caregivers' out – of - pocket expenses , 2 ) increase caregivers' workforce attachment and wage preservation , 3 ) increase caregivers' access or contributions to retirement accounts , and 4 ) increase caregivers' social security benefits .

see figure 12 for example actions in each category .

experts we interviewed identified potential benefits of each of the four policy categories .

they also identified specific groups of parental or spousal caregivers who could benefit , including women , lower - income caregivers , and working caregivers ( see table 2 ) .

as discussed previously , women were more likely to provide parental and spousal care , to work part - time , and to have lower earnings than men caregivers .

in addition , over one - third of parental caregivers and almost two - thirds of spousal caregivers were in the bottom two income quartiles , and caregivers in the bottom earnings quartile were more likely to provide care daily .

experts also said all four categories have potential costs and challenges ( see table 3 ) .

experts identified three implementation issues that would need to be addressed regardless of the policy category .

determining responsibility for implementation .

it is unclear who would be responsible for implementing and funding certain actions under each approach , according to experts .

some may require legislative changes , steps by employers , or public - private partnerships that integrate both sectors .

the raise family caregivers act enacted in january 2018 requires the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to develop a strategy , including recommendations related to financial security and workforce issues , to support family caregivers and to convene an advisory council to help develop the strategy .

the advisory council will include representatives from federal agencies , employers , state and local officials , and other groups .

between october 12 , 2018 and december 3 , 2018 , hhs sought nominations for individuals to serve on the advisory council .

defining caregiving for benefit eligibility .

experts said some actions may require a definition of caregiving to use in determining eligibility for benefits .

current definitions related to federal caregiving policy vary .

for example , fmla defines a caregiver by specific familial relationships .

in contrast , the raise family caregivers act defines a family caregiver more broadly as an “adult family member or other individual who has a significant relationship with , and who provides a broad range of assistance to , an individual with a chronic or other health condition , disability , or functional limitation.” identifying and verifying caregivers .

experts said some actions may require a mechanism for identifying and verifying a caregiver's status .

experts noted that many caregivers do not identify themselves as such , particularly those caring for a spouse , and therefore do not claim existing benefits .

in addition , certain actions may require a decision about whether benefits extend to the primary caregiver or to all caregivers , for example , siblings who may jointly provide care to a parent .

several experts we interviewed said caregivers could benefit more from a retirement system that incorporates actions across the policy categories so that actions can work in tandem to address caregivers' needs .

for example , if caregivers have lower out - of - pocket caregiving costs , they might be able to contribute more to their retirement savings .

if caregivers can contribute more to their retirement savings because they have better access to accounts , they might have to rely less on social security in retirement .

some experts pointed to hawaii's kupuna caregivers program as an example of a program with complementary goals — to alleviate out - of - pocket expenses and reduce barriers to staying fully employed while providing care for a family member .

specifically , according to experts , the program provides a financial benefit of $70 per day for up to 365 days to caregivers who work at least 30 hours a week to spend on respite care , home health care workers , meal preparation , and transportation costs for a care recipient age 60 or older .

although the program is in the early stages of implementation , experts said several states already see it as a model for meeting these two goals .

experts also said it would be helpful to implement actions that address the needs of caregivers in the long - and short - term and across their lifespans .

in general , experts said each of the policy categories could help longer - term caregivers more than short - term caregivers .

however , they said certain actions to decrease caregivers' out - of - pocket expenses or to increase workforce attachment could also help in addressing immediate needs .

for example , experts said actions such as paid time off and flexible work schedules could help those caring for individuals with acute conditions to attend doctor's appointments .

experts also said policies should address the needs of caregivers with different levels of workforce attachment .

for example , one expert said there are disparate policy impacts to consider depending on whether someone is a salaried worker , an hourly worker , or a caregiver who does not work .

similarly , someone who depends on other types of government assistance , such as social security disability insurance , may also have different needs .

another expert said the age at which caregiving takes place may impact retirement security ; people may be caring for older parents or a spouse at a point in their careers when they are supposed to be catching up on retirement contributions or have peak earnings , so they may not be able to make up for lost time in terms of retirement savings .

finally , several experts mentioned public awareness as critical to helping people understand the implications of caregiving on retirement security .

they stressed the importance of financial literacy and making caregivers aware of existing and new benefits .

experts said people are not well informed about their social security benefits or their options for private retirement savings .

in addition , it can be difficult to understand the long - term impacts of becoming a caregiver , and experts pointed to the need for education about how the decision , along with those to leave the workforce or reduce workforce participation , could affect caregivers' long - term financial security .

one expert noted that education and services that help families proactively think about their financial security and plan for caregiving needs could be useful .

educating the public about what supports exist , new supports as they become available , and eligibility and enrollment procedures , is critical to ensuring caregivers take advantage of available supports .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of labor , the department of health and human services , the department of the treasury , and the social security administration for review and comment .

the departments of labor , health and human services , and the treasury provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

the social security administration told us they had no comments on the draft report .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of labor , health and human services , and treasury , the acting commissioner of social security , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or jeszeckc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

the objectives of this review were to ( 1 ) examine what is known about the size and characteristics of the parental and spousal caregiving population , including differences among women and men ; ( 2 ) examine the extent to which parental or spousal caregiving affects retirement security ; and ( 3 ) identify and discuss policy options and initiatives that could improve caregivers' retirement security .

this appendix provides information about the methods we used to answer these questions .

section i describes key information sources we used , and section ii describes the empirical methods we used to answer the first and second research questions and the results of supplementary analyses .

to answer our research questions , we analyzed data from three nationally representative surveys — the american time use survey ( atus ) , the health and retirement study ( hrs ) , and caregiving in the u.s. — conducted an extensive literature search , and interviewed relevant experts or stakeholders .

this section provides a description of our data sources and the steps we took to ensure their reliability for the purposes of our review .

to answer the first objective , we analyzed data collected through atus' eldercare module from 2011 through 2017 , the most recent year of data available .

the atus — which is sponsored by the bureau of labor statistics and conducted by the u.s. census bureau — provides nationally representative estimates of how , where , and with whom americans spend their time .

individuals interviewed for the atus are randomly selected from a subset of households that have completed their eighth and final month of interviews for the current population survey ( cps ) .

starting in 2011 , the atus began asking questions about eldercare .

we weighted the data and calculated relative standard errors to reflect cps guidance on the sample design .

a relative standard error is equal to the standard error of a survey estimate divided by the survey estimate .

we analyzed data used in the 2015 caregiving in the u.s. study sponsored by the national alliance for caregiving and the aarp public policy institute to estimate job impacts of parental and spousal caregiving for working caregivers .

the survey was conducted through online interviews .

to identify caregivers , respondents were asked whether they provided unpaid care to a relative or friend 18 years or older to help them take care of themselves .

respondents were also asked to whom they provided care , which allowed us to identify parental and spousal caregivers .

we considered someone to be a parental caregiver if they provided care to a parent or a parent - in - law .

we considered someone to be a spousal caregiver if they provided care to a spouse or partner .

to determine the job impacts of caregiving , respondents were asked whether they were currently employed while providing care or whether they were employed in the last year while providing care and whether they experienced any of the following job impacts as a result of caregiving: went in late , left early , or took time off during the day to provide care went from working full - time to part - time , or cut back hours took a leave of absence received a warning about performance or attendance at work gave up working entirely turned down a promotion lost any job benefits all estimates derived from random samples are subject to sampling error .

all percentage estimates from this survey have margins of error at the 95 percent confidence level of plus or minus 5 percentage points or less , unless otherwise noted .

to analyze the effects of caregiving on retirement security , we analyzed data collected through the hrs , a nationally representative survey sponsored by the national institute on aging and the social security administration and conducted by the survey research center at the university of michigan's institute for social research .

this biennial longitudinal survey collects data on individuals over age 50 and contains information on unpaid parental and spousal caregivers .

each biennial period is referred to as a “wave.” the hrs includes both members of a couple as respondents .

there are currently 12 waves of core data available from 1992 to 2014 with about 18,000 to 23,000 participants in any given wave .

the initial 1992 cohort consisted of respondents who were then ages 51 to 61 , and these respondents have been interviewed every 2 years since 1992 .

new cohorts have been added over time to maintain the representation of the older population from pre - retirement through retirement and beyond .

we used data from 2002 to 2014 for our analyses ; we did not use data prior to 2002 because data on spousal caregivers were formatted differently .

we adjusted asset and income values for inflation .

we weighted the data and calculated standard errors to reflect hrs guidance on the sample design .

for each of the datasets described above , we conducted a data reliability assessment of variables included in our analyses .

we reviewed technical documentation , conducted electronic data tests for completeness and accuracy , and contacted knowledgeable officials with specific questions about the data .

we determined that the variables we used from the data we reviewed were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing and comparing the caregiving populations to each other or to non - caregivers .

we also cited studies conducted by other researchers to supplement our findings ; each of these studies was reviewed by two social scientists with expertise in research methodology and was found to be sufficiently methodologically sound for the purposes of supplementing our descriptions or comparisons .

to gain an understanding of policy options that could improve caregivers' retirement security , we reviewed prior gao work , conducted an extensive literature review of journal articles , working papers , and think - tank studies on caregiving and topics related to retirement security , and conducted preliminary interviews with experts in caregiving or retirement security .

based on this information , we identified specific actions that could affect caregivers' retirement security , which we categorized into four different categories based on common themes .

we then conducted semi - structured interviews with or received written responses from a range of experts and stakeholders — including some of the experts we met with to identify specific policy actions — to obtain their views on the benefits and costs of the specific policy options and approaches we identified , and we also asked them to identify any additional actions .

we selected experts and stakeholders who are engaged in research or advocacy around caregiving or retirement issues , or those who might be affected by the actions identified .

we also aimed to interview experts or stakeholders who might have different viewpoints regarding the identified actions .

see table 4 for a list of the experts or stakeholders we interviewed or received written comments from over the course of our work .

this section discusses the quantitative analysis methods we used to describe the characteristics of parental and spousal caregivers and the regression analyses we conducted to estimate the impact of caregiving on retirement security .

we used atus and hrs data for these analyses .

to describe the characteristics of parental and spousal caregivers , we conducted descriptive analyses to examine differences between parental and spousal caregivers and the general population .

for all univariate and multivariate statistics calculated using the atus data , we constructed variance estimates using replicate weights .

the atus eldercare module defines caregiving as “assisting or caring for an adult who needed help because of a condition related to aging.” the eldercare module contains one observation per eldercare recipient , and for each recipient , includes information about the duration of care provided to the recipient , the age of the recipient , the relationship of the recipient to the care provider , and whether the care recipient and the care provider share a household .

to analyze data on eldercare providers rather than recipients , we restructured the data into a single observation per care provider .

while any given care provider could provide care to multiple recipients , we defined care provider types as follows: spousal caregivers were those who provided care to a spouse or cohabiting domestic partner , regardless of whether they also provided care to another person .

parental caregivers were those who provided care to a parent or parent - in - law , regardless of whether they also provided care to another person .

caregivers of another relative were those who provided care to someone related to them ( such as a grandparent or aunt or uncle ) , regardless of whether they also provided care to another person .

caregivers of a non - relative were those who provided care to an unrelated person , such as a friend or neighbor , regardless of whether they also provided care to another person .

data on frequency of care — how often a respondent provided eldercare — is collected once for each care provider , rather than for each recipient , and therefore did not require restructuring .

however , as noted above , data on the duration of care — how long a respondent provided care — is collected for each care recipient .

therefore , we analyzed the duration of care for the relevant care recipient ( parent or spouse ) using the same caregiver types as described above .

for example , if someone provided both parental and spousal care , the duration of care for the relevant recipient would be used .

we conducted descriptive analyses to examine parental and spousal caregivers' characteristics including gender , age , race and ethnicity , marital status , level of education , employment status , and earnings .

the following are important considerations of these analyses: age .

we examined caregivers who provided care to an adult recipient of any age , and , except where indicated in the text , we compared the characteristics of adult caregivers to the general adult population of all ages .

we used four age categories ( 15 to 44 , 45 to 50 , 51 to 64 , and 65 and older ) .

we chose these age groups so that we could examine the characteristics of care providers with a similar age profile to those we examine in our analysis of household income and assets .

presence of a living parent .

we did not have information in the atus to determine whether those who provided parental care had living parents ; therefore , our analyses included all parental caregivers who said they provided care to a parent or parent - in - law within the past three to four months , even if the parent was deceased by the time of their interview .

certain analyses , where indicated in the text , control for the presence of a parent in the respondent's household .

earnings .

atus provides current information on respondent's usual weekly earnings at their main job .

because we did not have current information on earnings from all jobs , for this analysis only , we restricted the sample to those respondents who have a single job .

because we did not have current information on self - employment income , we restricted our analysis of earnings to those respondents who are wage and salary workers .

in our report , we present data on the unadjusted demographic and economic characteristics of caregivers and the general population .

we present the unadjusted characteristics so that readers can view the actual demographic profile of caregivers .

however , we also conducted logistic regression analyses that predict the likelihood of caregiving as a function of various demographic and economic characteristics and found that most characteristics are qualitatively similar in the multivariate and univariate context .

our independent variables for this multivariate analysis were age , education , gender , marital status , race , ethnicity , and labor force status — employed , unemployed , or not in the labor force .

where indicated , as mentioned above , we included a categorical variable for whether the respondent's parent lives in the respondent's household .

where indicated , we included quartiles of usual weekly earnings ; in logistic regressions that included weekly earnings as an independent variable , the analyses were restricted to wage and salary workers with a single job .

see appendix iii for more detail about these logistic regression analyses .

to analyze the impact of caregiving on retirement assets and income , we compared the assets and retirement income of caregivers and non - caregivers .

we conducted separate analyses for each type of care , as described below .

to determine the effect of spousal caregiving on retirement security , we took two approaches: 1 .

we conducted descriptive analyses to examine differences between spousal caregivers and non - caregivers in terms of assets at or near retirement and social security income during retirement .

we also examined differences between spousal caregivers and non - caregivers in terms of work , education , and health status of both the person providing and the person receiving care .

2 .

we conducted regression analyses to examine whether observed differences in assets and social security income were still statistically significant when we controlled for these differences in the spousal caregiving and non - caregiving populations .

in order to construct our analysis sample of spousal caregivers , we took the following steps .

first , we identified married individuals at ages 65 or 66 .

we chose these ages because they are at or near the full retirement age at which individuals can receive unreduced social security benefits .

we then identified the respondents that provided spousal care in the current wave or in the prior two waves of data , a 6-year period of time .

to determine whether someone provided spousal care , the hrs asks the respondent whether they received help with activities of daily living ( adls ) or with instrumental activities of daily living ( iadls ) and who helped with these activities .

if the respondent indicated that their spouse or partner provided help , we then identified that person as a spousal caregiver .

this resulted in a sample of about 5,000 observations .

we found that about 10 percent of the sample provided spousal care in the 6 years we examined .

we also obtained information on the asset levels , hours worked , and other descriptive attributes at ages 65 or 66 .

to determine the level of social security retirement income , we looked ahead to the household's social security income at age 71 using data from future waves of the hrs because some individuals may receive benefits at a later age .

we found differences between spousal caregivers and non - spousal caregivers , and differences were often statistically significant ( see table 5 ) .

as the table shows , spousal caregivers tended to have lower asset levels — ira assets , non - ira assets , or defined contribution account balances — as well as lower levels of social security income .

although the asset levels of spousal caregivers did not increase as much as for non - caregivers , the differences were not statistically significant .

spousal caregivers also tended to work fewer hours , were less likely to have a college degree , and were more likely to be in self - reported poor or fair health .

spouses receiving care also had different characteristics than spouses not receiving care , indicating that the care recipient also could affect household assets .

spouses receiving care tended to work less and to be in poorer self - reported health .

spouses receiving care also worked fewer hours — 1,100 compared to 2,700 for spouses who did not receive care ( see table 5 ) .

about 66 percent of spouses that received care were in self - reported fair or poor health , as opposed to 15 percent of those who did not receive care .

we also compared differences between spousal caregivers and non - caregivers by gender ( see table 6 ) .

we found some of the same differences between men and women spousal caregivers and non - caregivers as we did among spousal caregivers and non - caregivers more generally .

however , there were also additional differences .

for example , among women , growth in assets was larger among caregivers , and was statistically significant .

however , differences in the cumulative hours worked was not statistically significant .

in order to investigate whether observed differences in retirement assets or income might be due to factors other than caregiving , we controlled for additional variables using a multiple regression .

specifically , we generated a binary variable which took the value of one if the respondent had provided spousal care and took the value of zero if not and examined the estimated coefficient on this variable .

we ran six different regression models for each of the assets , with six different sets of controls , in addition to the spousal caregiving variable .

the different models are as follows , with each building on the model prior .

unless otherwise noted , the findings presented in the report are from model 5 .

model 1 estimated the differences , with only controls for the year of the wave .

this helps control for the effects that would be experienced by all retirees in that year , like an economic recession .

model 2 included the controls from model 1 and also whether the person has a college degree .

this helps control for the effects of education on assets and income .

model 3 included the controls from models 1 and 2 as well as earnings for the respondent in the period before we observed them caregiving .

this helps control for caregivers having lower earnings before caregiving , which could affect assets and income .

model 4 included the controls from models 1 , 2 , and 3 and also demographic characteristics , such as race and ethnicity , which can be associated with assets or income .

model 5 included the controls from models 1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 and also controlled for the self - reported health of the potential caregiver .

model 6 included the controls from models 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 and also controlled for the self - reported health of the potential care recipient .

having a spouse in poor health might affect assets or income , even if no caregiving was provided .

we estimated effects on four different types of assets and income at ages 65 and 66: ira assets , non - ira assets , defined contribution balances , and social security income ( see table 7 ) .

we took the logarithm of the value before running the regression to normalize the distribution .

we also considered the possibility that caregiving might not only affect the level of assets , but might affect the accumulation or growth of assets .

we did that by including models that estimated the effect on the growth of ira and non - ira assets .

the table below shows the parameter estimates of the effect of spousal caregiving with different levels of controls or dependent variables .

in the table , the columns represent the different models ( 1 through 6 ) .

the rows represent different dependent variables — different types of assets or social security income for which we estimated the effect of spousal caregiving .

in the table , the upper panel shows the effects on women's assets and income based on caregiving .

the middle panel shows the effects on men's assets and income based on caregiving , and the final panel shows the effect when the men's and women's samples were pooled .

as the table shows: for women , men , and when the sample was pooled , we found significant negative effects of spousal caregiving on both ira and non - ira assets .

however , the coefficient decreased in magnitude when we added additional controls .

for example , when we controlled for the health of the person receiving the help , the coefficient almost fell by half , from about .5 to about .25 in the case of non - ira assets .

this indicates that it is difficult to differentiate the effect of spousal caregiving from the effect of having a spouse in poor self - reported health .

for women , men , and when the sample was pooled , we found significant negative effects of spousal caregiving on social security income .

but for men , the effect was only significant at the 10 percent level for models with fewer controls .

in addition , when we added controls for demographics and health , the effect for men no longer was significant .

for the growth of assets , we found negative effects for non - ira assets for women , but not for men and not for the pooled sample .

however , the effects were only significant at the 10 percent level and not significant when we controlled for the health of the care recipient .

in addition to the regression coefficients , we also calculated the differences in percent terms , which may be easier to interpret ( see table 8 ) .

we found results that were strongest when comparing women spousal caregivers to women who did not provide spousal care .

the effect for women was resilient to the inclusion of controls .

in the model that included the health of the recipient ( model 6 ) , the effect ranged from a 40 percent reduction in ira assets , to an 8 percent reduction in household social security income .

for men , we found effects for ira assets , but the effects for social security income were not resilient to the inclusion of controls besides the education of the recipient .

to determine the effect of parental caregiving on retirement security , we conducted descriptive analyses to examine differences between parental caregivers and non - caregivers in terms of assets at or near retirement age and social security income during retirement .

in order to construct our analysis sample of parental caregivers , we took the following steps .

first , we identified individuals at age 65 or 66 who had living parents or parents - in law .

we made this restriction because having living parents at ages 60 to 66 ( and the opportunity to provide care ) might be associated with higher socio - economic strata .

therefore , we did not want to compare caregivers to those who did not provide care because their parents were deceased .

we then identified the respondents that provided parental care in the current wave or in the prior two waves of data .

to determine who is a parental caregiver , the hrs asks respondents two separate questions .

the first asks whether a respondent spent a total of 100 hours or more since their last interview or in the last 2 years helping a parent or parent - in - law with basic personal activities like dressing , eating , or bathing .

the second question asks whether a respondent spent a total of 100 hours or more since their last interview or in the last 2 years helping a parent or parent - in - law with other things , such as household chores , errands , or transportation .

we limited the analysis to those with living parents or in - laws .

this resulted in a sample of about 2,499 observations .

we found that about 57 percent of the sample provided parental care in the 6 years we examined .

unlike our analysis of spousal caregivers , we found that parental caregivers had higher levels of assets at or near retirement than non - caregivers , but differences between parental caregivers and non - caregivers were not statistically significant ( see table 9 ) .

the following tables provide information about the characteristics of various types of eldercare providers .

table 13 shows the adjusted odds of providing care for people with different economic and demographic characteristics , from multivariate analyses .

models 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 show the adjusted odds of providing parental care , and models 5 and 6 show the adjusted odds of providing spousal care .

model 1 estimates the probability of providing parental care as a function of gender , age , marital status , race , education , and labor force status .

model 2 estimates the probability of providing parental care as a function of gender , age , marital status , race , education , and income quartiles .

this model is restricted to employed workers , and therefore does not include labor force status as a regressor .

model 3 is identical to model 1 , except that model 3 includes an indicator for whether the parental caregiver and the parental care recipient live in the same household .

model 4 is identical to model 2 , except that model 4 includes an indicator for whether the parental caregiver and the parental care recipient live in the same household .

model 5 estimates the probability of providing spousal care as a function of gender , age , marital status , race , education , and labor force status .

model 6 estimates the probability of providing spousal care as a function of gender , age , marital status , race , education , and income quartiles .

like model 2 , this model is restricted to employed workers , and therefore does not include labor force status as a regressor .

in addition to the contact named above , erin m. godtland ( assistant director ) , nisha r. hazra ( analyst - in - charge ) , benjamin bolitzer , jessica mausner , and rhiannon c. patterson made key contributions to this report .

also contributing to this report were susan aschoff , deborah bland , justin fisher , avani locke , michael naretta , mimi nguyen , rachel stoiko , shana wallace , and adam wendel .

