thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on our nation's geostationary operational environmental satellite - r ( goes - r ) series .

the goes - r series is to replace the current series of satellites , which will likely begin to reach the end of their useful lives in approximately 2014 .

this new series is expected to mark the first major technological advance in goes instrumentation since 1994 .

it is also considered critical to the united states' ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting through the year 2028 .

as requested , this statement summarizes our report being released today that ( 1 ) determines the status of the program , ( 2 ) evaluates whether plans for the goes - r acquisition address problems experienced on similar programs , and ( 3 ) determines whether national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa ) plan to address the capabilities that were planned for the satellites , but then removed , will be adequate to support current data requirements .

in preparing this testimony , we relied on our work supporting the accompanying report .

that report contains a detailed overview of our scope and methodology .

in addition , we updated factual information on satellite launch schedules as warranted .

all of our work for this report was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

noaa operates goes as a two - satellite system that is primarily focused on the united states .

these satellites are uniquely positioned to provide timely environmental data about the earth's atmosphere , its surface , cloud cover , and the space environment to meteorologists and their audiences .

they also observe the development of hazardous weather , such as hurricanes and severe thunderstorms , and track their movement and intensity to reduce or avoid major losses of property and life .

furthermore , the satellites' ability to provide broad , continuously updated coverage of atmospheric conditions over land and oceans is important to noaa's weather forecasting operations .

to provide continuous satellite coverage , noaa acquires several satellites at a time as part of a series and launches new satellites every few years ( see table 1 ) .

noaa's policy is to have two operational satellites and one backup satellite in orbit at all times .

four goes satellites — goes - 10 , goes - 11 , goes - 12 , and goes - 13 — are currently in orbit .

both goes - 11 and goes - 12 are operational satellites , with goes - 12 covering the east and goes - 11 the west .

goes - 13 is currently in an on - orbit storage mode .

it is a backup for the other two satellites should they experience any degradation in service .

goes - 10 is at the end of its service life , but it is being used to provide limited coverage of south america .

the others in the series , goes - o and goes - p , are planned for launch over the next 2 years .

noaa is also planning the next generation of satellites , known as the goes - r series , which are planned for launch beginning in 2015 .

noaa plans for the goes - r program to improve on the technology of prior series , in terms of both system and instrument improvements .

the system improvements are expected to fulfill more demanding user requirements by updating the satellite data more often and providing satellite products to users more quickly .

the instrument improvements are expected to significantly increase the clarity and precision of the observed environmental data .

noaa originally planned to acquire six different types of instruments .

in september 2006 , however , noaa decided to reduce the scope and technical complexity of the goes - r program because of expectations that total costs , which were originally estimated to be $6.2 billion , could reach $11.4 billion .

specifically , noaa reduced the minimum number of satellites from four to two , cancelled plans for developing a critical instrument — the hyperspectral environmental suite ( which reduced the number of planned satellite products from 81 to 68 ) , and divided the solar imaging suite into two separate acquisitions .

the agency estimated that the revised program would cost $7 billion .

in addition to the reductions in scope , noaa also delayed the launch of the first satellite from september 2012 to december 2014 .

noaa is solely responsible for goes - r program funding and overall mission success .

however , since it relies on the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) acquisition experience and technical expertise to help ensure the success of its programs , noaa implemented an integrated program management structure with nasa for the goes - r program .

within the program office , there are two project offices that manage key components of the goes - r system — the flight and ground segment project offices .

the flight project office , managed by nasa , is responsible for awarding and managing the spacecraft segment contract , delivering flight - ready instruments to the spacecraft segment contractor for integration onto the satellites , and overseeing the systems engineering and integration .

the ground segment project office , managed by noaa , oversees the ground contract , satellite data product development and distribution , and on - orbit operations of the satellites .

noaa and nasa have made progress on the goes - r program .

in january 2008 , noaa approved the program's move from the preliminary design and definition phase to the development phase of the acquisition life cycle .

this approval also gave the program the authority to issue the requests for proposals for the spacecraft and ground segment projects — which it did in january 2008 and may 2008 , respectively .

the program office plans to award the prime contract for the spacecraft segment in may 2009 and the contract for the ground segment in june 2009 .

in addition , between september 2004 and december 2007 , the goes - r program awarded contracts for the development of five key instruments .

these instruments are currently in varying stages of development .

figure 1 depicts the schedule for both the program and key instruments .

noaa has made several important decisions about the cost , scope , and schedule of the goes - r program .

after reconciling the program office's cost estimate with an independent cost estimate , the agency established a new program cost estimate of $7.67 billion , an increase of $670 million from the previous estimate .

agency officials plan to revisit this cost estimate after the spacecraft and ground segment contracts are awarded but stated that it was developed with a relatively high level of confidence and that they believe that any adjustments would be well within the $7.67 billion program budget .

to mitigate the risk that costs would rise , program officials decided to remove selected program requirements from the baseline program and treat them as options that could be exercised if funds allow .

these requirements include the number of products to be distributed , the time to deliver the remaining products ( product latency ) , and how often these products are updated with new satellite data ( refresh rate ) .

specifically , program officials eliminated the requirement to develop and distribute 34 of the 68 envisioned products , including aircraft icing threat , turbulence , and visibility .

program officials explained that these products are not currently being produced by legacy goes satellites ; they are new products that could be produced from the advanced goes - r instruments .

in addition , the program slowed planned product latency on the remaining products by as much as 10 minutes for hurricane intensity and 6 minutes for volcanic ash detection and height .

it also reduced the refresh rates on these products by as much as 55 minutes for sea surface temperatures , cloud top observations , and vertical moisture profiles in the atmosphere .

program officials included the restoration of the products , latency , and refresh rates as options in the ground segment contract — items that could be acquired at a later time .

noaa also delayed goes - r program milestones including the dates for issuing the requests for proposals by up to 6 months and awarding the contracts for the spacecraft and ground segments by 12 and 10 months , respectively .

the dates when the satellites would be available for launch have also slipped by 4 months , with the first satellite launch now scheduled for april 2015 .

program officials attributed these delays to providing more stringent oversight before releasing the requests for proposals , additional time needed to evaluate the contract proposals , and funding reductions in fiscal year 2008 .

recent events have raised doubts about the feasibility of the goes - r launch date .

specifically , after the spacecraft segment contract was awarded and then protested in december 2008 , nasa decided to re - evaluate the proposals .

nasa now plans to re - award the contract in may 2009 .

because nasa has agreed to a 72-month development cycle for the spacecraft segment ( from contract award date to launch readiness ) , the launch date of goes - r will likely be delayed until at least may 2015 .

any delays in the launch of the first goes - r satellite run counter to noaa's policy of having a backup satellite in orbit at all times and could lead to gaps in satellite coverage .

this policy proved useful in december 2008 , when noaa lost communication with goes - 12 , but was able to use goes - 13 as an operational satellite until communication was restored .

however , beginning in november 2014 , noaa expects to have two operational satellites in orbit ( o and p ) , but it will not have a backup satellite in place until goes - r is launched .

if noaa experiences a problem with either of its operational satellites before goes - r is in orbit , it will need to rely on older satellites that are beyond their expected operational lives and therefore may not be fully functional .

goes - r has taken steps to address lessons from other satellite programs .

these actions include ensuring sufficient technical readiness of the spacecraft and ground segments prior to awarding the contracts .

however , key risks remain and important actions remain to be completed in selected areas .

specifically , key technology risks remain — affecting both the ground segment and the instruments .

while the hardware that is to be used for the ground segment is mature , key components have not previously been integrated .

in addition , the program office has identified the advanced baseline imager and the geostationary lightning mapper instruments as having a high level of risk associated with cost due in part to the technical challenges posed by each instrument .

program officials reported that they have sufficient management reserves to address these risks .

to manage such risks , noaa uses earned value management , a proven means for measuring progress against cost and schedule commitments and thereby identifying potential cost overruns and schedule delays early , when the impact can be minimized .

two key aspects of this process are ( 1 ) conducting comprehensive integrated baseline reviews to obtain agreement from stakeholders on the value of planned work and validate the baseline against which variances are calculated and ( 2 ) using monthly variance reports to provide information on the current contract status , the reasons for any deviations from cost or schedule plans , and any actions taken to address these deviations .

to its credit , the goes - r program office is using earned value management to oversee the key instrument contracts and plans to use it on the spacecraft and ground segment contracts .

to date , the program office has performed integrated baseline reviews on the instruments and obtains and reviews variance reports for each of the instruments .

however , the program's integrated baseline review for the advanced baseline imager did not include a review of schedule milestones , the adequacy of how tasks are measured , and the contractor's management processes .

further , the variance reports for two instruments — the advanced baseline imager and the geostationary lightning mapper — do not describe all of the significant variances .

program officials explained that they meet with the contractor on a monthly basis to discuss all of the variances , but they were unable to provide documentation of these discussions or the reasons for , impact of , or mitigation plans for the variances .

as a result of these shortfalls , the program office has less assurance that key instruments will be delivered on time and within budget , and it is more difficult for program managers to identify risks and take corrective actions .

before it was cancelled in september 2006 , the hyperspectral environmental suite was originally planned as part of the goes - r satellite series to meet requirements for products that are currently produced by goes satellites as well as new technically - advanced products not currently produced by goes satellites .

noaa still considers these requirements to be valid , and noaa and the science community still have a need for the advanced products .

noaa had planned to use the new sounding products to improve its performance goals , such as helping to increase the lead times associated with severe thunderstorm warnings from an average of 18 minutes in 2000 to as much as 2 hours by 2025 , and helping to increase the lead times associated with tornado warnings from an average of 13 minutes in 2007 to as much as 1 hour by 2025 .

in addition , noaa had planned to use the new coastal waters imaging products to provide more accurate and quantitative understanding of areas for which noaa has management responsibilities .

in particular , the coastal water imaging products could have been used to predict and monitor the growth , spread , severity and duration of harmful algal blooms .

recent studies suggest that harmful algal blooms are occurring more frequently because of climate change .

noaa , nasa , and the department of defense assessed alternatives for obtaining advanced sounding and coastal water imaging products from a geostationary orbit .

the results of the analysis recommended that noaa work with nasa to develop a demonstration sounder to fly on an as - yet undetermined satellite and to evaluate other options for coastal waters imaging .

noaa plans to assess the technical feasibility of various options and to have the national research council make recommendations on long - term options for coastal water imaging .

however , noaa has not defined plans or a timeline for addressing the requirements for advanced products .

further , agency officials were unable to estimate when they would establish plans to fulfill the requirements .

until a decision is made on whether and how to provide the advanced products , key system users will not be able to meet their goals for improving the lead times or accuracy of severe weather warnings , and climate research organizations will not obtain the data they need to enhance the science of climate , coastal , environmental , and oceanic observations .

in our report , we are making three recommendations that , if implemented , could improve the management and oversight of the goes - r acquisition .

these are: ensuring that any rebaselining of a key instrument includes an assessment of milestones , adequacy of resources , task and technical planning , and management processes ; ensuring that reasons for cost and schedule variances are fully disclosed and documented ; and , if feasible , developing a plan and timeline for restoring the advanced capabilities removed from the program .

in written comments on a draft of this report , the department of commerce agreed with our findings and recommendations and outlined steps it is taking to implement them .

the department also provided technical comments on the report , which we incorporated as appropriate .

in summary , noaa has made repeated and continuing efforts to learn from problems experienced on other satellite programs .

the goes - r satellite series is now in development , but program costs have increased , the scope of the program has been reduced , and schedules have been delayed .

further , unless the program exercises contract options , key benefits in terms of new products and faster data updates will not be realized .

of particular concern are the three years of launch delays since 2006 .

in addition , recent events make it likely that the launch of goes - r will continue to slip , which increases the risk of having gaps in satellite coverage .

until noaa and nasa act to address this risk , the united states' ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting is in jeopardy .

in addition , noaa has not yet developed a plan or a timeline for recovering the advanced capabilities that were removed .

until such decisions and plans are made , the geostationary user community may not be able to make significant improvements in their severe weather forecasts , or their ability to monitor our coastal environments .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our statement .

we would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

if you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony , please contact david a. powner at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov .

other key contributors to this testimony include colleen m. phillips , assistant director ; carol cha ; william carrigg ; neil doherty ; franklin jackson ; kaelin kuhn ; lee mccracken ; and eric winter .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

