thank you for the opportunity to discuss our investigation of potential security vulnerabilities on northern and southern u.s. borders .

the united states shares over 5,000 miles of border with canada to the north , and 1,900 miles of border with mexico to the south .

individuals attempting to legally enter the united states by land present themselves to a customs and border protection ( cbp ) officer at one of the 170 ports of entry located along these borders .

any other method of land entry is illegal.because cbp checks the identification of entrants into the united states and searches vehicles for contraband at ports of entry , individuals entering the united states illegally may attempt to avoid screening procedures by crossing the border in areas between ports of entry .

the u.s. border patrol , which is part of cbp , is responsible for patrolling and monitoring these areas to stop cross - border violators .

however , given limited resources and the wide expanse of the border , the u.s. border patrol is limited in its ability to monitor the border either through use of technology or with a consistent manned presence .

commensurate with the perceived threat , there is a sharp contrast between how cbp distributes human resources on the northern border as opposed to the southern border .

according to cbp , as of may 2007 , it had 972 u.s. border patrol agents on the northern border and 11,986 agents on the southern border .

given the potential security vulnerabilities on our borders , you expressed concern that cross - border violators may attempt to enter the united states , possibly bringing with them radioactive materials or other contraband , such as explosives , drugs , counterfeit money , and bogus credit cards .

we were therefore asked to perform a limited security assessment to identify vulnerable border areas where cbp does not maintain a manned presence 24 hours per day or where there is no apparent monitoring equipment in place .

you also requested that , where possible , our investigators attempt to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband to demonstrate the existence of serious security vulnerabilities .

to perform this work , our investigators visited seven border areas that were unmanned , unmonitored , or both — four at the u.s. – canada border and three at the u.s. – mexico border .

we identified these areas by reviewing information that is publicly available and by reviewing our previous work on border security .

these areas were located in four states on the northern border and two states on the southern border .

we did not attempt to evaluate all potential u.s. border security vulnerabilities .

investigators used a global positioning system ( gps ) in some cases and geographic landmarks in others to determine the location of the border .

in three out of four locations on the u.s. – canada border , investigators crossed into the united states from canada carrying a duffel bag to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband .

safety considerations prevented our investigators from attempting to cross north into the united states from a starting point in mexico .

we conducted our investigation from october 2006 through june 2007 in accordance with quality standards for investigations as set forth by the president's council on integrity and efficiency .

according to cbp , the ease and speed with which a cross - border violator can travel to the border , cross the border , and leave the location of the crossing , are critical factors in determining whether an area of the border is vulnerable .

we identified state roads close to the border that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states .

we also located several ports of entry that had posted daytime hours and which , although monitored , were unmanned overnight .

investigators observed that surveillance equipment was in operation but that the only observable preventive measure to stop a cross - border violator from entering the united states was a barrier across the road that could be driven around .

cbp provided us with records that confirmed our observations , indicating that on one occasion a cross - border violator drove around this type of barrier to illegally enter the united states .

the violator was later caught by state law enforcement officers and arrested by the u.s. border patrol .

we found state roads close to the u.s. – canada border in several states .

many of the roads we found appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , allowing us to simulate the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband from canada into the united states .

on october 31 , 2006 , our investigators positioned themselves on opposite sides of the u.s. – canada border in an unmanned location .

our investigators selected this location because roads on either side of the border would allow them to quickly and easily exchange simulated contraband .

after receiving a signal via cell phone , the investigator in canada left his vehicle and walked approximately 25 feet to the border carrying a red duffel bag .

while investigators on the u.s. side took photographs and made a digital video recording , the individual with the duffel bag proceeded the remaining 50 feet , transferred the duffel bag to the investigators on the u.s. side , and returned to his vehicle on the canadian side ( see fig .

1 ) .

the set up and exchange lasted approximately 10 minutes , during which time the investigators were in view of residents both on the canadian and u.s. sides of the border .

according to cbp records of this incident , an alert citizen notified the u.s. border patrol about the suspicious activities of our investigators .

the u.s. border patrol subsequently attempted to search for a vehicle matching the description of the rental vehicle our investigators used .

however , the u.s. border patrol was not able to locate the investigators with the duffel bag , even though they had parked nearby to observe traffic passing through the port of entry .

investigators identified over a half dozen locations in this area where state roads ended at the u.s. – canada border .

although investigators took pictures of the border area , they did not attempt to cross the border because of private property concerns .

there was no visible u.s. border patrol response to our activities and no visible electronic monitoring equipment .

cbp told us that the activities of our investigators would not be grounds for a formal investigation .

still , according to cbp records , criminals are aware of vulnerabilities in this area and have taken advantage of the access provided by roads close to the border .

for example , appendix i details an incident on january 25 , 2007 , in which an alert citizen notified cbp about suspicious activities on the citizen's property , leading to the arrest of several cross - border violators .

on november 15 , 2006 , our investigators visited an area in this state where state roads ended at the u.s. – canada border .

one of our investigators simulated the cross - border movement of radioactive materials or other contraband by crossing the border north into canada and then returning to the united states ( see fig .

2 ) .

there did not appear to be any monitoring or intrusion alarm system in place at this location , and there was no u.s. border patrol response to our border crossing .

on december 5 , 2006 , our investigators traveled along a road parallel to the u.s. – canada border .

this road is so close to the border that jumping over a ditch on the southern side of the road allows an individual to stand in the united states .

while driving the length of this road on the canadian side , our investigators noticed cameras placed at strategic locations on the u.s. side of the border .

they also observed u.s. border patrol vehicles parked at different locations along the border .

at a location that appeared to be unmanned and unmonitored , one investigator left the vehicle carrying a red duffel bag .

he crossed the ditch and walked into the united states for several hundred feet before returning to the vehicle .

our investigators stayed in this location for about 15 minutes , but there was no observed response from law enforcement .

at two other locations , investigators crossed into the united states to find out whether their presence would be detected .

in all cases , there was no observed response from law enforcement .

we identified several ports of entry with posted daytime hours in a state on the northern border .

during the daytime these ports of entry are staffed by cbp officers .

during the night , cbp told us that it relies on surveillance systems to monitor , respond to , and attempt to interdict illegal border crossing activity .

on november 14 , 2006 , at about 11:00 p.m. , our investigators arrived on the u.s. side of one port of entry that had closed for the night .

investigators observed that surveillance equipment was in operation but that the only visible preventive measure to stop an individual from entering the united states was a barrier across the road that could be driven around .

investigators stayed at the port of entry for approximately 12 minutes to see whether the u.s. border patrol would respond .

during this time , the investigators walked around the port of entry area and took photographs .

when the u.s. border patrol did not arrive at the port of entry , our investigators returned south , only to have a u.s. border patrol agent pull them over 3 miles south of the port of entry .

when questioned by the u.s. border patrol agent , our investigators indicated that they were federal investigators testing security procedures at the u.s. border .

the agent did not ask for identification from our investigators and glanced only briefly at the badge and commission book the driver offered for inspection .

in addition , he did not attempt to search the vehicle , ask what agency our investigators worked for , or record their names .

according to dhs , the agent acted in a manner consistent with operational protocol because he was satisfied with the credentials presented to him and did not have probable cause to search the vehicle .

cbp provided us with records concerning this incident .

according to the records , the agent was dispatched because of the suspicious activities of our investigators in front of the port of entry camera .

the records indicated that after this incident , cbp staff researched the incident fully to determine whether our investigators posed a threat .

by performing an internet search on the name of the investigator who rented the vehicle , cbp linked the investigators to gao .

cbp also provided us with records that confirmed our observations about the barrier at this port of entry , indicating that on one occasion a cross - border violator drove around this type of barrier to illegally enter the united states .

the violator was later caught by state law enforcement officers and arrested by the u.s. border patrol .

safety considerations prevented our investigators from performing the same assessment work on the u.s. – mexico border as performed on the northern border .

in contrast to our observations on the northern border , our investigators observed a large law enforcement and army national guard presence near a state road on the southern border , including unmanned aerial vehicles .

however , our limited security assessment also identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a noticeable law enforcement presence during the time our investigators visited the sites .

although cbp is ultimately responsible for protecting these areas , officials told us that certain legal , environmental , and cultural considerations limit options for enforcement .

on october 17 , 2006 , two of our investigators left a main u.s. route about a quarter mile from a u.s. – mexico port of entry .

traveling on a dirt road that parallels the border , our investigators used a gps system to get as close to the border as possible .

our investigators passed u.s. border patrol agents and u.s. army national guard units .

in addition , our investigators spotted unmanned aerial vehicles and a helicopter flying parallel to the border .

at the point where the dirt road ran closest to the u.s. – mexico border , our investigators spotted additional u.s. border patrol vehicles parked in a covered position .

about three - fourths of a mile from these vehicles , our investigators pulled off the road .

one investigator exited the vehicle and proceeded on foot through several gulches and gullies toward the mexican border .

his intent was to find out whether he would be questioned by law enforcement agents about his activities .

he returned to the vehicle after 15 minutes , at which time our investigators returned to the main road .

our investigators did not observe any public traffic on this road for the 1 hour that they were in the area , but none of the law enforcement units attempted to stop our investigators and find out what they were doing .

according to cbp , because our investigators did not approach from the direction of mexico , there would be no expectation for law enforcement units to question these activities .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

investigators identified potential security vulnerabilities on federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

these areas did not appear to be monitored or have a manned cbp presence during the time our investigators visited the sites .

investigators learned that a memorandum of understanding exists between dhs ( of which cbp is a component ) , interior , and usda regarding the protection of federal lands adjacent to u.s. borders .

although cbp is ultimately responsible for protecting these areas , officials told us that certain legal , environmental , and cultural considerations limit options for enforcement — for example , environmental restrictions and tribal sovereignty rights .

on january 9 , 2007 , our investigators entered federally managed land adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

the investigators had identified a road running parallel to the border in this area .

our investigators were informed by an employee of a visitor center that because the u.s. government was building a fence , the road was closed to the public .

however , our investigators proceeded to the road and found that it was not physically closed .

while driving west along this road , our investigators did not observe any surveillance cameras or law enforcement vehicles .

a 4-foot - high fence ( appropriate to prevent the movement of a vehicle rather than a person ) stood at the location of the border .

our investigators pulled over to the side of the road at one location .

to determine whether he would activate any intrusion alarm systems , one investigator stepped over the fence , entered mexico , and returned to the united states .

the investigators remained in the location for approximately 15 minutes but there was no observed law enforcement response to their activities .

on january 23 , 2007 , our investigators arrived on federally managed lands adjacent to the u.s. – mexico border .

in this area , the rio grande river forms the southern border between the united states and mexico .

after driving off - road in a 4x4 vehicle to the banks of the rio grande , our investigators observed , in two locations , evidence that frequent border crossings took place .

in one location , the investigators observed well - worn footpaths and tire tracks on the mexican side of the river .

at another location , a boat ramp on the u.s. side of the rio grande was mirrored by a boat ramp on the mexican side .

access to the boat ramp on the mexican side of the border had well - worn footpaths and vehicle tracks ( see fig .

4 ) .

an individual who worked in this area told our investigators that at several times during the year , the water is so low that the river can easily be crossed on foot .

our investigators were in this area for 1 hour and 30 minutes and observed no surveillance equipment , intrusion alarm systems , or law enforcement presence .

our investigators were not challenged regarding their activities .

according to cbp officials , in some locations on federally managed lands , social and cultural issues lead the u.s. border patrol to defer to local police in providing protection .

this sensitivity to social and cultural issues appears to be confirmed by the provisions of the memorandum of understanding between dhs , interior , and usda .

on february 23 , 2007 , we met with cbp officials to discuss the results of our investigation .

cbp officials clarified their approach to law enforcement in unmanned and unmonitored areas at the northern and southern u.s. borders , including an explanation of jurisdictional issues on federally managed lands .

cbp indicated that resource restrictions prevent u.s. border patrol agents from investigating all instances of suspicious activity .

they added that the northern border presents more of a challenge than the southern border and that many antiquated ports of entry exist .

our visits to the northern border show that cbp faces significant challenges in effectively monitoring the border and preventing undetected entry into the united states .

our work shows that a determined cross - border violator would likely be able to bring radioactive materials or other contraband undetected into the united states by crossing the u.s. – canada border at any of the locations we investigated .

cbp records indicate that it does successfully stop many individuals from crossing the border illegally , but our own observations and experiences ( along with cbp's acknowledgment of existing challenges ) lead us to conclude that more human capital and technological capabilities are needed to effectively protect the northern border .

our observations on the southern border showed a significant disparity between the large law enforcement presence on state lands in one state and what seemed to be a lack of law enforcement presence on federally managed lands .

mr. chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time .

for further information about this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-7455 or kutzg@gao.gov .

contacts points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

this appendix details four cases where customs and border protection ( cbp ) apprehended individuals who were engaged in suspicious activities on the northern and southern borders .

according to cbp , u.s. border patrol agents followed proper protocols in responding to these incidents .

we are summarizing these case studies — which cbp provided to us — to further illustrate challenges the u.s. border patrol faces .

at about 3:20 a.m. on june 24 , 2006 , electronic surveillance equipment observed a vehicle arrive at the port of entry gate from the direction of canada .

the suspect got out of the vehicle and , after inspecting the area around the gate , returned to the vehicle and drove around the gate into the united states .

u.s. border patrol agents were notified , along with state law enforcement .

the state officer identified and stopped the vehicle while the u.s. border patrol agents were en route .

u.s. border patrol agents arrived and arrested the suspect .

the suspect was identified as a citizen of albania and admitted to driving around the port of entry gate .

the suspect had applied for asylum in the united states and been denied in 2001 , at which point he had moved to canada .

attempts to return the suspect to canada failed , as he had no legal status in canada .

suspect was held in jail pending removal proceedings .

at about 6:00 p.m. on january 25 , 2007 , the u.s. border patrol was notified of suspicious activity on the u.s. – canada border .

u.s. residents on the border had observed a vehicle dropping off several individuals near their home .

a u.s. border patrol agent proceeded to the area where residents had observed the suspicious activity .

once there , the agent followed footprints in the snow and discovered two suspects hiding among a stand of pine trees .

the suspects were columbian nationals , one male and one female .

they indicated that a man was going to pick them up on the canadian side of the border , and that a friend had driven them to the agreed - upon location on the u.s. side .

cell phone numbers retrieved from the suspect's phone linked him to phone numbers belonging to a known alien smuggler in the area .

the suspects said they intended to seek political asylum in canada .

they were sent to a detention facility after their arrest .

on february 10 , 2007 , at about 2:00 a.m. , u.s. border patrol surveillance equipment detected six suspects entering the united states from canada .

the suspects were walking south along railroad tracks .

after a short foot chase , u.s. border patrol agents apprehended all six suspects — two individuals who were believed to be smugglers and a family of four .

all the suspects were citizens of south korea .

according to interviews with the suspects , after the family arrived in canada they were approached by an individual who said he could take them to the united states .

he brought the family to a desolate area and introduced them to a male and a female , who they were to follow across the border .

the individual then instructed the family to leave their luggage in the car and said that he would pick all six of them up in the united states .

the wife and two children in the family were released for humanitarian reasons after apprehension , and the male was placed in detention .

on may 3 , 2007 , at about 1:20 a.m. , an alert citizen reported a possible illegal alien near the u.s. – mexico border .

the responding u.s. border patrol agent located the individual , who claimed to be a citizen of uruguay .

he said that he had used a variety of transportation means , including airplanes and buses , to travel from uruguay to a mexican city just south of the u.s. border .

the individual claimed to have crossed the border by foot along with four other individuals .

he then walked for 4 days through the desert .

when he became dehydrated , he sought help at a nearby u.s. town .

as a result , he was spotted by the alert citizen who notified the u.s. border patrol .

the individual was scheduled to be removed from the country but requested a hearing before an immigration judge .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

