the nation faces what is generally reported to be the most serious economic crisis since the great depression .

in response , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) was enacted to promote economic recovery , make investments , and minimize and avoid reductions in state and local government services .

in early 2009 , the congressional budget office estimated that the combined spending and tax provisions in the recovery act will cost an estimated $787 billion from 2009 through 2019 .

of that total , more than a third comes from division a of the act , which provides substantial funding for , among other things , construction and infrastructure projects .

these projects , which are supported by various federal agencies , encompass construction , alteration , and repair efforts for roads , bridges , public transit , water systems , and federal buildings and facilities .

under the recovery act's prevailing wage provision , all construction projects funded directly by or assisted in whole or in part by the federal government through division a of the act are subject to the requirements of the davis - bacon act .

that is , all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors and subcontractors must be paid at least the prevailing wage rate , including fringe benefits , in the local area in which they are employed , as determined by the secretary of labor .

in addition , contractors are required to pay these workers weekly and submit weekly certified payroll records to the contracting or administering agency .

prior to the recovery act , numerous federal programs that included construction projects were subject to the davis - bacon act .

because these programs were already required to comply with davis - bacon requirements , they were not newly affected by the recovery act's prevailing wage provision .

however , because the recovery act extended davis - bacon requirements to all construction projects that it supported through division a of the act , some federal programs became subject to these requirements for the first time .

in this context , you asked us to ( 1 ) identify programs that are newly affected by the recovery act's prevailing wage provision and ( 2 ) examine the extent to which that provision is expected to affect each of those newly affected programs .

separately , we are also reporting on the extent to which federal requirements , including davis - bacon requirements , are expected to affect the timing of recovery act projects .

to identify programs that are newly affected by the recovery act's prevailing wage provision , we requested data from 27 of the agencies that received funding under division a of the act .

although the recovery act was initially estimated to provide $787 billion in spending and tax provisions , we focused on the appropriation portion because the act's prevailing wage provision only applied to division a. u.s. army corps of engineers education energy health and human services homeland security housing and urban development justice labor state transportation treasury veterans affairs the independent agencies included the corporation for national and community service environmental protection agency federal communications commission general services administration national aeronautics and space administration national endowment for the arts national science foundation small business administration smithsonian institution social security administration u.s. agency for international development we asked each agency to specify which of its programs were newly subject to davis - bacon requirements under the recovery act .

we verified the agency - provided data with agency officials and checked their appropriation figures with appropriation values in the recovery act .

we also interviewed officials from the department of labor and the congressional research service to learn about the universe of newly subject programs and the application of davis - bacon requirements .

to examine the extent to which the recovery act's prevailing wage provision is expected to affect each newly affected program , we conducted semi - structured interviews with federal officials from most of these programs , and for the other programs we obtained federal officials' written responses to our questions .

we also interviewed state and local officials in the 16 states and the district of columbia that we are reviewing for our bimonthly reports to congress on recovery act implementation .

these 16 states are arizona , california , colorado , florida , georgia , illinois , iowa , massachusetts , michigan , mississippi , new jersey , new york , north carolina , ohio , pennsylvania , and texas .

we also conducted interviews with , and obtained relevant documentation from , two national contractor associations ( associated general contractors of america and associated builders and contractors ) ; a national union ( afl - cio ) ; the national association of state auditors , comptrollers and treasurers ; the national association of counties ; and the national governors association .

to further understand how davis - bacon requirements might affect specific programs that are newly subject to those requirements , we interviewed and collected additional data from state and local officials and contractors associated with five of the programs that fell within the scope of our work .

we selected these five programs because they existed prior to the recovery act , are currently being implemented , and have a significant portion of their funding going toward construction activities .

the local officials and contractors interviewed were referrals identified by federal and state officials .

we ensured a range of officials and contractors were selected by asking for contacts from geographically disbursed states for different recovery act programs .

the examples we provide in this report are illustrative only and not generalizable .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2009 to february 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the davis - bacon act requires contractors and subcontractors working on federally funded contracts in excess of $2,000 to pay at least locally prevailing wages to laborers and mechanics .

the act covers both new construction and the alteration or repair of existing public buildings and works .

the department of labor sets prevailing wage rates for various job categories in a local area on the basis of periodic surveys it conducts of contractors , unions , public officials , and other interested parties .

the davis - bacon act stems from a depression - era practice of transporting workers from lower - paying areas to bypass local workers who would demand a higher wage .

the prevailing wage requirement was meant to prevent this practice by ensuring that workers on federal projects were paid at least the locally prevailing wage .

congress has extended this requirement beyond projects funded directly by the federal government by including davis - bacon act prevailing wage provisions in numerous related laws under which federal agencies assist construction projects through grants , loans , guarantees , insurance , and other methods .

examples of related laws include the federal - aid highway acts , the housing and community development act of 1974 , and the federal water pollution control act .

contractors on projects subject to davis - bacon requirements may also be subject to additional prevailing wage requirements under state and local laws .

in addition to paying no less than locally prevailing wages , contractors for construction projects that are subject to the davis - bacon act must pay their workers on a weekly basis and submit weekly certified payroll records .

the federal contracting or administering agency has primary responsibility for enforcing these requirements , while the department of labor has coordination and oversight responsibilities , including the authority to establish regulations and investigate compliance with labor standards as warranted .

the prevailing wage provision in section 1606 of the recovery act broadly applies davis - bacon requirements to all construction projects funded directly or assisted by the federal government under division a of the act .

it reinforces davis - bacon act coverage of construction projects where the federal government is a party to the contract , extends it to projects assisted in whole or in part by division a of the act , and overri any limitation to davis - bacon coverage in related laws under which federal agencies provide financial assistance , such as grants and loan guarantees , to recipients to use for construction projects .

it also extends the prevailing wage requirement to some federally assisted projects th would not otherwise be subject to that req uirement .

according to federal agency officials , 40 programs are newly subject to davis - bacon requirements as a result of the recovery act's prevailing wage provision , as shown in table 1 .

these programs are spread across 12 of 27 federal agencies that received funding under division a of the ac most of the programs existed prior to the recovery act and are subject to davis - bacon requirements for the first time under the act , while some are newly created programs .

t .

federal , state , and local officials involved with the 40 recovery act programs that are newly subject to davis - bacon requirements differed on whether those requirements would increase program costs .

however , these officials generally did not expect davis - bacon requirements to inhibit their ability to achieve recovery act and program goals .

federal officials responsible for most of the programs did not expect davis - bacon requirements to affect the timing of their program's recovery act efforts , though officials for some programs expected an impact .

federal officials responsible for programs that are newly subject to davis - bacon requirements — the prevailing wage rate requirement and the administrative requirements associated with weekly payroll processes — had mixed views on the extent to which they expected these requirements to affect program costs , as table 2 shows .

officials for the 40 programs provided a range of explanations for the extent to which the prevailing wage rate requirement might impact program costs .

specifically: little to no impact .

department of energy officials responsible for two programs said construction firms generally pay prevailing wage rates as a standard practice and therefore the prevailing wage rate requirement would have no impact on program costs .

according to other program officials , the impact would be small because a relatively small amount of program funds are to be spent on construction activities that are subject to davis - bacon requirements .

for example , department of justice officials responsible for the transitional housing assistance grants for victims of domestic violence , dating violence , stalking , or sexual assault program said only a small number of grantees requested funds for construction and that less than 5 percent would be allocated for this purpose .

department of energy officials responsible for the geothermal technologies program noted that the prevailing wage rates were in line with what they expected , and electricity delivery and energy reliability program officials said existing wage rates paid by utility companies were generally high already so any increase in wage expenses due to prevailing wage rates would probably be minimal .

moderate impact .

officials from the department of energy's weatherization assistance program explained that the prevailing wage rate requirement will have at least a moderate impact on program costs .

they explained that weatherization projects in buildings taller than four stories will require that workers be paid commercial prevailing wage rates that are higher than the wage rates that would otherwise be used for weatherization projects .

department of energy officials responsible for the wind and hydropower technologies program explained that the prevailing wage rates for construction workers are sometimes 20 percent higher than what would have been paid for similar work and could increase labor costs by 20 percent .

conversely , these officials said the payment of higher wages could attract a more highly trained laborer and thus possibly result in savings in rework or in adherence to safety guidelines .

large impact .

department of energy officials from the state energy program explained that in some of the areas hardest hit economically , construction workers are paid less than the prevailing wage rate for the county .

therefore , paying the davis - bacon prevailing wage rate will increase costs .

likewise , department of justice officials responsible for the correctional facilities on tribal lands program explained that in some cases the prevailing wage rate may be significantly higher than what the tribe would normally pay for construction .

department of energy officials responsible for the energy efficiency and conservation block grants program anticipated a potentially large impact as a result of the large number of grantees and significant proportion of funds that would be spent on construction labor wages .

state and local officials we interviewed also had mixed views about the expected impact of the prevailing wage rate requirement on program costs .

district of columbia weatherization officials explained that the prevailing wage rates were generally in line with what they would expect to pay and some state weatherization officials in california said the prevailing wage rates may be less than what some service providers are currently paying .

data provided by state energy program officials in georgia indicated that contractor wage rates are higher than davis - bacon prevailing wage rates in a subset of counties .

conversely , iowa state weatherization officials explained that the average cost increase would be about 9 percent per home , and one local lead hazard reduction program official reported that , based on historical experience , the prevailing wage rate requirement could increase program costs by 10 to 13 percent per home .

one mississippi contractor we interviewed said the wage rates would not have an impact on costs because the hourly rates that the company pays its employees are and always have been higher than the davis - bacon rates .

as table 2 also shows , federal officials reported mixed views on the extent to which they expected davis - bacon administrative requirements , such as paying workers weekly , to affect program administrative costs .

for example: little to no impact .

department of health and human services officials responsible for the capital improvement program and facility investment program for health centers said the requirements should have no impact on program costs since grantees were asked to include davis - bacon compliance in their proposals .

department of energy officials responsible for the solar energy technologies program expected the administrative requirements to have a small impact because less than 5 percent of funds will be used for construction - related activities subject to davis - bacon requirements .

department of housing and urban development officials responsible for the green retrofit program for multifamily housing said the administrative requirements would have a small impact because the grant recipients had previous experience with the davis - bacon requirements through other federal housing programs and were accustomed to requirements such as paying workers on a weekly basis .

environmental protection agency officials responsible for the diesel emission reduction act grants program said the impact would be small because the majority of the grant funds are used to purchase equipment and are therefore not subject to the administrative requirements .

these program officials added that while the requirements are new to most grantees , the grantees will become familiar with them over time .

moderate impact .

state energy program officials noted that many construction companies involved with their projects do not maintain payroll records sufficient to meet davis - bacon requirements , and as a result , the administrative requirement to pay workers weekly may add to their administrative costs .

large impact .

federal officials responsible for the weatherization assistance program and the lead hazard reduction program said davis - bacon administrative requirements would require a more detailed payroll tracking system , which would be particularly burdensome for small companies .

according to weatherization assistance program officials , smaller companies are the ones , generally speaking , that do not usually have experience with the davis - bacon requirement for certified weekly payrolls .

for these employers , who often employ fewer than five people , it is particularly burdensome to certify payrolls weekly .

lead hazard reduction program officials explained that additional administrative duties necessary for weekly payroll processing will increase administrative costs .

to accommodate this increase , the agency is in the process of increasing the cap on how much recipients can spend on administrative costs from 10 to 15 percent of their award .

state and local officials we interviewed had mixed views on the impact of davis - bacon administrative requirements on program costs .

clean water state revolving fund officials in georgia and the district of columbia said they do not anticipate any additional costs as a result of the administrative requirements , whereas program officials in mississippi and new jersey noted the requirements would likely increase project costs .

local agencies involved with the weatherization assistance program in california , michigan , new york , and ohio reported hiring new staff to process davis - bacon paperwork , and local weatherization officials from california noted that the administrative requirements might be particularly burdensome on smaller businesses .

local officials responsible for a lead hazard reduction program in new york said their subcontractor is familiar with the administrative requirements , and the subcontractor has not indicated that these requirements are problematic .

despite these potential cost increases for some recovery act programs , most federal officials said the davis - bacon requirements will have little , if any , impact on their ability to support their program and recovery act goals .

federal officials responsible for 15 of the 40 programs said davis - bacon requirements would have no impact on their program's ability to achieve its goals , and officials from 12 programs reported that the requirements would have little impact ( see table 3 ) .

however , federal officials from four programs — the weatherization assistance program , state energy program , energy efficiency and conservation block grants , and correctional facilities on tribal lands program — noted that the davis - bacon requirements could have a large impact on their ability to support the recovery act goal of preserving or creating new jobs .

for example , weatherization assistance program officials said that davis - bacon requirements will have a large impact in urban areas because they have to pay commercial construction rates to weatherize buildings over four stories tall .

these commercial construction wage rates are higher than the wage rates officials were expecting to pay and officials said program goals would be affected because they will have to reduce the number of homes weatherized .

state and local officials we interviewed and collected data from also reported that the davis - bacon requirements would generally have little impact on their ability to achieve program and recovery act goals .

california state officials responsible for the state energy program stated that even though the requirements may have been an inhibiting factor for some applicants , they do not believe that the requirements will negatively affect the ability to achieve energy policy goals .

while ohio state officials responsible for weatherization said their program goals have not been affected , district of columbia lead hazard reduction program officials said they had to reduce the number of homes to be treated .

florida officials responsible for the clean water state revolving fund and drinking water state revolving fund programs reported that the addition of davis - bacon requirements had little impact on their program's ability to support the underlying recovery act goals , such as creating jobs , in part due to the ultra - competitive behavior during the economic downturn and the enormous demand for environmental infrastructure funding .

conversely , michigan state weatherization officials said the requirements might affect their ability to support the recovery act goal of job creation , especially for smaller businesses and contractors .

according to these officials , some smaller local contractors who performed weatherization work before the recovery act sometimes may not have the capacity to take advantage of the recovery act weatherization work because of requirements such as the weekly payroll certifications .

according to federal officials responsible for most programs that are newly subject to davis - bacon requirements , the requirements are not likely to affect the timing of their program's recovery act efforts .

however , officials for some programs expected an impact on their program's timing .

federal officials for 23 of the 40 programs said they did not expect davis - bacon requirements to affect their program's timing .

for example , an official for the national science foundation's academic research infrastructure program — recovery and reinvestment noted that while they had to spend time consulting with the office of management and budget and the department of labor on davis - bacon requirements , this effort had not significantly altered the program's timing .

federal officials for 2 programs were uncertain about how davis - bacon requirements might affect their program's timing , while officials for 7 programs did not provide a response in time for our report .

in contrast , federal officials for 8 programs expected davis - bacon requirements to have an impact on the timing of their program's recovery act efforts .

for example , officials with the department of energy's weatherization assistance program stated that davis - bacon requirements had significantly affected their program's timing because the program is newly subject to the requirements so prevailing wage rates for weatherization workers were not immediately available .

some states decided to wait to begin weatherizing homes until the department of labor had determined county - by - county prevailing wage rates for their state to avoid having to pay back wages to weatherization workers who started working before the prevailing wage rates were known .

for example , state weatherization officials in arizona said that all but one of their local service providers decided to wait to weatherize homes using recovery act funds until the prevailing wage rates were determined because they were concerned about the time required to reconcile differences in wage rates .

the timing of the weatherization assistance program's recovery act efforts was also affected by concerns about complying with davis - bacon requirements .

for example , pennsylvania weatherization officials stated that delays occurred because some local agencies had initially submitted management plans that had not included language describing how they would comply with those requirements .

officials with the department of energy's energy efficiency and conservation block grants and state energy program also expected davis - bacon requirements to affect the timing of their recovery act efforts , while officials with the department of housing and urban development's lead hazard reduction program reported that grantees were provided additional time to complete their work plans to ensure contractors understood the requirements .

we provided a draft of this report to all 27 agencies and the office of management and budget for their review and comment .

two agencies provided technical comments that were incorporated into the report as appropriate .

the other agencies had no comments .

we also provided a copy of relevant sections of the report to gao teams responsible for reviewing recovery act work in the states mentioned in this report .

in some cases , those teams forwarded relevant sections to officials within those states .

we included these comments as appropriate .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to all 27 agencies reviewed in this report , and other interested parties .

the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or daltonp@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix i .

other key contributors to this report were mark gaffigan , ( director ) , ric cheston ( assistant director ) , kim gianopoulos ( assistant director ) , david marroni ( analyst - in - charge ) , angela miles , and alise nacson .

important contributions were also made by anne rhodes - kline , carol herrnstadt shulman , and barbara timmerman .

