i am pleased to be here today to discuss findings of several recent gao reports on the effects of the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) on health insurance markets , including insurer availability , variation in premiums , and enrollee satisfaction .

according to the most recently available census bureau estimates , over 189 million americans under the age of 65 obtained health coverage from private health insurance plans in 2015 .

private health insurance is sold through individual and group markets .

group market participants generally obtain health insurance coverage through a group health plan , usually offered by an employer — small employers purchase insurance from the small - group market and large employers purchase from the large - group market .

americans without access to group health coverage , such as those with employers that do not offer health coverage , may choose to purchase it directly from an insurer through the individual market .

all three markets ( individual , small - group , and large - group ) have historically been highly concentrated — that is , a small number of issuers in a market enrolled a significant portion of the people in that market .

as you know , ppaca contained a number of provisions that could affect private health insurance markets , many of which took effect for plan years beginning in 2014 .

for example , it changed how insurers determine health insurance coverage and premiums and how they market their plans , such as by prohibiting insurers from denying coverage to individuals and from varying premiums based on consumer health status or gender and established limits on premium variation based on age , geographic location , and other factors .

in addition , ppaca established requirements for the benefits that must be covered by health plans — referred to as essential health benefits — and required insurers to market their plans according to defined categories based on the extent to which the plans would be expected to cover the costs of enrollees' medical care .

ppaca also required the establishment of health insurance exchanges in each state beginning in 2014 — marketplaces through which consumers can compare and select health insurance coverage from among all the health plans participating in the state exchange .

these plans are known as qualified health plans ( qhp ) .

some states have established their own exchanges — referred to as state - based exchanges .

in states that have not done so , consumers have access to a federally facilitated exchange ( ffe ) .

for 2017 , 17 states were operating a state - based exchange and 34 states were using the ffe .

in general , plans available on either type of exchange are also available for sale outside of the exchange , in that the consumer could work directly with an insurer to purchase a plan without using their state's exchange .

however , ppaca provided incentives for many consumers to use the exchange instead of purchasing plans directly from an insurer .

for example , certain consumers are eligible for tax credits to help them pay their premiums , but only if they purchase a qhp through the exchange .

in addition , the exchanges are required to carry out certain consumer assistance functions that may facilitate individuals' selection of and enrollment in exchange coverage .

the combination of all of these provisions allows consumers to use the exchanges to directly compare the health insurance plans available to them based on premium costs , benefits covered , and plan generosity .

according to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , enrollments in the exchanges have increased every year since 2014 , with about 11 million individuals having purchased health plans through the exchanges in 2016 , up from about 7 million in 2014 .

this testimony describes ( 1 ) private health - insurance market concentration and issuer participation in the individual , small - group , and large - group markets from 2011 through 2014 , the years leading up to and through the first year that key ppaca provisions took effect ; ( 2 ) the numbers of health plans and ranges of health plan premiums available to individuals during the first 2 years of exchange operation ( 2014 and 2015 ) ; and ( 3 ) enrollee experiences with qhps obtained through the exchanges during the first 3 years of exchange operation ( 2014 through 2016 ) .

my comments are primarily based on three reports we issued in 2015 and 2016 .

for these reports , we primarily examined data from the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within hhs , and previously published research .

for our 2016 report on private health - insurance market concentration and issuer participation , we analyzed data from 2011 through 2014 , the first year of ppaca exchanges , to see how market concentration and issuer participation in 2014 compared to earlier years .

we used 2011 through 2014 medical loss ratio datasets and 2014 unified rate review data that issuers are required to report annually to cms .

for our 2015 report on the numbers of health plans and ranges of health plan premiums available to individuals in 2014 and 2015 , we also analyzed data from cms .

comparisons across years were conducted at both the state and the county level for states that had sufficiently reliable data in both years — including comparisons of plans offered either on or off an exchange in 28 states ( 1,886 counties ) , and comparisons of plans offered only on an exchange for 38 states ( 2,613 counties ) .

for our 2016 report on enrollee experiences with qhps obtained through the exchanges during the first years of exchange operation , we performed a search of research databases to identify relevant literature published from january 1 , 2014 , through april 30 , 2016 .

among other things , we identified and reviewed the results of five national surveys of qhp enrollees who obtained their coverage through the exchanges .

we interviewed stakeholders , including officials from cms and five states — colorado , indiana , montana , north carolina , and vermont — that varied geographically and by whether the state or cms offered the exchange .

each report includes a full description of our scope and methodology .

for the purpose of this testimony , we also present more recent data on issuer participation , plan availability , and premium options in the exchanges that were published by hhs in 2016 .

we conducted the work upon which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

ppaca required the establishment of individual health insurance exchanges , as well as small business exchanges , within each state by 2014 .

ppaca does not require issuers to offer plans through these exchanges , but instead generally relies on market incentives to encourage issuer participation .

issuers seeking to offer a health plan in an individual exchange or small business exchange must first have that plan approved by the exchange in the state .

we previously reported that most of the largest issuers holding the majority of the market in the 2012 individual and small - group markets participated in the 2014 exchanges , although most of the numerous smaller issuers in those markets did not .

in addition , some issuers that participated in the 2014 individual or small business exchanges had not participated in that respective market in 2012 .

while some of these issuers had previously provided coverage in other markets in 2012 , other issuers were newly established through the federally supported consumer oriented and operated plans ( co - op ) program .

as i mentioned above , ppaca also changed , as of 2014 , how insurers determine health insurance premiums and how consumers shop for health insurance plans .

as part of this , ppaca required that health plans be marketed based on information that helps consumers compare the relative value of each plan .

specifically , plans must be marketed by specific categories — including four “metal” tiers of coverage ( bronze , silver , gold , and platinum ) — that reflect out - of - pocket costs that may be incurred by an enrollee .

these changes occurred at the same time that ppaca required the establishment of health insurance exchanges for each state , through which consumers could compare and select from among qhps .

finally , beginning january 1 , 2014 , premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies became available under ppaca for qualified individuals who purchased qhps sold through an exchange .

in 2016 , we examined enrollment in private health - insurance plans in the years leading up to and through 2014 , the first year of the exchanges established by ppaca , and found that in each year , markets were concentrated among a small number of issuers in most states .

on average , in each state , 11 or more issuers participated in each of three types of markets — individual , small group , and large group — from 2011 through 2014 .

however , in most states , the 3 largest issuers in each market had at least an 80 percent share of the market during the period .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

not all issuers in the individual and small group markets participated in the exchanges in 2014 , and several exchanges had fewer than 3 participating issuers .

enrollment through the exchanges was generally more concentrated among a few issuers than was true for the individual and small group markets overall in 2014 .

for our examination of issuer participation in the first year of the exchanges , we reported that fewer issuers participated in most state health insurance markets in 2014 compared to 2013 , though exiting issuers generally had small market shares in that prior year .

specifically , we found that from 2013 to 2014 , the number of issuers participating in individual markets decreased in 46 states , while fewer states' small - group and large - group markets had decreased participation ( 28 and 22 states , respectively ) .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

however , across the three types of markets , those issuers exiting each state market before 2014 generally had less than 1 percent of the market in the prior year .

there were also issuers that newly entered state markets in 2014 .

their market shares in 2014 varied across the three types of markets , with some newly entering issuers in the individual market capturing a market share of over 10 percent .

most newly entering issuers in 2014 participated in the exchanges and they generally had a larger share of the enrollment sold through the exchanges than through the overall markets .

in addition , some newly entering issuers captured a majority of their exchange market , with co - ops having a higher proportion .

since 2014 , there have been additional changes to the number of issuers entering and exiting the individual and small group markets .

for example , most of the co - ops that offered coverage in the exchanges in 2014 have since discontinued offering coverage .

in addition , in an analysis of data from exchanges in states that used the ffe and state - based exchanges , where available , hhs has since reported that the number of issuers offering health plans through the exchanges decreased from 2016 to 2017 , reflecting multi - state withdrawals by a few large insurers .

in 2015 , we reported that individual market consumers generally had access to more health plans in 2015 — a year after the initial implementation of key ppaca provisions — than in 2014 .

consumers in most of the counties analyzed in the 28 states for which we had sufficiently reliable data for plans offered either on or off an exchange had six or more plans from which to choose in three of the four health plan metal tiers ( bronze , silver , and gold ) in both 2014 and 2015 .

the percentage of counties with six or more plans in those metal tiers increased from 2014 to 2015 .

specifically , in 2014 , six or more bronze - , silver - , and gold - tier plans were available to consumers in the individual market ( either on or off an exchange ) in at least 95 percent of the 1,886 counties and were available on an exchange in at least 59 percent of the 2,613 of the counties for which we had sufficiently reliable data for plans offered on an exchange .

in 2015 , the percentage of these same counties with six or more bronze - , silver - , and gold - tier plans available in the individual market increased to 100 percent , and at least 71 percent had six or more of these plans available on an exchange .

 ( see table 1. ) .

in our 2015 report , we also found that premiums varied among states and counties , the lowest cost plans were typically available on an exchange , and in most states premiums increased from 2014 to 2015 .

specifically , we found that: the range of premiums available to consumers in 2014 and 2015 varied among the states and counties we analyzed .

for example , in arizona , the premium for the lowest - cost silver plan option for a 30- year - old in 2015 was $147 per month , but in maine , the lowest - cost silver plan for a 30-year - old in 2015 was $237 .

we also found that the range of premiums — from the lowest to highest cost — differed considerably by state .

for example , in rhode island , 2015 premiums for silver plans available to a 30-year - old either on or off an exchange ranged from a low of $217 per month to a high of $285 per month , a difference of 32 percent .

by contrast , in arizona , 2015 premiums for these plans ranged from a low of $147 per month to a high of $545 per month , a difference of 270 percent .

the lowest cost plans were typically available on an exchange .

specifically , in both years , taking into account plans available through an exchange and those only available off an exchange , the lowest cost plans were available through an exchange in most of the 1,886 counties we analyzed in the 28 states .

in most states , the costs for the minimum and median premiums for silver plans increased from 2014 to 2015 .

for example , in the 28 states included in our analysis , from 2014 to 2015 the minimum premiums for silver plans available to a 30-year - old increased in 18 states , decreased in 9 states , and remained unchanged in 1 state .

at the county level , we found that premiums for the lowest cost silver option available for a 30-year - old increased by 5 percent or more in 51 percent of the counties in the 28 states .

while our 2015 report examining the numbers of health plans and ranges of health plan premiums available to individuals in 2014 and 2015 was our most recent examination of these two issues , hhs has examined more recent data .

for example , in 2016 , hhs reported that despite a decline in the number of issuers participating in the ffe from 2016 to 2017 , all consumers were able to choose among various plan options for 2017 , although the options for about 21 percent of consumers were among choices of plans offered by a single insurer .

hhs also conducted analyses focused on the premiums for the second - lowest cost silver plan in states that used the ffe and estimated that average premiums for these plans increased more between 2016 and 2017 ( 25 percent ) than in previous years ( 2 percent between 2014 and 2015 , and 7 percent between 2015 and 2016 ) .

in 2016 , we reported that most enrollees who obtained their coverage through the health insurance exchanges were satisfied overall with their qhp during the first few years that exchanges operated , according to national surveys of qhp enrollees .

for example , most qhp enrollees who obtained their coverage through the exchanges reported overall satisfaction with their plans in 2014 through 2016 , according to three national surveys that asked this question .

one survey found that most 2015 enrollees re - enrolled in 2016 with the same insurer , and often with the same plan offered by that insurer , and another survey reported that most re - enrollees expressed satisfaction with their qhp .

the surveys reported that qhp enrollees' satisfaction with their plans was either somewhat lower than , or was similar to , that of those enrolled in employer - sponsored health insurance in 2015 and 2016 .

to varying degrees , qhp enrollees expressed satisfaction with specific aspects of their plan , including their coverage and choice of providers , and with plan affordability .

we also interviewed stakeholders — including experts , state departments of insurance , and others — and reviewed literature for our 2016 report .

these interviews and the literature revealed some concerns about qhp enrollee experiences that were similar to longstanding concerns in the private health insurance market .

for example , according to these experts , some enrollees found it too expensive to pay for their out - of - pocket expenses before reaching their deductibles and have reported concerns about affording care or have been deterred from seeking care .

some enrollees have also faced difficulties understanding their qhp's coverage terminology and others have faced problems accessing care after enrollment , according to stakeholders and literature we reviewed .

chairman jordan , ranking member krishnamoorthi , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i look forward to answering any questions that you may have .

for questions about this statement , please contact john e. dicken at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this statement include john e. dicken , director ; gerardine brennan and william hadley , assistant directors ; and kristen j. anderson , lakendra beard , sandra george , and laurie pachter .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

