the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) was enacted to ( 1 ) help preserve jobs and promote economic recovery from the current economic recession , ( 2 ) invest in technology to spur technological advances , and ( 3 ) invest in infrastructure to provide long - term economic benefits , among other things .

the act was a massive response to the economic crisis ; the cost of that response is now estimated at about $862 billion in funding and tax provisions .

it is expected that the act will be carried out with an unprecedented level of transparency , so that the public can see how its money is being spent and what is being achieved .

both members of congress and the president have emphasized the need for accountability , efficiency , and transparency in the expenditure of recovery act funds and have made it a central principle of the act .

as congress finished work on the act , the house appropriations committee released a statement saying , “a historic level of transparency , oversight and accountability will help guarantee taxpayer dollars are spent wisely and americans can see results for their investment.” to do so , congress built into the act numerous provisions to increase transparency and accountability over spending that require recipients of recovery act funding to report quarterly on a number of measures , as contained in section 1512 of the act .

nonfederal recipients of recovery act funded grants , contracts , or loans are required to submit reports with information on each project or activity , including descriptive information on the uses of recovery act awards .

in addition , the act called for the establishment of a web site through which the public could gain easy access to recipient - and agency - reported information on recovery act spending .

through recovery.gov , the government's official web site , users can search the site a number of different ways for information about individual recovery act awards in their neighborhood and throughout the country , as well as for summary information .

the web site contains information on each reported award , such as cost , location , and description of activities to be carried out .

in response to your request , the overall objective of our work was to assess the extent to which the descriptions of the uses of funds , published on recovery.gov , transparently describe how funds are being spent and what outcomes are expected .

more specifically , we ( 1 ) determined how the office of management and budget ( omb ) and federal agencies implemented recovery act requirements to describe the use of funds and ( 2 ) assessed the extent to which the descriptive information made available on recovery.gov meets established requirements and is transparent .

we are also providing information on the reported nature and types of projects funded by the recovery act for the programs included in this review .

this information is contained in appendixes i - xi .

this report covers 11 telecommunications , energy , transportation , federal buildings , and civil works programs .

these are the department of agriculture's broadband initiatives program ; the department of commerce's broadband technology opportunities program ; the department of energy's weatherization assistance and geothermal the department of transportation's high - speed intercity passenger rail , grants - in - aid for airports , highway infrastructure investment , supplemental discretionary grants , and transit capital assistance programs ; the general services administration's federal buildings fund program ; the u.s. army corps of engineers' civil works program .

collectively , funding for these programs accounts for approximately $67 billion of the $275 billion in recovery act funding distributed through contracts , grants , and loans .

we selected these programs because they represented large programs — $1 billion or more — or were of interest to you .

to understand how omb and other federal agencies are implementing recovery act requirements to describe the use of funds , we reviewed the act and its legislative history for reporting requirements and guidance on reporting established by ( 1 ) omb , ( 2 ) the recovery accountability and transparency board ( recovery board ) , and ( 3 ) any supplemental guidance and other technical assistance developed by the federal agencies for programs covered by our work .

we met with officials from those agencies to gain an understanding of these requirements .

to assess the extent to which descriptions of awards transparently described how funds were being used , we developed a transparency assessment ( described later in this report ) based on the recovery act ; omb's guidance , including omb's recipient reporting data model ; the federal funding accountability and transparency act ; and professional judgment .

based on these considerations , we considered descriptions of awards transparent if they conveyed , in a manner understandable to the general public , a basic understanding of the activities to be carried out and the expected outcomes .

this effort was meant to be an assessment of transparency only with regard to the aspects we reviewed , not to recovery.gov as a whole or to the administration's efforts to make this information available frequently and in a timely manner .

in assessing transparency , we took probability ( random ) samples of 467 of the 14,089 prime recipient award records on recovery.gov as of february 10 , 2010 , from 9 of the 11 programs listed above .

prime recipients are nonfederal entities that receive recovery act funding as awards in the form of contracts , grants , or loans directly from the federal government .

in order to determine which records to sample from recovery.gov , we used the definition of an “award” — the prime recipient's record for a contract , grant , or loan — as defined by omb and the recovery board for the purposes of recipient reporting .

we selected 12 key fields required for recipient reporting that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including 3 narrative fields .

to apply this general definition to award information — hereafter referred to as descriptions of awards or descriptions — we used the following specific attributes that were either explicitly stated or inherent in the recovery act or omb's guidance: general purpose of the award ( eg , construction or fire protection ) ; nature of activities being conducted ( eg , dredging waterways or installing security cameras ) ; location ( where award activities are being conducted ) ; cost ( amount awarded ) ; status ( percentage complete ) ; and outcome ( what is expected to be achieved ; eg , increased safety or reduced congestion as a result of a redesigned highway intersection or increased energy efficiency from the installation of a new heating , ventilation , and air conditioning system ) .

to these six specific attributes , we used our professional judgment to add a seventh that in our view , was needed to provide a complete description: scope ( i.e. , information on the magnitude or extensiveness of an award ) .

for example , scope could be the number of homes to be weatherized statewide or the number of miles ( or lane miles ) of a road to be repaved .

using these seven attributes and our professional judgment , we assessed information in the 12 data fields collectively , for understandability , clarity , and completeness .

two analysts independently reviewed information on each award from the 12 fields and then compared results to reach a consensus on the overall score ( eg , met the transparency criteria ) .

if they could not agree , a third analyst reviewed the award information without regard to the original determinations and made a deciding assessment .

those that were understandable , clear , and complete we considered to be “transparent.” for those that were not fully transparent , we searched publicly available information from federal , state , and recipient web sites , and reviewed publicly available documents to complete the descriptions .

we also reviewed in - depth 52 judgmentally selected energy and infrastructure awards in five programs , primarily from programs that are already covered as part of our bimonthly reviews on recovery act spending: broadband technology opportunities program , weatherization assistance program , grants - in - aid for airports , highway infrastructure investment , and transit capital assistance .

for these awards , we spoke with federal , state , and local officials responsible for developing or reviewing award information about federal transparency requirements and any feedback that they have received on these awards from the public , and assessed the accuracy of select information from source documents ( such as award documents ) .

in addition to the review described above , we discussed with federal and state officials how they make information on awards available to the public .

we also gathered information on the nature and scope of awards ( or potential awards ) for the 11 programs by reviewing documentation supplied by the federal agencies and discussing the programs with agency officials .

 ( see apps .

i - xi for this information. ) .

finally , for the nine programs with recipient reports at the time of our review , we ( 1 ) performed a number of electronic edit checks on the awards for the prime recipients , including any associated subrecipients , in our probability sample to determine whether there were possible anomalies in the award information and ( 2 ) discussed with federal agencies and reviewed federal inspectors general efforts to ensure the reliability of the data reported by recipients .

 ( see app xii. ) .

we did not assess how federal agencies or prime recipients selected the awards discussed in this report to ensure that the awards met the purposes of the act or whether the awards met the act's eligibility requirements .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2009 through may 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as part of our work , we assessed the reliability of certain recovery act data that were pertinent to our effort .

we determined that the data elements were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

see appendix xiii for additional information on our methodology .

congress built into the recovery act numerous provisions to increase transparency and accountability , including requiring recipients of funds to report quarterly on a number of measures .

to implement these requirements , omb worked with the recovery board to deploy a nationwide system at federalreporting.gov for collecting data submitted by the recipients of funds .

omb set the specific timeline for recipients to submit reports and for agencies to review the data .

recipients are required to submit the reports in the month after the close of a quarter , and , by the end of the month , the reports are to be reviewed by federal agencies for significant errors and missing information before being posted to recovery.gov .

for the programs discussed in this report , information was submitted by recipients for the quarter ending december 31 , 2009 ( second round reporting ) and posted on recovery.gov on january 30 , 2010 .

while omb's role was to provide governmentwide guidance , one of the functions of the recovery board was to establish the web site and to publish a variety of data , including recipient data once it was reviewed by the federal agencies .

these data , collected through www.federalreporting.gov , are made available to the public for viewing and downloading on www.recovery.gov .

the recovery act set a demanding schedule for implementing recovery.gov , requiring the recovery board to establish the web site within 30 days .

the recovery board's goals for this web site were to promote accountability by providing a platform to analyze recovery act data and serving as a means of tracking fraud , waste , and abuse allegations by providing the public with accurate , user - friendly information .

this was an extensive undertaking across the federal government .

omb , the recovery board , and federal agencies , among others , worked to design a web site , develop the capability to handle tens of thousands of submissions , develop guidance on reporting , and assist recipients in meeting reporting requirements .

more specifically , within a short period of time , omb and the recovery board implemented a recipient reporting system that covered a wide - range of programs and provided detailed and up - to - date information on the use of recovery act funds .

our fieldwork and initial review and analysis of recipient data from www.recovery.gov indicated that there was a range of significant reporting and quality issues that needed to be addressed , including issues with interpretations of reporting guidance .

omb told us that achieving the promised degree of transparency will be an iterative process , during which the reporting process and submitted information will improve .

the recovery act required recipients to report specific information , including descriptive information on each award , which we discuss further in the following section .

in the accountability and transparency section of the act , transparency is not specifically defined .

however , the act requires that the award information on recovery.gov be made available to enhance public awareness of the use of funds .

furthermore , both members of congress and the president have asserted the need for accountability , efficiency , and transparency in recovery act spending , with the administration pledging that the recovery act would “break from conventional washington approaches to spending by ensuring that public dollars are invested effectively and that the economic recovery package is fully transparent and accountable to the american people.” thus , the transparency of award information on recovery.gov , particularly in narrative fields ( the focus of this review ) is particularly important .

for this report , we reviewed the 11 energy and infrastructure programs introduced previously .

 ( see table 1. ) .

no awards were made for two of the programs — the broadband initiatives program and the supplemental discretionary grant program — by december 31 , 2009 .

awards were made for the other 9 programs by this date , requiring recipients to submit reports for the second round of reporting .

both the recovery act and omb require recipients to report on a wide range of items to track the uses of funds .

these items include — but are not limited to — overall descriptions of the awards , projects and activities funded , funding amounts , numbers of jobs created or retained , compensation for certain executives , and awards to subrecipients .

as discussed earlier , our focus is on the extent to which descriptions of awards reported by recipients and published on recovery.gov provide a basic understanding of what funds are being spent on and what outcomes are expected .

as a result , we focused on certain reporting requirements and guidance that provide that basic understanding , such as the location of the project and the nature of the award activities .

the act created broad requirements for recipient reporting .

specifically , the act requires , among other types of information , that recipients report the total amount of recovery act funds received , associated obligations and expenditures , and a detailed list of those projects or activities .

for each project or activity , the detailed list must include its name and a description , an evaluation of its completion status , and an estimate of the number of jobs created and the number of jobs retained through that project or activity .

the act did not include any more specific interpretation or explanation of these requirements .

to operationalize the act's requirements , omb provided recipients with a range of guidance through memorandums , supplemental materials , and reporting instructions .

specifically , starting for the period ending september 30 , 2009 ( and repeated for the quarter ending december 31 ) , omb's reporting instructions for the recipient reporting data model specified that recipients would provide , among other things , the project name , which should be brief and descriptive ; a project description that captures the overall purpose of the award and expected outputs and outcomes or results ; an award description that describes the overall purpose , expected outputs , and outcomes or results of the award , including significant deliverables and , if appropriate , units of measure ; the project status , which was specified as not started , less than 50 percent complete , completed 50 percent or more , or complete ; an activity description , which categorizes projects and activities ; the amount of the award ; and the primary place of performance , which is the physical location of award activities .

three of these fields — project name , project description , and award description — are narrative fields .

omb's recipient reporting data model does not specifically address the clarity of such descriptions , although omb , in its december 2009 guidance to heads of executive departments and agencies , has stated that the narrative information must be sufficiently clear to facilitate understanding by the general public .

several of these fields are defined in ways that are inconsistent with reporting award project and activity information as required by the recovery act .

where , for example , funds are awarded using a single award to cover multiple projects , requiring a project description that captures the overall purpose of the award is not consistent with the requirement in the act to report a detailed list of all projects and activities each having its own name , description , completion status , and potential outcomes .

requiring that status , outcomes , or other information covered be reported in single fields on an award - by - award rather than a project - by - project or activity - by - activity basis may convey an incomplete impression if multiple projects or activities are being included .

officials from omb agreed with this assessment but said that the agency , in creating its guidance and reporting data model , weighed the level of reporting detail required against the potential reporting burden .

omb created the guidance to require general information that could be applied broadly across a wide range of recipients .

omb defined the three narrative fields to solicit high - level information that is not overly specific to a single program .

in this regard , the guidance had to be applicable to awards that are for discrete activities at a single location and for a single purpose .

for example , under the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) highway infrastructure investment program , an award might be for a single project to widen a section of a road or to replace a substandard bridge .

bundle several discrete activities at different locations .

for example , under the federal transit administration's ( fta ) transit capital assistance program , a transit agency could receive an award that has different purposes at different locations .

are like block grants in which recipients ( i.e. , states , territories , and tribes ) receive funds for a broad purpose and make subawards to local entities , which then decide the specific uses for which funds are to be spent .

for example , under the department of energy's weatherization assistance program , recipients receive funding to enable low - income families to reduce their energy bills by making energy - efficiency improvements to their homes .

in turn , the recipients provide grant funds to a number of local agencies to actually carry out the purposes of the program , which might involve modernizing heating equipment in one home and installing insulation in another .

are components of a larger project , but are not linked to the larger project for reporting purposes .

for example , under the civil works program , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) may enter into a contract ( the award ) with one company to dredge a river channel and with another company to build a seawall , all for the purpose of improving navigable waters at a specific location .

each recipient reports on the activities conducted under the individual award but not the overall project being funded as each recipient works on only a piece of the larger project .

omb officials also told us the agency created generic reporting guidance because they expected the guidance to be a baseline , with agencies providing supplemental guidance that was more specific to unique program characteristics and situations that omb's one - size - fits - all guidance could not effectively address .

according to omb , the agencies would be better sources of program - specific individualized guidance , tailored to the awards made under their programs .

as discussed in the next section of this report , most agencies included in our review did provide some type of technical assistance or supplemental materials to aid recipients in reporting .

however , most did not develop formal , program - specific supplemental guidance that was approved by omb , and omb did not require agencies to do so .

for agencies that do develop program - specific supplemental guidance , omb officials told us that they primarily review this guidance for consistency with their agency's general guidance , and review the supplemental guidance to ensure its overall sufficiency .

omb officials did not indicate if their review includes whether agencies developed guidance on their narrative fields .

also , while omb reviews formal guidance , it does not monitor other forms of agency supplemental material or technical assistance provided to recipients .

 ( see apps .

i - xi for additional information on the agencies' reporting assistance and its possible effects on the transparency of descriptions ) .

omb continues to update its guidance based on lessons learned from early reporting experiences , recognizing that the reporting process is a work in progress .

for example , omb clarified its guidance on calculating jobs created or retained to address issues with the jobs data reported by recipients during the first reporting round .

during the course of our review , omb officials signaled that they are willing to revise their guidance should our assessment or other input suggest that changes are needed , but would need to balance any changes in guidance against additional reporting burdens .

we found two instances in which omb's guidance on narrative fields was unclear .

first , for the award description field , the guidance provided that recipients of grants should describe the overall purpose of the award ; recipients of contracts should provide a description of the overall purpose and expected outcomes including significant deliverables .

omb provided three examples of how to fill in the field , at least two of which do not conform to omb's expectations: “community development” and “special education – part b / preschool.” these examples provide only high - level titles but do not identify the purpose or outcomes .

furthermore , omb allowed recipients to enter descriptions of up to 4,000 characters , providing space for more robust descriptions .

as a result , based on our assessment of award descriptions , recipients are reporting widely varying types of information in this field — some of it very detailed , while other reporting is quite limited and uninformative .

this issue is discussed more fully in the following section and can be seen in award information from recovery.gov that we reproduced in appendixes i through xi .

second , for the quarterly activities / project description field , omb instructed grantees to provide a description of the overall purpose and expected outputs and outcomes or results of the award .

as mentioned , project description , as that term is used in the act , refers to listed projects or activities , not awards .

instead , omb's guidance anticipated that , for contracts , recipients were supposed to provide a description of all significant services or supplies delivered in the current calendar quarter .

the example omb provided in its recipient reporting data model , “powers and gold beach ranger districts curry county or has fuels item 1 chetco area and item 3 – powers area” is , in our opinion , unclear , and it does not meet the general requirements that omb laid out .

as discussed in the next section , the inconsistency and lack of clarity in omb's guidance may have contributed to the level of transparency in some of the award description information that we reviewed .

we estimate that about a quarter of the awards on recovery.gov for the nine programs we reviewed were transparent — that is , had sufficiently clear and understandable information on the award's purpose , scope , location , cost , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work .

many others ( an estimated 68 percent ) had at least some or most of this information , and a small percentage ( an estimated 7 percent ) had little of this information .

a few factors may have contributed to the lack of transparency in the descriptions we assessed , including the type of guidance and technical assistance provided by omb and federal agencies .

in addition to the information published on recovery.gov , federal , state , and other public sources provide some additional information on the uses of recovery act funds .

because the recovery act did not define transparency , we developed our own set of criteria by which to measure the transparency of the awards' descriptive fields .

in order to assess the descriptions , we selected key fields required for recipient reporting from recovery.gov that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including the three narrative fields .

using the recovery act , omb's guidance , and our professional judgment , we determined that these fields should collectively contain information on the award's purpose , scope , location , cost , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work — information necessary to make the use of funds transparent to the public .

we also considered the extent to which information in the fields was clear and understandable .

we drew a probability ( simple random ) sample of prime recipient awards to review for each of the nine energy and infrastructure programs that had awards in recovery.gov for the second round of recipient reporting and compared the descriptions of these awards to our transparency criteria .

 ( see app .

xiii for more information about our transparency criteria and overall methodology. ) .

we estimate that 25 percent of the awards for the nine programs we reviewed ( out of a total of over 14,000 awards ) were transparent — had sufficiently clear and understandable information on the award's purpose , scope , location , cost , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work .

 ( see table 2. ) .

we estimate that another 68 percent had some or most of this information , but not all .

importantly , the descriptions of awards that partially met our transparency criteria varied widely .

some of these award descriptions had much of the information needed to make them transparent , but might be missing one important aspect , such as the expected outcomes .

other descriptions contained much less information and provided sufficient detail to meet only a few attributes of our criteria , such as purpose and location .

finally , an estimated 7 percent of the descriptions provided little or no information on nature , scope , purpose , location , or outcomes of the award .

recipient - reported information varied widely in its transparency .

for example , a napa , california , transit recipient provided clear information in sufficient detail for the general public to understand the award's purpose , scope , location , cost , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work .

specifically , the description of the award states that it will be used to purchase four hybrid buses and construct a multimodal park - and - ride facility and , as a result , the transit fleet will be modernized , and the park - and - ride facility will allow hundreds of commuters to make more efficient , safe , and timely transit connections .

 ( see table 3. ) .

thus , we determined that this description met our transparency criteria .

other recipient - reported information was less transparent and partially met our transparency criteria .

for example , a weatherization program description for the commonwealth of virginia partially met our transparency criteria because it contained some , but not all of the attributes needed to make the use of funds transparent to the public .

 ( see table 4. ) .

for example , the description did not provide information on the scope of the award because it did not indicate how many homes would be weatherized in the state .

from publicly available information on other federal and state web sites , we found information that would have made this description more complete .

specifically , we found that approximately 9,193 homes throughout the state of virginia will undergo weatherization activities such as tests for carbon monoxide , heating / cooling equipment inspection and repair , domestic water heater insulation , and refrigerator and stove replacement .

 ( the extent to which federal agency and state agency recovery act web sites have material that supplement recovery.gov recipient - reported information is discussed later in this section. ) .

finally , some recipient - reported information contained little or no information on what funds are being spent on and what outcomes are expected .

these did not meet our transparency criteria .

for example information reported by the state of michigan for a highway project did not describe the location of the roadway or the extent of the project , and used technical terminology to describe the nature of the project — chip sealing — that is not likely to be familiar to the general public .

 ( see table 5. ) .

as a result , this description did not meet our transparency criteria .

from publicly available information on other federal and state web sites , we found information that would have made this description more understandable and clearer .

specifically , we found that the award supports pavement improvement activities to resurface 7.8 miles of featherstone road from m - 66 to engle road north of sturgis .

the award will result in improved driving quality by making the road smoother .

for more information on the transparency results for each program , as well as our assessment of each of the 467 awards that we reviewed , see appendixes i - xi .

two key factors may have contributed — positively or negatively — to the transparency of the award descriptions we assessed from recovery.gov , although we cannot directly correlate our specific transparency results to these factors .

most notably , the guidance provided may have played a role in the degree to which recipients transparently described their awards .

as noted in the previous section , omb's guidance for reporting information on the uses of an award is unclear , which could have prevented some recipients from meeting some or all of our criteria in the transparency assessment .

in addition , the type of assistance — program - specific guidance or technical assistance — as well as the level of detail , which varied across agencies , may have played a role in the extent to which awards met our transparency criteria .

some agencies supplemented omb's high - level guidance with program - specific technical assistance on how to meet omb's reporting requirements , including specific instructions on what to write in the narrative fields .

for example , fta annotated omb's guidance with program - specific instructions and examples for all the reporting fields in federalreporting.gov .

in the project description field , fta suggested that recipients “describe the specific outputs and outcomes that will result from the grant .

this entry should include quantitative information about the activities conducted and items purchased under the grant.” for the most part , the programs in our review for which agencies provided program - specific guidance or technical assistance — highway infrastructure investment , transit capital assistance , and geothermal technologies program — tended to have more transparent descriptions .

however , other program - specific factors , such as grant applications that involved creating project descriptions for public dissemination in advance of award selection , may have also played a role in the degree to which such descriptions met our transparency criteria .

for example , when some applications required recipients to create project descriptions for public dissemination in advance of award selection , such as in the broadband technology opportunities program , the recipients may have been more prepared to describe their awards in the narrative fields .

for additional information by program , see appendixes i - xi .

other agencies we reviewed only provided general reporting assistance to recipients , primarily by disseminating omb's guidance to help recipients navigate omb's reporting requirements .

however , this assistance did not necessarily include specific clarification or instructions for completing narrative fields .

for example , the department of energy provides technical assistance to weatherization assistance program recipients that , for the most part , summarizes omb's guidance .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) distributes omb's guidance and provides recipient reporting assistance through each of its field offices , which in turn , determines how to disseminate guidance to recipients .

in one faa field office , a contractor hired to oversee recovery act efforts distributed information and guidance to every airport in the region by e - mail .

for the most part , the programs in our review that only provided general reporting assistance to recipients , mostly through disseminating omb's guidance — weatherization assistance program , grants - in - aid for airports , and the federal buildings fund — tended to have less transparent descriptions .

however , other factors , such as the level of experience of the recipients in reporting on government awards , may have also played a role in the degree to which such descriptions met our transparency criteria .

for additional information by program , see appendixes i - xi .

federal agencies' data quality reviews may also have played a role in the extent to which some recipients met our transparency criteria .

omb's guidance requires that federal agencies conduct data quality reviews to address two key data problems — material omissions and significant reporting errors — but does not specify methodologies for such reviews .

however , omb does require federal agencies to develop data quality plans to articulate how they intend to detect and correct material omissions and significant reporting errors .

omb officials told us that given the limited amount of time federal agencies have to conduct these reviews , identifying misleading or erroneous information must take priority .

officials from almost all of the programs included in this review that had awarded funds for the second reporting round told us that they conduct automated checks of data , specifically of the numerical fields .

for example , department of energy officials told us that they ensure the quality of recipient reported data for the weatherization assistance program primarily through an automated analysis of key data fields , including the award number , recipient name , award amount , and jobs calculated .

in a few cases , they also manually review the data for other anomalies .

however , officials from some of the programs included in our review told us they did not typically review the information provided in narrative fields , and , of the three programs that do , none had a systematic process in place to evaluate the accuracy or transparency of the information .

for example , fhwa officials told us that they “spot check” the information for significant errors because of the volume of awards — over 10,000 — in their program .

in light of the importance of the quality of the recovery act data , the recovery board has worked with federal inspectors general to establish a multiphased review process to look at the quality of the data submitted by recovery act recipients .

to date , this process has focused on ( 1 ) whether agencies developed data quality reviews in anticipation of the data to be submitted and ( 2 ) identified data errors and omissions in recipients' first cycle reports and factors that may have contributed to them and the actions taken by agencies , omb , and the recovery board to improve the quality of the data that recipients will submit in future reporting cycles .

the resulting report did not comment on the quality of the data in the narrative fields .

according to the recovery board , future reports will focus on the effectiveness of the agency data quality review processes .

for information on each agency's data quality reviews , see appendix xii .

recovery.gov includes award information on recovery act spending from both recipients and agencies , as well as various other required agency reports , including agency - specific recovery act plans and weekly financial and activity reports .

aside from the information on recovery.gov , descriptive information on the uses of awards is available through other resources .

at the federal level , agency web sites provide information on recovery act activities as required by omb's guidance .

the level and type of award information provided on agency web sites varies across the programs we reviewed .

for example , fhwa has a link to a spreadsheet on its web site that provides information such as the location and obligation amount for each award , as well as a short description .

the geothermal technologies program web site has detailed information on each project , including the technology type , recipient name , location , objectives , description , and targets / milestones .

the recovery act did not require states to establish web sites to provide recovery act information .

however , all 50 states and the district of columbia do post some information on their state - specific recovery act web sites .

as with the federal agency web sites , however , the state web sites provide varying levels of detail .

for example , the new york state recovery act web site , nyworks ( www.recovery.ny.gov ) , details how the state of new york is spending its recovery act funds through a map that provides specific information on each project that has been announced .

in addition , the web site provides links to over 40 other federal , state , and local entities that have additional information on recovery act spending .

mississippi's recovery act web site ( www.stimulus.ms.gov ) provides links to federal guidance and the recipient reports for projects in the state , but it does not provide additional information on a project - by - project basis beyond what is published on recovery.gov .

in some cases , state auditors have also developed web pages or sites to provide information to the public on the oversight and monitoring of recovery act spending .

in addition to federal and state web sites , information on the uses of recovery act funds can be found on some recipients' web sites and in other publicly available documents .

for example , the ohio department of transportation has a one - page description and photo for most recovery projects that provides detail on the activities and outcomes of that project , as well the expected completion date .

likewise , 36 of the 58 states , territories , and tribes receiving recovery act funds through the weatherization assistance program have their weatherization plans on their web sites .

the department of energy requires all states , territories , and tribes to create these plans to outline how they will use weatherization funds , including recovery act funds .

for the most part , the officials we spoke with said they are not systematically tracking the citizen feedback that they have received on publicly available award information .

the recovery board tracks the total number of comments received on recovery.gov — it receives about 125 to 200 e - mails per week — but does not categorize the e - mails by type of comment .

however , recovery board officials told us that they plan to begin linking e - mails to specific projects in the future .

omb officials told us that the information published from the first round of reporting received public scrutiny and commentary , which they viewed as evidence that the transparency and reporting processes for the recovery act are working effectively .

in fact , based on the comments omb received , the agency added an automated check to federalreporting.gov to ensure that certain numerical fields , such as zip codes or congressional districts , were correctly entered .

in general , federal agency officials told us that they have received some feedback on recovery act awards and the award information made available to the public .

officials from the weatherization assistance program and grants - in - aid for airports program told us that the public has provided little feedback on awards and the award information made available to the public , while geothermal technologies program officials told us that the public and media have provided positive feedback on the program's web site , which provides detailed information on each project .

according to officials at a few agencies , many public inquiries on the recovery act addressed the availability of funding and jobs , not individual awards .

according to fhwa officials , the agency has no baseline information for comparing the feedback on recovery act awards with comments on awards made before the recovery act , because they did not previously track feedback on project information they provided to the public .

the administration faced a daunting task in simultaneously putting in place ways to spend large sums of recovery act funds that required , in some instances , developing new programs and , in others , significantly expanding the size of existing ones , while also seeking to make these efforts more transparent to the public than previous efforts had been .

although omb initially focused on quickly designing a reporting system that covered a vast array of recovery act programs delivered in different ways , now that such requirements are largely in place , omb can begin focusing on other important aspects of its transparency efforts .

specifically , ensuring that the narrative portions of recovery.gov award descriptions prepared by recipients are understandable is an important aspect of omb's transparency effort .

these descriptions provide a key mechanism through which the public can understand clearly how their tax dollars are being spent and what is likely to be achieved from these expenditures .

looking forward , omb has an opportunity to improve the transparency of the recipient - reported narrative information on recovery.gov by revising its guidance to remedy the problems we found .

assuredly , the more difficult task is having tens of thousands of recipients follow this guidance and report on their awards in a way intended by the act and the administration .

in our view , one promising approach is for omb to work with the executive departments and agencies that seek to provide supplemental guidance on narrative description information .

in doing so , omb can use its central position to further mission agencies' efforts to tailor resulting guidance to their individual situations in a way that furthers the transparency goals discussed in this report .

a second approach is for omb , in partnership with federal agencies , to periodically review the descriptions of awards submitted by recipients and to work with the recovery board on the board's assessments of agencies' data quality reviews to gain a sense of whether the information reported is meeting the administration's expectations .

we are not making recommendations to individual agencies at this time because we believe that there are actions that omb can take which may lead to substantial improvements in recipient reporting of narrative information .

however , as we continue to monitor omb's efforts to achieve transparent recovery act spending , we will reassess , as needed , whether actions in these areas are needed .

to further the goals of public understanding of what recovery act funds are being spent on and what results are expected , we recommend that the director , office of management and budget , take the following three actions: revise omb's recipient reporting guidance , including the recipient reporting data model , to provide recipients with clearer general instructions and examples for narrative fields aimed at fostering more complete information on the uses of funds and expected outcomes .

work with executive departments and agencies to determine ( 1 ) whether supplemental guidance is needed to meet , in a reasonable and cost - effective way , the intent of the recovery act for reporting on projects and activities and ( 2 ) whether that supplemental guidance or other agency - proposed technical assistance dealing with narrative descriptions of awards provides for transparent descriptions of funded activities .

periodically ( 1 ) review , in partnership with executive departments and agencies , the descriptions of awards — in particular , the narrative fields — submitted by recipients to determine whether the information provides a basic understanding of the uses of the funds and the expected outcomes , and , if not , determine what actions to take , including encouraging agencies to develop or improve program - specific guidance and ( 2 ) work with the recovery board on the board's assessments of departments' and agencies' data quality reviews to ensure the adequacy of these reviews and further reinforce actions to meet transparency goals .

we provided a draft of this report to the office of management and budget ; the departments of agriculture , commerce , energy , and transportation ; the corps of engineers ; and the general services administration for their review and comment .

omb officials agreed with our recommendations .

the officials stated that our report would be enhanced if it better communicated information in three areas .

first , regarding our findings on transparency , the large “partially met” category contains awards that have a substantial amount of the information needed to understand what funds are being spent on and what outcomes are expected as well awards that contained sufficient information on only a few attributes .

second , omb asked that we recognize the need to balance more extensive reporting with the effort needed to comply with that reporting .

third , omb officials suggested that we state more clearly that we assessed the transparency of award information collectively — that is , from reviewing the 12 data fields as a whole rather than from looking at the information contained in each field individually — since some information that might not appear in one data field could show up in another field .

we revised our report to better communicate these aspects .

the officials also provided technical and clarifying comments , many of which we incorporated .

for the most part , the other agencies' comments were limited to technical and clarifying comments , which we incorporated where appropriate .

in its technical comments , the department of transportation provided a general comment from fta that the transit administration believed that many of the award descriptions for transit projects that we assessed as partially meeting our transparency criteria could have been assessed as meeting the criteria .

given the procedures that we used to make our assessment , we remain confident that these assessments were fair and accurate .

we do note that providing narrative information is a learning experience , with recipients having opportunities in subsequent reporting rounds to improve their narrative material to be more transparent .

finally , the department of commerce provided a letter in which it detailed a number of ways that it undertook to achieve transparency for its broadband technology opportunities program .

 ( see app .

xv. ) .

as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter .

at that time , we will send copies to congressional committees and subcommittees with responsibilities for the programs discussed in this report ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the secretaries of the agencies discussed in this report .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact katherine siggerud at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov for buildings , telecommunications and transportation issues , patricia dalton at ( 202 ) 512- 3841 or daltonp@gao.gov for energy and army corps of engineers issues .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

contributors to this report are listed in appendix xvi .

within the department of agriculture , the rural utilities service's broadband initiatives program makes funding available for broadband infrastructure projects in rural areas that lack sufficient access to high - speed broadband service .

the recovery act provides $2.5 billion of budget authority for the rural utilities service to extend grants , loans , and loan / grant combinations to projects for the purpose of facilitating broadband deployment in rural communities .

through the use of loans , the rural utilities service can support a principal amount exceeding the appropriation .

on july 9 , 2009 , the rural utilities service and the department of commerce's national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) released a joint notice of funds availability detailing the requirements , rules , and procedures for applying for broadband funding .

under this funding notice , the rural utilities service received 401 applications requesting nearly $5 billion , and another 833 applications were joint applications to the broadband initiative program and ntia's broadband technology opportunities program totaling nearly $13 billion .

broadband grants and loans fall into several first round project categories: last mile projects .

up to $1.2 billion was available for last mile infrastructure projects in remote and non - remote areas .

a “last - mile” project is defined as any broadband infrastructure project that provides service to end users or end user devices .

a remote area is an unserved , rural area 50 miles from the limits of a nonrural area , and an unserved area is defined as a proposed service area composed of one or more contiguous census blocks , where at least 90 percent of households in the proposed funded service area lack access to facilities - based , terrestrial broadband service .

middle mile projects .

up to $800 million was available for middle mile projects .

a middle mile project is defined as a broadband infrastructure project that does not predominantly provide broadband service to end users or to end user devices , and may include interoffice transport , backhaul , internet connectivity , or special access .

the rural utilities service released a separate second funding round notice on january 22 , 2010 .

under this second funding notice , the rural utilities service received a total of 776 applications requesting nearly $11.2 billion .

the second funding notice retained funding for last mile and middle mile projects , but eliminated the funding category for last mile remote projects .

several new categories have been established for satellite , rural library broadband , and technical assistance , as described below: last mile projects .

up to $1.7 billion is available for loans or loan / grant combinations .

middle mile .

up to $300 million is available for loans or loan / grant combinations .

satellite , rural library broadband , and technical assistance projects .

up to $100 million is available in grants for satellite projects , as well as any and all funds not obligated for last mile and middle mile projects , and up to $5 million is available in grants for connecting rural libraries and developing regional broadband development strategies in rural areas .

second round awards are expected to be announced starting in june 2010 .

in the first round , the rural utilities service announced over $1 billion in grants and loans for 68 broadband projects in 31 states , one territory , and 17 tribal lands and alaska native regions .

according to the department of agriculture , these projects will make high - speed internet available to an estimated 529,000 households and 96,000 rural businesses and public facilities .

of the 68 awarded projects , 49 are for last mile non - remote areas , 13 are for last mile remote areas , and 6 are for middle mile projects .

as of may 3 , 2010 , the agency had obligated nearly $250 million for 26 of the 68 awards .

there have been no program expenditures to date .

the projects selected include a range of efforts to bring high - speed internet to remote and rural communities that currently have little or no access to broadband technology .

funding has been awarded to a range of providers — small telecommunications companies , wireless providers , and rural electric and telephone providers — to build networks in rural areas .

these projects feature a variety of internet technologies , including wireline and wireless , and are expected to provide internet connectivity to homes , business , and anchor institutions in rural communities .

since no grant or loan money had been obligated to recipients as of december 31 , 2009 , there were no awards reported on recovery.gov for the second reporting round .

the rural utilities service did not issue supplemental technical assistance to recipients to augment the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance on recipient reporting .

because broadband initiatives program funds have not yet been expended , recipient reporting for the program will not occur until july 2010 .

therefore , the agency does not have experience with how well omb's guidance ensures that the public has accurate information .

based on information that the rural utilities service received in the first funding round , the agency developed enhanced application guide procedures and developed more comprehensive forms for the applicant's use that should enable an applicant to submit better data .

the agency held a series of workshops together with ntia in july 2009 and january 2010 coinciding with the first and second funding round notices and agency officials said that they will be hosting upcoming workshops to discuss compliance and reporting requirements .

the rural utilities service makes broadband stimulus project information available to the public in several forms , including the following: department of agriculture web site ( www.usda.gov / recovery ) .

this web site includes an overview of all recovery act funds provided to the department of agriculture and a recovery act project map that provides the award recipient , type , and amount , among other things , for all departmental awards .

the agency also publishes a blog for each state ( linked to the project map ) , with an entry that briefly describes each award and provides a venue for public feedback .

broadband usa ( www.broadbandusa.gov ) .

this joint rural utilities service / ntia broadband portal includes an information library on recovery act broadband programs and an application database .

the database , which includes funded applications , provides information such as the project type , proposed project area , description , and in many cases , a project executive summary .

press releases ( www.usda.gov / rus ) .

on its site , the rural utilities service posts press releases announcing awards for the broadband initiatives program .

according to agency officials , there has been considerable interest from various groups about projects funded by the broadband initiatives program .

these comments range from full support for a project to questions about why the agency made an award to a community .

officials stated that , in most cases , the public is satisfied with the information that has been made to the general public , but some groups want more information than the rural utilities service can make available , such as proprietary information about the award recipient .

the agency plans to make all information available to the public in conformance with the requirements of the freedom of information act .

within the department of commerce , the national telecommunications and information administration's ( ntia ) broadband technology opportunities program makes grant funding available to a variety of entities for broadband infrastructure , public computer centers , and innovative projects to stimulate demand for , and adoption of , broadband .

of the $4.7 billion appropriated for the program , up to $350 million was also available for the state broadband data and development program pursuant to the broadband data improvement act for the purpose of developing and maintaining a nationwide map featuring the availability of broadband data .

on july 9 , 2009 , ntia and the department of agriculture's rural utilities service released a joint notice of funds availability detailing the requirements , rules , and procedures for applying for broadband funding .

under this funding notice , ntia received 260 applications requesting over $5.4 billion to fund broadband infrastructure projects in unserved and underserved areas .

in addition , parties filed more than 320 applications with ntia requesting nearly $2.5 billion in grants for projects that promote sustainable demand for broadband services and more than 360 applications with ntia requesting more than $1.9 billion in grants for public computer centers .

parties submitted another 833 joint applications to the broadband technology opportunities program and the rural utilities service's broadband initiatives program requesting nearly $13 billion for broadband infrastructure projects .

broadband technology opportunities program funds were available through the following three categories of eligible projects during the first round: broadband infrastructure .

up to $1.2 billion was available for broadband infrastructure projects .

this category consists of two components — last mile and middle mile — and funds projects to deliver access to unserved and underserved areas .

an “unserved” area is defined as one or more contiguous census blocks , where at least 90 percent of households in the proposed funded service area lack access to facilities - based , terrestrial broadband service .

an “underserved” area is defined as one or more contiguous census blocks where ( 1 ) no more than 50 percent of the households have access to facilities - based , terrestrial broadband service ; ( 2 ) the rate of broadband adoption is 40 percent of households or less ; and ( 3 ) no service provider advertises broadband speeds of at least 3 megabits per second ( “mbps” ) .

public computer centers .

up to $50 million was available for projects that expand public access to broadband service and enhance broadband capacity at entities such as community colleges and public libraries that permit the public to use these computing centers .

sustainable broadband adoption .

up to $150 million was available for innovative projects that promote broadband demand , including projects focused on providing broadband education , awareness , training , access , equipment , or support , particularly among vulnerable population groups that traditionally have underutilized broadband technology .

ntia released a subsequent funding round notice on january 22 , 2010 .

under this second funding notice , the agency received a total of 886 applications requesting a total of $11 billion in funding .

for the second funding notice , ntia is adopting a “comprehensive communities” approach as its top priority in awarding infrastructure grants , focusing on middle mile projects that connect community anchor institutions , such as libraries , hospitals , community colleges , universities , and public safety institutions .

the following project categories are funded in the second funding round: comprehensive community infrastructure projects .

up to $2.35 billion is available for broadband infrastructure projects that emphasize middle mile broadband capabilities and new or substantially upgraded connections to community anchor institutions , especially community colleges .

under the second funding notice , a middle mile project is defined as any component of a comprehensive community infrastructure project that provides broadband service from one or more centralized facilities ( i.e. , the central office , the cable headend , the wireless switching station , or other equivalent centralized facility ) to an internet point of presence .

public computer centers .

at least $150 million is available to provide broadband access to the general public or a specific vulnerable population and must either create or expand a public computer center or improve broadband service or connections at a public computer center , including those at community colleges , that meets a specific public need for broadband service .

sustainable broadband adoption .

at least $100 million is available to fund innovative projects that promote broadband demand , including projects focused on providing broadband education , awareness , training , access , equipment , or support , particularly among vulnerable groups that traditionally have underutilized broadband technology .

second round awards are expected to be announced starting in july 2010 .

in the first funding round , ntia awarded and obligated 82 broadband technology opportunities program grants worth more than $1.2 billion .

as of may 10 , 2010 , more than $8.6 million had been expended ; however , ntia officials said that more funds have been spent , but not yet drawn down .

ntia has funded 49 infrastructure projects , 20 public computing centers , and 13 sustainable broadband adoption projects in 45 states and territories .

in addition , ntia has initially funded 54 broadband mapping and planning grants in 50 states , three territories , and the district of columbia , totaling more than $100 million .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for broadband awards available on recovery.gov .

we found that an estimated 57 percent met our transparency criteria , 43 percent partially met our criteria , and zero percent did not meet our criteria .

for broadband descriptions that partially met or did not meet our criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet the transparency criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our transparency criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

since the broadband technology opportunities program is an entirely new program , ntia focused on developing application processes to ensure the timely distribution of project funding .

ntia did not issue supplemental technical assistance to recipients to augment omb's guidance on recipient reporting .

the agency held a series of workshops in july 2009 and january 2010 that coincided with the first and second funding round notices , and agency officials said that they will be hosting upcoming workshops to discuss compliance and oversight requirements .

according to several grant recipients that we spoke with , agency officials have been very helpful in providing assistance throughout the application and reporting process .

ntia makes broadband stimulus project information available to the public in several forms .

for example: ntia web site ( www.ntia.doc.gov / broadbandgrants / ) .

on april 7 , 2010 , ntia launched a new web site for current information on the broadband technology opportunities program .

the web site includes sections on recovery act grants awarded and grants management , as well as an application database , and will make publicly available copies of reports on award recipients' progress that contain detailed descriptions of recipient activities .

for each award , the agency posts an award summary that includes the name , location , and amount of the award , as well as a detailed description of the award activities and outcomes .

broadband usa ( www.broadbandusa.gov ) .

this joint rural utilities service / ntia broadband portal includes an information library on recovery act broadband programs and an application database .

the database , which includes funded applications , provides information such as the project type , proposed project area , description , and , in many cases , a project executive summary .

press releases ( www.ntia.doc.gov / press ) .

ntia also posts press releases announcing awards for the broadband technology opportunities program , including the mapping grants .

these press releases typically include short , narrative information on the awards .

in addition , award recipients are using a variety of methods to inform the public about their projects , including company / institution web sites , press releases , and local news media reports .

award recipients told us that they have received hundreds of phone calls or web inquiries from individuals who were looking for employment or vendors who were attempting to sell goods or services to the award recipients .

according to agency officials , there has been considerable interest from various groups about projects funded by the broadband technology opportunities program .

these comments range from full support for a project to questions about why a project was funded in an area where there may already be an incumbent broadband service provider .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

 .

state library , archives & public records , arizona american recovery and reinvestment act - pcc - arizona public computer centers the arizona public computer centers project plans to enhance existing facilities in more than 80 public libraries throughout arizona .

the project expects to deploy more than 1,000 computers across the state to meet the growing demand for public computers and broadband access .

the project intends for users to access valuable e - resources and enable libraries to provide training in 21st century skills .

the arizona state library plans to partner with a variety of government , not - for - profit , and tribal organizations .

the arizona state library expects 84 public computer centers to serve more than 75,000 users per week or more than 450,000 residents throughout the term of the grant .

the arizona public computer centers project plans to enhance existing facilities in more than 80 public libraries throughout arizona .

the project expects to deploy more than 1,000 computers across the state to meet the growing demand for public computers and broadband access .

the project intends for users to access valuable e - resources and enable libraries to provide training in 21st century skills .

the arizona state library plans to partner with a variety of government , not - for - profit , and tribal organizations .

the arizona state library expects 84 public computer centers to serve more than 75,000 users per week or more than 450,000 residents throughout the term of the grant .

public , society benefit , general / other ( information not reported ) connect arkansas inc. little rock , ar 72201-1766 less than 50% completed public utilities commission , california for broadband mapping , cpuc is gathering and verifying broadband data and creating a publicly available , interactive web - based map that will display information about the broadband services and providers available at each address throughout california .

for broadband planning , cpuc is partnering with the california state university , chico research foundation ( csu ) , to carry out activities intended to increase broadband subscribership .

broadband mapping: collection of certain broadband data from all broadband providers in california , specified data verification tasks , geo - coding , and creation and on - going maintenance of a state - level broadband availability map .

data must be collected , verified , geo - coded , and submitted to the ntia twice yearly for the entire duration of the broadband mapping portion of this grant program .

broadband planning: identify subscribership levels in order to develop a plan to identify barriers to broadband adoption , develop marketing and promotional material aimed at promoting broadband adoption and usage , and work with broadband providers to encourage high speed internet services .

san francisco , ca 94102-3214 less than 50% completed 06-50-m09001 governor's office of information technology , the state broadband data and development grant program the state of colorado governor's office of information technology ( oit ) is overseeing colorado's state broadband data and development program which will map broadband availability across the state and provide the information regarding broadband service required by the ntia .

oit will verify this broadband service data through a number of methods .

the broadband data and development program grant also includes a planning effort , funded through five years .

this planning program will start by working closely with local stakeholders in several regions of the state to develop local technology planning teams during the first two years of the grant period .

the teams will assess broadband demand and barriers to adoption and will disseminate the broadband service information being mapped .

successful methods in developing these teams' work will then be generalized across the state over the last three years of the funded planning period .

12 / 30 / 09: finalizing award documents , selection and contract development of data contractor and defining positions to be hired .

601 east 18th avenue , suite 250 08-50-m09032 technology & information , delaware dept of state broadband data and development grant the delaware department of technology and information ( dti ) was designated by govenor markell as the delaware entity eligible to receive a federal grant under the national telecommunications and information administration's ( nita ) state broadband data and development grant program .

dti applied for $1,069,922 to cover broadband mapping activities for the first 2 years , as well as $472,811 for broadband planning purposes .

dti will oversee the broadband mapping data collection and verification , including public anchor institution information , and the development of an interactive state broadband inventory mapping system .

the resulting data will be presented to nita per their specifications and also made available to the public from a user friendly website .

dti will leverage exsisting it infrastructure , and will partner with the university of delaware's information for public administration ( ud - ipa ) to achieve the overall ntia goals .

the longer term broadband planning activities will be carried out by dti in partnership with ud - ipa .

relationships will be built with technology planning teams comprised of representativies from local governments , small businesses , and agricultural communities .

these teams will be formed in parallel with mapping activities and will continue for the full 5 years of the program .

they will idnentify ( 1 ) broadband best practicies for their community ; ( 2 ) issues affecting the deployment and full use of broadband ; and ( 3 ) potential projects to expand the use and deployment of broadband in these communities .

dti signed the approved grant on december 16,2009 .

internal resources for the the project have been assigned .

initial meetings have been conducted within dti and the delaware office of management and budget to review reporting requirements .

dti is currently working on finalizing the statement of work with vendor to begin data collection .

10-50-m09029 partnership for a connected illinois , the connect illinois mapping and planning american recovery and reinvestment act - sbdd - the partnership for a connected illinois , inc .

this project , conducted on behalf of the state of illinois , seeks to employ gis toolsets and experienced personnel to deliver comprehensive broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning , in a manner compliant with the national telecommunications and information administration ? s ( ntia ) notice of funding availability ( nofa ) for the state broadband data and development grant program .

the ensuing deliverables will include datasets as required by the ntia as well as web - based , interactive broadband maps to inform state and local government officials , consumers , broadband providers , community development organizations , researchers , and other stakeholders .

this interactive web site ( www.connectillinois.org ) will be critical to ensure accessibility of the broadband data , but it will also be key to increasing awareness of the mapping program and the benefit of broadband .

it will also play an important role in ensuring local verification of the mapping data .

data will be compiled directly from network providers with protection to the proprietary aspects of that data provided by non - disclosure agreements .

connect illinois partner connected nation will utilize the value of long - standing relationships with providers to negotiate the non - disclosure agreements , receive datasets from individual providers , develop comprehensive datasets of illinois providers of all platforms excluding satellite , then incorporating those datasets into informative gis mapping that will be the first of its kind in illinois .

the end product of the mapping activities will be that of a highly interactive and accessible mapping suite called broadbandstat .

this product will allow easily functional search activity at street levels and will be combined with u.s. census and research data to provide users with the ability to drill down to neighborhoods , see which companies provide service in their areas , determine the density of households and populations , and county - level adoption rates .

also of great value will be the collection of datasets reflecting the presence of community anchor institutions throughout the state .

teams are already at work identifying the locations of various health care providers , k - 12 schools , public and private colleges and universities , public safety answering points ( psap ? s ) , fire departments , police departments , and ambulance services , and , to the extent permissible , other local emergency services agencies .

community anchor institution data , including connectivity information , will be submitted as datasets to ntia , but it will also be overlaid within a mapping context to create a remarkable graphic depiction of the locations of these critical connection points from a statewide to a local level .

community anchor institutions tend to be key junctures in the development of telecommunications systems nodes that provide greater access to households and businesses in unserved and underserved areas .

lastly , sbdd funding under this award will provide for five years of planning activities that relate to the consistent and steady communication of the ? messages ? .

of the mapping products throughout the state , including instruction on the use of the mapping tools .

through strategic relationships with various organizations including the illinois resource network , the governor ? s broadband deployment council , the illinois library association , the illinois department of commerce and economic opportunity , and the connect illinois broadband resource development council , this project envisions a steady flow of communication and information that will ensure full statewide penetration of awareness of the mapping artifacts and how to employ them at their best and highest uses .

teams are already at work identifying the locations of various health care providers , k - 12 schools , public and private colleges and universities , public safety answering points ( psap ? s ) , fire departments , police departments , and ambulance services , and , to the extent permissible , other local emergency services agencies .

community anchor institution data , including connectivity information , will be submitted as datasets to ntia , but it will also be overlaid within a mapping context to create a remarkable graphic depiction of the locations of these critical connection points from a statewide to a local level .

community anchor institutions tend to be key junctures in the development of telecommunications systems nodes that provide greater access to households and businesses in unserved and underserved areas .

lastly , sbdd funding under this award will provide for five years of planning activities that relate to the consistent and steady communication of the ? messages ? .

of the mapping products throughout the state , including instruction on the use of the mapping tools .

through strategic relationships with various organizations including the illinois resource network , the governor ? s broadband deployment council , the illinois library association , the illinois department of commerce and economic opportunity , and the connect illinois broadband resource development council , this project envisions a steady flow of communication and information that will ensure full statewide penetration of awareness of the mapping artifacts and how to employ them at their best and highest uses .

the performing partners of the partnership for a connected illinois , inc. have been working diligently and proactively during the fourth quarter of 2009 to produce the requisite datasets of broadband availability in the state of illinois .

the federal award notification sent to the partnership was dated december 29 , 2009 .

as such , asap registration at this writing is incomplete .

no funds have been received or invoiced as yet .

not withstanding , work continues .

a total of 344 potential broadband providers in illinois were identified .

through further research and direct contact , that number was pared to approximately 250 .

non - disclosure agreements were developed , submitted , negotiated , and signed .

data from providers of various size and platform are now submitting data .

negotiations , contacts , and research continues to increase the flow of data .

foundational work has been accomplished in terms of identification and location of community anchor institutions .

recruitment has begun by one subcontractor to hire a researcher specifically assigned to community anchor institution data development .

a hire in this regard is anticipated in the first two weeks of 2010 .

demonstrations of the broadbandstat product described in the proposal have been made to several state agencies .

the combination of highly granular mapping and research will be crucial to the information and development of a statewide comprehensive broadband strategic plan .

as described in the planning outcomes section , the illinois resource network has agreed to prepare an online tutorial about the illinois broadbandstat product , increasing access and user - friendliness .

hard work lies ahead , and the performing partners of the partnership for a connected illinois , inc. remain focused on meeting federal deadlines and providing the citizens of illinois with quality data , maps , research , education , and broadband advocacy .

partnership for a connected illinois , inc. , 150 e. pleasant hill rd , mc 6879 less than 50% completed 17-50-m09033 connected nation , inc. state broadband data and development program recipient dba name: kansas .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

connect kansas progress to date * commenced with broadband planning efforts in late february 2009 and included working groups among the public sector and provider communities * provided a number of staff hours in - kind to the planning effort * state of kansas contracted with professional facilitators to help with the initial organizing of the planning effort * developed budget / finance cost model for connect kansas * developed , distributed , reviewed and finalized project work plan and work breakdown structure ( wbs ) * assigned project team and distributed project organization chart * developed and launched a connect kansas website to explain the program and gather information from the consumer community * prepared project kick - off plan , roles & responsibilities , and outreach plan * created and implemented a outreach strategy * scheduled periodic bi - weekly connect kansas project team meetings * produced bi - weekly status reports , data collection activity log and website statistics ; and , distributed to the connect kansas project team * compiled and refined broadband provider list * developed a broadband data collection activity log * developed sbdd compliant non disclosure agreement ( nda ) * distributed ndas to provider community * executed ndas with the provider community * securely stored executed ndas * conducted webinars with provider community * conducted demonstrations of the broadbandstat product * requested broadband coverage coordinate data sets from provider community * distributed broadband coverage data sets to gis mapping team for processing 1020 college street , p. o .

box 3448 bowling green , ky 42102-3448 less than 50% completed 20-50-m09021 american recovery and reinvestment act ? .

sbdd ? .

massachusetts technology park corporation dba mtc ( ? mass broadband institute ? ) ? .

the goal of the massachusetts broadband mapping project is to develop detailed and accurate statewide broadband availability and infrastructure datasets to support the development and updating of a national broadband map that will be made available to the public .

this goal will be accomplished by: developing collaborative relationships and data sharing agreements with broadband providers to develop a broadband availability database ; validating and enhancing the provider database through the analysis of cable strand maps , dsl - equipped central office and remote terminal locations and wireless tower locations and various modeling methods based on the transport technology ; verifying broadband availability in the field through a grassroots , civic engagement component using industry experts , partner organizations , and public participation and ; making the data easily accessible and useable through an innovative web - based map library , data repository , and searchable broadband map .

the mbi will collect , integrate , verify and submit five substantially complete datasets to ntia in the first quarter of 2010 with subsequent semi - annual updates .

a wireline broadband availability dataset will include availability , technology and speed of wireline broadband services by census block or street segment .

a wireless broadband availability dataset will include availability , technology , speed and spectrum of wireless broadband services by census block or street segment .

a residential broadband speed dataset will include average nominal speed for residential broadband users for each broadband service by metropolitan and rural statistical areas .

a middle - mile infrastructure dataset will include location , ownership , technology , capacity and typical speeds of interconnect points between broadband provider services and the internet .

a community anchor institution dataset will include address , current broadband subscribership , technology and typical speed for each community anchor institution in the state ( eg , public safety entities , medical and healthcare facilities , libraries , state and local government entities , schools , community colleges and other higher education buildings ) .

the massachusetts broadband planning project will identify barriers and assets to the deployment of broadband infrastructure and broadband adoption and then develop and implement innovative solutions to overcome barriers and best utilize assets .

these solutions include: developing and supporting local technology planning teams and organizing outreach efforts to engage , inform , and energize residents , businesses , and public officials ; supporting municipalities in making educated decisions on broadband issues impacting their communities , including technology , siting locations , zoning , and permitting ; improving access to broadband and increasing adoption rates by providing technical assistance , support and coordination to the public , community anchor institutions , municipalities , and providers and ; facilitating the development of public computing centers , training programs , and other efforts to improve broadband access and adoption quarterly activities for the massachusetts broadband mapping project included: hiring staff and selecting consultants ; purchasing hardware and software ; establishing information security policies and procedures ; requesting data from and negotiating non - disclosure agreements with broadband service providers ; acquiring publicly available cable and dsl data ; performing cable and dsl availability modeling by census block ; submitting initial statewide availability datasets to the ntia ; and establishing data verification and web site development plans .

quarterly activities for the massachusetts broadband planning project included: approving a sub - award to westernma connect ; developing a community contact database ; planning sub - regional public forums ; and coordinating with other broadband initiatives in western massachusetts .

less than 50% completed connected nation , inc. state broadband data and development program recipient dba name: michigan .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

connect michigan progress to date * developed budget / finance cost model for connect michigan * developed draft project work plan and work breakdown structure ( wbs ) * assigned project team and distributed project organization chart * developed and launched a connect michigan website to explain the program and gather information from the consumer community * prepared project kick - off plan , roles & responsibilities , and outreach plan * conducted project kick - off meeting with public stakeholders * scheduled periodic bi - weekly connect michigan project team meetings * compiled and refined broadband provider list * conducted introductory meeting with broadband provider community * developed a broadband data collection activity log * developed sbdd compliant non disclosure agreement ( nda ) * distributed ndas to provider community * started execution of ndas with the provider community ? .

securely stored executed ndas * conducted webinars with provider community * conducted demonstrations of the broadbandstat product * requested broadband coverage coordinate data sets from provider community * distributed broadband coverage data sets to gis mapping team for processing 1020 college street , p. o .

box 3448 bowling green , ky 42102-3448 less than 50% completed 26-50-m09035 connected nation , inc. state broadband data and development program recipient dba name: minnesota .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

bowling green , ky 42102-3448 less than 50% completed connected nation , inc. state broadband data and development program recipient dba name: nevada .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

connect nevada progress to date * developed budget / finance cost model for connect nevada * developed draft of project work plan and work breakdown structure ( wbs ) * assigned project team * developed and launched a connect nevada website to explain the program and gather information from the consumer community * prepared project kick - off plan , roles & responsibilities , & outreach plan * scheduled and participated in monthly connect nevada project team meetings with the nevada broadband task force * presented to the broadband providers association meetings * compiled and refined broadband provider list * developed a broadband data collection activity log * developed sbdd compliant non disclosure agreement ( nda ) * started distribution of ndas to provider community * executed ndas with the provider community * securely stored executed ndas * conducted webinars with provider community * conducted demonstrations of the broadbandstat product * requested broadband coverage coordinate data sets from provider community ( national providers in nevada ) * distributed broadband coverage data sets to gis mapping team for processing .

1020 college street , p. o .

box 3448 bowling green , ky 42102-3448 less than 50% completed cultural affairs , new mexico department of american recovery and reinvestment act - sba - fast forward new mexico nm state library , university of nm - los alamos , global center for cultural entrepreneurship , and 1st mile institute partner to sponsor 'fast - forward new mexico , a broadband stimulus initiative that integrates a statewide broadband awareness campaign , a nm broadband conference , and a series of broadband training initiatives in public and tribal libraries across the state .

trainings are in computer literacy and e - commerce .

a centralized website and on - line catalog will support current and future trainings .

no activities during this quarter .

public , society benefit , general / other santa fe , nm 87507-5166 cyber security & critical infrastructure coordination , nys office of american recovery and reinvestment act - state broadband data and development grant program - ny state office of cyber security and critical infrastucture coordination in keeping with the recovery act's direction that ntia develop and maintain a comprehensive and interactive national broadband map , ntia established a grant program where awardees will collect broadband - related data and conduct planning programs at the state level .

in addition to supporting state level planning activities , these data will be used to construct the following deliverables: ( 1 ) datasets detailing broadband availability , technology , speed , infrastructure and in the case of wireless broadband , the spectrum used , across new york state .

 ( 2 ) a dataset identifying community anchor institutions and associated broadband information .

 ( 3 ) development of a statewide interactive broadband map identifying available broadband service levels , providers , unserved and underserved areas .

much of this data will be collected from broadband service providers .

other data sources , existing and to be created , will be used to validate the accuracy and completeness of these deliverables .

the overall purpose and expected results of the award are stated above in the award description section .

the following is a summary of quarterly activities: ( 1 ) reviewed grant documentation and identified reporting requirements and deadlines ; ( 2 ) worked with other nys agencies to assemble a comprehensive list of companies that potentially provide end user broadband services or provide backbone / infrastructure related services .

contacted approximately 120 of these companies thus far in order to execute non - disclosure agreements and begin the data collection process ; ( 3 ) began assembling community anchor institutions dataset from existing and available information ; ( 4 ) began procurement process to purchase required hardware and software to complete the project ; ( 5 ) began development of workflows to be used to standardize , cleanse , improve , geo - process and validate data received from providers ; ( 6 ) began hiring process to staff seven open project team positions .

three were hired in late december but will not be calculated as jobs created until next quarter ; ( 7 ) began mapping related planning activities in support of the nys broadband development and deployment council .

less than 50% completed 36-50-m09010 rhode island economic development corporation state broadband data and development grant program the purpose of the project is to develop geographic information system maps displaying levels of broadband service by connection speed and type of technology used to integrate the maps with demographic information to produce a comprehensive statewide inventory and mapping of existing broadband service and capability .

project will be compliant and consistent with requirements specified by the u.s. department of commerce , national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) notice of july 1 , 2009 related to the arra and broadband mapping , specifically the state broadband data and development grant program .

no activities to report for qtr 4 - 2009 as grant was awarded on 12 / 28 / 09 315 iron horse way , suite 101 connected nation , inc. state broadband data and development program recipient dba name: south carolina .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

connect south carolina progress to date * developed budget / finance cost model for connect south carolina * developed draft project work plan and work breakdown structure ( wbs ) * assigned project team * developed and launched a connect south carolina website to explain the program and gather information from the consumer community * prepared project kick - off plan , roles & responsibilities , and outreach plan * created a outreach strategy * compiled and refined broadband provider list * developed a broadband data collection activity log * developed sbdd compliant non disclosure agreement ( nda ) * distributed ndas to provider community ( national ) * executed ndas with the provider community ( national ) * securely stored executed ndas * conducted webinars with provider community * conducted demonstrations of the broadbandstat product * requested broadband coverage coordinate data sets from provider community * distributed broadband coverage data sets to gis mapping team for processing .

1020 college street , p.o .

box 3448 bowling green , ky 42102-3448 less than 50% completed state broadband data and development grant program recipient dba name: tennessee .

the state broadband data program is a competitive , merit - based matching grant program that effects the joint purposes of the recovery act and the broadband data improvement act ( bdia ) by funding projects that collect comprehensive and accurate state - level broadband mapping data , develop state - level broadband maps , aid in the development and maintenance of a national broadband map , and fund statewide initiatives directed at broadband planning .

connected tennessee progress to date * developed budget / finance cost model for connected tennessee * developed draft project work plan and work breakdown structure ( wbs ) * assigned project team and distributed project organization chart * refined connected tennessee website to include broadband provider page to explain the program and gather information from the provider community * prepared project kick - off plan , roles & responsibilities , and communications plan * conducted project kick - off meeting with stakeholders * scheduled periodic bi - weekly connected tennessee project team meetings * compiled and refined broadband provider list * conducted introductory meeting with broadband provider community * developed a broadband data collection activity log * developed sbdd compliant non disclosure agreement ( nda ) * distributed ndas to provider community * started execution of ndas with the provider community * securely stored executed ndas * conducted webinars with provider community * conducted demonstrations of the broadbandstat product * requested broadband coverage coordinate data sets from provider community * distributed broadband coverage data sets to gis mapping team for processing 618 church street suite 305 less than 50% completed vermont center for geographic information , incorporated the vt broadband mapping initiative will initiate the development of a comprehensive and verified geographic inventory of broadband service availability in the state of vt. landline and wireless services ( fixed and mobile ) will be mapped , including wireless voice and data with information from providers and other sources .

the broadband mapping information collected and verified through this proposed effort will then support the broadband development objectives identified in the rus broadband initiatives program ( bip ) and ntia's broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) in vt .

most importantly , the geographic inventory will further refine our understanding of the location of 'unserved' and 'underserved' areas , supporting targeted investments in these areas .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

in some cases , only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

arra sbdd georgia technology authority ( gta ) arra sbdd georgia technology authority ( gta ) the purpose of this project is to provide ntia ( dept commerce ) and georgia public / private sector stakeholders with broadband mapping and data collection , analysis , and broadband mapping display services for the state of georgia residents , businesses , and community anchor institutions .

the gta broadband office operations will utilize planning funds to promote sustainable adoption throughout the state as a part of this project's deliverable .

the georgia technology authority is in the process of selecting a vendor through a statement of need process with qualified vendors .

we expected to select a mapping vendor by the end of january , 2010 .

information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports broadband data collection , mapping , and planning activities across georgia over a 2-year period .

data on the availability , speed , and location of broadband across the state will be collected and verified on a semi - annual basis between 2009 and 2011 .

these data will be used to develop publicly available state - wide broadband maps and to inform the comprehensive , interactive , and searchable national broadband map that the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) is required by the recovery act to create and make publicly available by february 17 , 2011 .

mapping indiana broadband is a project that will collect , map , verify , and distribute data that will contribute to a publicly available national broadband map to inform policymaker's efforts and provide better information to consumers about the availability of broadband internet services .

state broadbamd data and development grant .

award letter received .

grants 100 n senate avenue igcn551 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports collection of information from broadband providers across the state .

administration , louisiana division of american recovery & reinvestment act - sbdd - state of louisiana division of administration louisiana state broadband data & development program - data collection & mapping ; louisiana state broadband data & development program - planning the intent of the award is to allow the state of louisiana to collect / verify statewide broadband availability and submit the findings to the ntia , according to the requirements contained in the sbdd nofa and its subsequent clarification .

in this reporting period , we completed our project kickoff meeting and finalized our strategy for service provider outreach .

1201 north 3rd street , suite 2-130 baton rouge , la 70802-5243 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds mapping activities including broadband availability data collection , verification , mapping and analysis .

these efforts are expected to raise awareness of the availability of broadband , identify barriers to adoption , and develop a plan for sustainable broadband adoption for currently “underserved” and “unserved” businesses and households .

further , these activities will increase coordination and collaboration between the state and regional economic development efforts .

overall approach / how grant will increase broadband adoption: the city's 3 partners who operate the 66 centers are established communiy anchor organizations which provide multipe services to constituents incuding public computing .

pccs are embedded in multi - muliple services organizations providing ideal institutional setting for reaching a large audience of potential broadband adopters .

these partners are: the boston pubic library ( bpl ) and its 25 neighborhood branches ; boston centers for youth and families ( bcyf ) , boston's largest youth and human services agency serving over 90,000 resident annually in 46 facilities including 29 pccs ; and the boston housing authority ( bha ) operating 62 pubic housing sites , serving 11,500 household with 11 computers labs .

no fund spent on infrastructure city of boston / auditing dept. , one city hall sq .

r - m - 4 information gao gathered to improve the description the city is using the award funds to wire 66 community centers and some public housing within the city of boston for internet use and purchase a few hundred computers for those centers .

these activities will provide internet access to low - income individuals who may not otherwise have access to the internet .

north dakota , state of arra - sbdd - north dakota information technology department $1,305,354 is for efforts related to mapping broadband availability across the state and year two maintenance of that data .

$308,400 is for efforts related to broadband planning activities to identify how the state could leverage current organizational structure and relationships , either directly or indirectly , to provide the broadband requirements for additional anchor institutions no project activities occurred during this period ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports broadband planning activities , including drafting non - disclosure agreements , a project plan , and a project schedule .

the award covers personnel salaries , travel expenses , and equipment associated with this planning .

executive office state of ohio state broadband data and development grant program state broadband data and development program grant - supports state broadband mapping and related planning activities .

award annouced 12 / 28 / 09 - no activities to report for quarter ending 12 / 31 / 09 .

30 e. broad street , 39th floor information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the development of a statewide map that will pinpoint areas in ohio that do not currently have access to broadband technology .

the activities under this award include collecting broadband data , to be displayed in a national broadband map , and planning delivery of broadband services .

public utility commission , state of oregon state broadband data and development grant program governor theodore kulongoski designated the public utility commission of oregon ( puc ) as the single eligible entity to receive a grant under the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) state broadband data and development grant program .

the puc was granted a $1,609,692 million broadband data collection and mapping grant and a $498,610 broadband planning grant .

the opuc selected one economy through the state's 'request for proposal' process to assist oregon with fulfilling the requirements of these grant programs .

none to date .

550 capitol st ne , suite 215 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the collection and mapping of specific data on broadband infrastructure and the availability of broadband services throughout oregon , including on tribal lands .

these data will identify unserved and underserved areas at the most granular level possible ; identify community anchor points ; be displayed on a publicly accessible and interactive state web site in the form of a broadband map ; be updated semi - annually through 2011 ; and be provided to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) .

these data will inform oregon about the affordability , availability , and adoption of broadband technology in all areas of the state .

these data will also provide information for analyzing and reporting on oregon's use of broadband technology in the telehealth industry and for energy management , education and government .

in year 2 , additional data collection efforts will provide fresh data that may show the effects of any actions taken by the state of oregon to address broadband adoption or availability and allow for further development of state broadband strategies .

spokane broadband technology alliane: public computer centers this public computer centers project will provide establish 17 public computer centers throughout the spokane washington area .

this is a newly awarded grant .

during the 8 days of the quarter the grant was active , we held a press conference , notified stakeholders and partners , had front page coverage in the local newspaper , and established a preliminary calendar .

public , society benefit , general / other grants 827 west first avenue , suite 121 information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides 3 new and expands 14 existing public computer centers in spokane's poorest neighborhoods , and equips a vehicle to bring computers and training to other organizations and hard - to - reach populations .

the training will cover basic internet search training and links to needed services , video production , and using the internet for small businesses .

the award is anticipated to serve 298,906 unduplicated users .

spokane broadband technology alliane: sustainable adoption this sustainable broadband adoption project will provide training to individuals and organizations throughout the spokane washington area .

we estimate that we will train 12150 people over the three years of the project , and that about 1550 will become new broadband subscribers .

this is a newly awarded grant .

during the 8 days of the quarter the grant was active , we held a press conference , notified stakeholders and partners , had front page coverage in the local newspaper , and established a preliminary calendar .

place of performance - city , state , and postal code information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports sustainable adoption of broadband services , which includes acquiring broadband - related equipment , developing and providing education and training programs , and conducting broadband - related public outreach .

the sustainable broadband adoption project in spokane will provide training at 11 not - for - profit organizations and community centers on the benefits of broadband access to enhance work / life skills .

small businesses are being trained to create an online presence , sell on the internet , and use social media and low - cost , targeted web advertising .

additional training will be available at 6 public libraries .

geological & economic survey , west virginia arra - sbdd - wv geological and economic survey the purpose of this program is to develop a statewide broadband coverage map to provide a comprehensive picture of current infrastructure deployment and availability of broadband service in the state of west virginia .

working with providers to encourage the provision of service in unserved and underserved areas , and engaging local entities to analyze current use of the technology and educate on service expansion opportunities .

this quarter's activity was gathering data from broadband service providers by the way , this is the message i get when changing the number of jobs to 4 , since we have not used federal funds yet .

 ? if number of jobs is greater than 0 , it cannot equal or exceed total federal amount arra funds received / invoiced .

 ? if number of jobs is greater than 0 , it cannot equal or exceed total federal amount of arra expenditure .

 ? if number of jobs is greater than 0 , it cannot equal or exceed total federal arra infrastructure expenditure .

1124 smith st , lm - 10 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the collection and verification of the availability , speed , and location of broadband access across west virginia .

this information will be mapped on a semi - annual basis from 2009-2011 , and the map will be used to increase broadband access and adoption through better data collection and broadband planning .

puget sound center foundation for teaching , learning andtechnology , the wyoming state broadband data and development grant provide targeted , timely and useful information that will enable local solutions to address local broadband priorities for the state of wyoming: data project feasibility ; expedient data delivery ; process for repeated data ; updating , planning and collaboration in november and december 2009 the project was initiated and the team assembled .

mapping project activities included the execution of ndas with all relevant providers and the development and release of a broadband provider survey .

this online survey was designed to collect coverage and speed information in the format requested by ntia .

outbound e - mail and telephone calling efforts helped encourage provider responses to the survey .

initial data submissions were reviewed , normalized and stored in a master database .

in addition , consumer website templates were developed for the ultimate delivery of statewide maps for wyoming .

planning activities included the establishment of planning objectives and state oversight procedures .

initial interviews with stakeholders across the state of wyoming will begin in q1 2010 .

19020 33rd avenue west suite 210 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the development of a statewide interactive map showing ( 1 ) areas that do and do not have broadband access ( or have limited access ) , ( 2 ) transmission speeds , and ( 3 ) the type of access ( eg , wireless , cable , etc. ) .

available .

this information will be used to help broadband providers apply for future infrastructure funding to build capacity across the state of wyoming .

south dakota network , llc south dakota network,llc , $20.6 million grant with an additional $5.1 million matching funds to add 140 miles of backbone network and 219 miles of middle mile spurs to existing network , enabling the delivery of at least 10mbps service to more than 220 existing anchor institution customers in rural and underserved areas of the state .

delivering 10 megabit connectivity for community anchor institutions in areas currently not served .

power and communication line and related structures construction ( information not reported ) sioux falls , sd 57104-2543 $20,572,242.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the award is being used throughout the state to add 140 miles of fiber optic cable to an existing 1,850-mile network and an additional 219 miles of fiber optic cable to connect anchor institutions ( such as schools , hospitals , and libraries ) to the expanded network .

funds will be used for fiber construction , equipment , and end - point electronics , plus permitting and engineering fees .

ion upstate new york rural broadband initiative ion will build 10 new segments for a total of 1308 plant miles of 'middle mile' infrastructure , which will incorporate more than 70 additional rural communities into its current statewide fiber backbone .

ion will enhance its reach throughout rural new york with its open network design ; this will enable a host of last mile service providers to bring their products and services to numerous underserved and unserved areas of rural ny .

no activities this quarter we are in the planning phase of the project .

power and communication line and related structures construction 80 state stret , 7th floor information gao gathered to improve the description the award encompasses 10 projects to build middle mile infrastructure that will bring broadband service to 125 anchor institutions .

the project will occur throughout the state of new york in a majority of the rural areas of new york and parts of pennsylvania and vermont .

the weatherization assistance program assists low - income families while improving their health and safety , by making such long - term energy - efficiency improvements to their homes as installing insulation , sealing leaks , and modernizing heating equipment , air circulation fans , and air - conditioning equipment .

these improvements enable families to reduce energy bills , allowing these households to spend their money on more pressing needs , according to the department of energy .

in 2009 , the recovery act provided $5 billion for the program — increasing the department's portion for local weatherization efforts by more than 20 times over a 2-year period based on fiscal year 2008 funding levels — about $227.2 million per year .

the department distributes 58 awards to each of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and seven territories and american indian tribes ( recipients ) and relies on the recipients to administer the programs .

the department had obligated approximately $4.73 billion of the recovery act's weatherization funding to recipients for weatherization activities as of march 31 , 2010 , retaining about 5 percent of the funds to cover its expenses , such as those for training and technical assistance , management , and oversight for the expanded weatherization assistance program .

funds are available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 , and the department has indicated that the recipients are to spend the funds by march 31 , 2012 .

as of march 31 , 2010 , recipients had spent about $659 million , or about 14 percent of the $4.73 billion obligated , to weatherize about 82,200 homes nationwide .

many recipients are just beginning to use recovery act funding , in part because certain federal requirements , such as davis - bacon wage requirements , affected the ability of some agencies to start work in programs , including the weatherization assistance program , and because they have needed time to develop the infrastructures required for managing the significant increase in weatherization assistance funding .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for weatherization assistance program awards on recovery.gov , as described in the report .

we found that an estimated: about 12 percent met our transparency criteria , 71 percent partially met our criteria , and 18 percent did not meet our criteria .

for weatherization descriptions that partially met or did not meet our transparency criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet our criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our weatherization assistance program sample , whether they met our criteria , and information that would complete the descriptions of award activities are provided at the end of this appendix .

the department provided additional documentation to assist recipients in fulfilling recovery act reporting requirements but did not assess the quality of the information reported by recipients in narrative reporting fields .

the department issued supporting documentation on the grant application process for the weatherization assistance program in march and december 2009 .

this documentation includes information about requirements for a public hearing , budget , and program oversight .

the department also issued supporting documentation twice in march 2010 , providing additional information about requirements for quarterly reporting and calculation of jobs created .

the supporting documentation is available on the department's web sites , as is a capability to search responses to frequently asked questions .

the department also provided technical assistance restating the office of management and budget ( omb ) requirements in the form of reporting instructions and training for completing specific fields , including narrative description fields , to fulfill recovery act reporting requirements in december 2009 .

the department has made its technical assistance available on the weatherization assistance program's technical assistance web site , http: / / www.waptac.org , and has established a call center — the recovery act clearinghouse — to answer specific reporting questions from recipients .

this technical assistance includes some information specific to the weatherization program , such as the definition of a completed unit , but for the most part , restates omb's guidance , as shown in table 6 for the project description field .

however , the department did not evaluate the quality of the information in narrative fields .

omb's guidance , issued december 2009 , states that where a narrative description is required , as in the award description field , the “description must be sufficiently clear to facilitate understanding by the general public.” department of energy officials told us that the agency ensures the quality of data primarily through an automated analysis of key data fields , including award number , recipient name , award amount , and jobs calculated , but not including narrative fields , such as award description or project description .

instead , department officials said every weatherization award has an assigned agency reviewer who may , at his or her discretion , review the accuracy of any and all data submitted by recipients .

department of energy officials said that they do not have a robust process for evaluating the quality of information in descriptive fields because they do not consider the narrative description fields key to reporting and could not automate a review of narrative fields .

also , they noted that the limited scope of the weatherization assistance program ensures that narrative descriptions — such as the award description — are sufficiently clear to be understood by the general public .

weatherization assistance program award information is made available to the public by the department , recipients , and some local agencies: the department of energy maintains weatherization information and data on its web site at http: / / apps1.eere.energy.gov / weatherization / recovery_act.cfm and http: / / www.energy.gov / recovery / .

it also maintains a web site housing technical assistance for recipients at http: / / www.waptac.org .

many of the 58 recipients have some weatherization information available on their web sites that , for example , describes the assistance program , summarizing activities performed , eligibility requirements , the application process , and contact information .

in some cases , the web sites also provide greater detail on the program , including the amount obligated to the recipient , the number of homes weatherized , and the number of jobs created .

in addition , approximately 36 of 58 recipients post their weatherization plans on their web sites .

these plans are required for each recipient receiving weatherization assistance funds and outline how funds will be used .

information available in the weatherization plans includes a description of the types of weatherization activities that could be performed , the counties or regions in which weatherization activities will occur , the number of units to be weatherized , the budget for weatherization activities , the community action agencies performing weatherization activities , the energy savings expected , and monitoring activities to ensure the quality of the weatherization activities performed .

in accordance with privacy guidance , the specific location for individual homes weatherized is not reported .

several state offices of inspector general have issued reports on the weatherization assistance program in their states .

furthermore , recipients also provide weatherization award information through press releases , hearings , public forums , and community meetings .

finally , many of the local agencies that provide weatherization services directly to residents also make information available to the public , through press releases , public service announcements , community events , or web sites .

most of the feedback that the department of energy , recipients , or local community action agencies have received about the weatherization assistance program has been about proposed regulations or weatherization activities performed , and few comments have been about the weatherization information available to the public .

at the department , many of the comments received relate to proposed regulations on reporting frequency ( and not to project description information ) .

recipients have received comments and inquiries from individuals wanting to apply for weatherization services or learn how to get a job and from vendors wishing to market products .

inquiries have also addressed how much money the recipient received , how many homes will be weatherized and the total amount of funding to be spent on each household — - but not the accessibility of project description information .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

human services , michigan department of recovery act weatherization award for the state of michigan michigan department of human services has been awarded stimulus funding from the u.s. department of energy weatherization assistance program for low - income persons in the amount of $243 million dollars over the next three years .

the state plan includes changes in the weatherization program for year 2009: average cost per unit maximum of $6,500 , increase in income eligibility limits to 200% of poverty or 60% of state median income , whichever is higher , and program training plan .

changes in the plan also include the new positions ; 10 weatherization inspectors , report analyst , davis bacon specialist , grant manager / monitor , fiscal monitor , division manager and the secretary .

funding has been allocated to the 32 community action agencies and limited purpose agencies that serve as local weatherization operators ( lwos ) in michigan under the existing weatherization program .

the funding is exclusively for weatherization , which involves the installation of energy efficiency measures on low - income homes .

applications are taken at local weatherization operator offices .

approximately 33,000 homes will be weatherized in michigan through march 2012 with the arra funding .

households generally realize a 25% reduction in their energy usage as a result of weatherization .

we have hired 10 technical monitors and they have attended and passed the level i & ii michigan inspector training .

they were all required to do field activities including 8 inspector shadowing events and 8 inspections where they took the lead .

they had to prepare all required paperwork / audit materials for each of these 16 inspections and have submitted to supervision for review and comment .

they must next go through the final step in the inspector certification process - the over - the - shoulder inspector observation test .

this will be scheduled in january .

we have acquired two training houses - one in the upper peninsula and one in lansing .

these houses are being used to schedule over the shoulder inspection tests , as well as hands on contractor trainings and lead safe weatherization training .

as of december 2009 , we have trained 180 new program inspectors to ensure an adequate number of inspectors statewide .

we have also conducted lead safe weatherization training for over 200 contractor / crew members .

we continue to work with local community colleges to adopt the doe recommended curriculum for contractors / crews that will enable ongoing classroom and hands on weatherization worker training .

in support of the program ( and of the jobs created / saved / retained ) a total of 703 persons / jobs were supported , in whole or in part , utilizing doe arra funds generating 101,503 hours of work .

during this reporting period we have seen an increase in the amount of arra funded work grow as new workers ramp up to start projects .

there will continue to be a lag between actual funds received and actual funds disbursed due to the use of 'general funds' dollars to support the sub - recipient activities until federal funds are drawn down to cover the actual expenditures reported .

235 s. grand ave. , suite 1314 less than 50% completed weatherization assistance for low - income persons arra supplemental funding for the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) : to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

in october vi wap was still in the program implementation stage .

a 3 day electric base load audit training for staff was conducted on oct. 7th , 8th , and 9th by pure energy inc. four members of vi wap staff were trained and 3 energy office engineers who will serve as back up to the vi wap auditors .

vi wap identified a home that would qualify to be weatherized and used it for a demonstration energy audit .

the information obtained in this energy audit was very useful and provided very good information for doe's technical assistance visit .

oct 19th thru oct 23rd doe officials conducted a technical assistance visit and reviewed various vi wap procedures on client intake .

vi wap has started purchasing tools , equipment , and supplies and has obligated funds for two vehicles for the program and funds to pay for the disposal of old refrigerator replaced in the program .

november 2009 vi wap client intake was finalized forms for the in - take application , and procedures for determining eligibility , proof of ownership , and ranking system .

a web meeting was hosted with doe on nov. 17 , 2009 , regarding the virgin islands priority list , for vi specific energy measures for the program .

the major issue being the cost limitation on the refrigerators at $1000.00 , which may cause a problem for the virgin islands because of the high price of refrigerators due to shipping cost .

in december , susan white a doe consultant on procurement and financial management trained staff and provided three days of technical assistance .

ms. white assisted vi wap on finalizing vi wap's procurement manual and developing rfp's for the certifying agency , final inspections , and two requests for bids .

the approved priority list for the program has still not been approved by doe .

vi wap also completed the production schedule average is 15 homes a month being weatherized in the territory .

the goal is 430 home by march 2012 .

less than 50% completed housing and community renewal , new york state division of weatherization formula grants allocated to the new york state division of housing and community renewal ( dhcr ) under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

funds are provided to reduce the energy expenditures of low - income households by conducted instrumented energy audits and installing energy conservation materials such as insulation , weatherstripping and caulk , high - efficiency heating and hot water systems , high - efficiency electrical fixtures and efficient building materials such as windows and doors .

award amount includes administrative funding ( up to 5% ) that will be retained by dhcr for administration .

funds are allocated to eligible subrecipients throughout the state who are responsible for proper installation , compliance with program rules and quality assurance .

arra funds are expected to provide energy conservation assistance for more than 45,000 dwelling units .

preliminary activities such as training , conducting energy audits and health and safety tests , and installation weatherization materials in eligible units .

less than 50% completed executive office of the state of new hampshire to audit and weatherize low - income residential single and multi - family units for the purpose of lowering residents' energy costs and increasing their health , safety , and comfort .

the program is also designed to decrease greenhouse gas emissions , decrease our country's dependence on fossil fuels , and create jobs , especially in the hard - hit construction related trades .

at least 2600 units are slated to be weatherized , coordinated by six community action agencies within new hampshire .

arra funding is expected to greatly increase the number of residential units to be weatherized , from a few hundred over two years to 2600 over three years .

as of december 31st , all six community action agencies in the state are weatherizing with arra funds .

completed units now stand at approximately 275 , with at least 100 in the process of being weatherized .

two energy auditing classroom trainings have been held , with over 27 new auditors receiving state energy auditing certification , seven new since the last quarterly report .

two combustion appliance training sessions are being planned for january '10 .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

state , louisiana department of weatherization assistance for low - income persons arra supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

most activities have continued to support the ramp up of workforce and infrastructure .

baton rouge , la 70808-0120 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 5,646 homes throughout the state will undergo weatherization activities such as performing client education , weatherizing site - built and mobile homes , and making weatherization repairs , such as installing attic insulation and performing basic air sealing .

natural resources , missouri department of weatherization assistance for low - income persons funding to be used to increase the energy efficiency of dwellings owned or occupied by low - income persons , reduce their total residential expenditures and improve their health and safety .

a grand total of 1,093 homes have been weatherized by the subgrant agencies through december 31 , 2009 .

a total of 839 homes have been weatherized by the subgrant agencies from october 1 , 2009 through december 31 , 2009 .

on october 13 , 2009 the missouri department of natural resources energy center ( mdnr / ec ) staff conducted a one - day administrative and technical training for the subgrant agencies in branson , missouri .

the training consisted of an update of the revised weatherization program operational manual and sessions concerning davis - bacon requirements , procurement , arra reporting , and technical monitoring .

during december 2009 seven regional arra energize missouri housing initiative meetings were held throughout the state to provide information and networking opportunities to those interested in participating in the program .

also in december the department of labor issued a revised weatherization wage rate determination for missouri .

the mdnr / ec has hired four weatherization employees to help with arra implementation .

mdnr / ec has five technical staff that are bpi certified .

jefferson city , mo 65101-4272 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description over a period of 3 years , 21,506 homes throughout the state will undergo weatherization activities and 221 of these will be reweatherized .

weatherization activities may include air leakage reduction , attic insulation , wall insulation , foundation and floor insulation , duct insulation , heating system clean and tunes , repairs , and replacements , lighting retrofits , and replacement of hot water heaters , refrigerators , and air conditioning units .

health & human services , north carolina department of weatherization assistance for low income persons .

american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) the weatherization assistance program's mission is to enhance the well - being of low - income residents , particularly those persons who are most vulnerable such as the elderly , the handicapped , and children , through the installation of energy efficient and energy - related health and safety measures , thus benefiting clients through reduced energy bills , enhanced comfort , and the mitigation of energy related health risks .

sub recipients will be responsible for weatherizing over 20,000 homes .

the weatherization assistance program's mission is to enhance the well - being of low - income residents , particularly those persons who are most vulnerable such as the elderly , the handicapped , and children , through the installation of energy efficient and energy - related health and safety measures , thus benefiting clients through reduced energy bills , enhanced comfort , and the mitigation of energy related health risks .

sub recipients will be responsible for weatherizing over 20,000 homes .

office of economic opportunity , 222 north person street less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 22,000 homes throughout the state of north carolina will undergo weatherization measures , including air sealing , attic insulation , dense - pack sidewalls , floor insulation , sealing and insulation of ducts , and general heat waste ( weatherstripping , caulking , glass patching , water heater tank wrap , pipe insulation , faucet aerators , low - flow showerheads , furnace filters ) .

housing & community development , md dept of weatherization assistance program for low - income persons .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , public law 111-5 , appropriates funding for the department of energy to issue / award formula - based grants under the weatherization assistance program .

the purpose of the program is to increase the energy efficiency of dwellings owned or occupied by low - income persons , reduce their total residential expenditures , and improve their health and safety .

the priority population for the weatherization assistance program is persons who are particularly vulnerable such as the elderly , persons with disabilities , families with children , high residential energy users , and households with high - energy burden .

maryland began in earnest arra production during the quarter after working with the lwa's to implement the davis - bacon act requirements for the prevailing wages and required reporting .

production has steadily increased during each month of the quarter .

maryland completed training for the hancock energy solutions software system for managing all program information and the system is now live .

all 18 lwa's are entering client case information into the system and invoices are now being paid out .

maryland dhcd has purchased 4 vehicles ( ford escape hybrids ) to be used by our quality control inspectors for their field work .

note that costs were two @ $29,300 and two @ $30,860. , expenditures that do not show up elsewhere in this report .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 6,850 homes throughout the state of maryland will undergo weatherization activities such as energy audits , incidental repairs , lighting retrofits , water system treatment , attic and floor insulation , furnace testing and service , blower door air sealing , and health and safety abatement .

weatherization assistance for low - income persons / arra arra supplemental funding for weatherization assitance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

the state of south carolina plans to weatherize 5000 homes over the three year life of the grant .

we anticipate completing 40% of our goal within the first year , and the remainder within the next two and half years .

this will be accomplished through a collaborative partnership with both public and private entities .

$58,892,771.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description weatherization activities include air sealing , attic insulation , dense - pack sidewall insulation , sealing and insulating ducts , floor insulation , and installation of a smart thermostat , compact fluorescent lamps , and refrigerator .

activities will be performed statewide .

housing and community development , virginia dept of weatherization assistance program for low - income persons to improve home energy efficiency for low - income families through the most cost - effective measures possible .

sub - awardees were expected to complete ramp - up activities .

this includes the purchase of additional or upgraded vehicles and equipment , hiring of additional personnel , identifying additional new beneficiaries and limited production increases .

600 east main street , the main street centre less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 9,193 homes throughout the state of virginia will undergo weatherization activities such as tests for carbon monoxide , pre - and post - blower door tests , pressure diagnostic tests , pre - and post - health and safety tests , heating / cooling equipment inspection and repair , floor insulation , domestic water heater insulation , and refrigerator and stove replacement .

district of columbia , government of the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) grant will provide assistance to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

the stimulus weatherization assistance program ( wap ) will expand efforts to audit income - qualified homes and install energy efficiency measures to reduce energy use .

ddoe has completed selection of community - based organizations and is preparing final grant agreements and awards to initiate partnerships with 7 organizations .

ddoe has posted 6 position descriptions to hire additional program staff ; candidates have been identified and are being screened and interviewed by ddoe human resources .

51 n st. ne 6th fl less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 785 units throughout the district will undergo weatherization activities , including conducting energy audits of single - family and multifamily homes / residences and performing weatherization improvements to these residences , such as installing energy - efficient lighting , insulation , and weather stripping , and replacing windows / doors ; heat pump repair ; hot water heater repair / replacement ; faucet , showerhead replacement , and programmable thermometer installation .

under this award , inefficient air - conditioners and refrigerators will be replaced in order to reduce electric bills in low - income households .

labor and industrial relations , hawaii department of weatherization assistance program for low - income persons weatherization formula grants - american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 the quarter ending 12 / 31 / 09 we processed a total of 14 units have been installed .

of these 9 units are hot water solar systems and 5 are compact fluorescent lights ( cfl's ) .

projected units installed for the coming quarter is 137 .

as of this date 107 families have been assessed , 17 are currently being considered for solar installations , and 22 are approved for solar and cfl installations .

applicants to hcap's wap - arra program are currently in receipt of energy conservation education .

applicants watch a video about general energy conservation practices and receive free copies of the publications 'power to save: an energy conservation guide to your home' and '101 ways to save. .

in addition to collateral materials , income eligible applicants received dwelling - specific tips and advice from the wap - arra technical specialist during an initial home survey and assessment .

during the post - installation phase , vendors will provide information on how to use and care for energy saving devices .

hcap continues to develop and refine its process for related weatherization programming with help from the state of hawaii , office of community services .

in the later part of this quarter the wap - arra program specialist and wap - arra technical specialist traveled to the island of kauai to discuss procedures with neighbor island caps and to receive technical training from hawaii energy .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports weatherization activities for 672 households in all four hawaii counties .

these activities include an energy audit service , installation of energy saving devices , and follow - up and energy monitoring of low - income homes , as well as technical assistance and training to subawardees .

housing & community services , oregon department of doe arra weatherization assistance program statewide the purpose of the weatherization assistance program is to increase the energy efficiency of dwellings owned or occupied by low - income persons , reduce their total residential expenditures , and improve their health and safety .

the program promotes job creation , provides energy savings , and reduces carbon emissions .

the priority population for the program is persons who are particularly vulnerable such as the elderly , persons with disabilities , families with children , high residential energy users , and households with high - energy burden .

income requirements for arra weatherization funds are 200 percent of the national poverty level .

a doe - approved energy audit is performed on each home to determine the greatest cost saving measures for the client's dwelling .

weatherization contractors then install the most cost - effective , energy efficient measures , address health and safety concerns , and improve comfort .

the use of arra funds on dwelling units may include , but are not limited to auditing , testing , and installation of energy saving materials .

energy - efficiency education is also provided for each household receiving weatherization .

arra weatherization funds may also be used for training and technical assistance .

during the quarter ohcs continued formalizing program and legal agreements with subrecipients and conducted training necessary for proceeding with weatherization operations throughout the state .

work activities during the period covered a wide range of activities .

through various webinars , tele - conferences , and prepared group training meetings , ohcs has worked with subrecipients developing monitoring and reporting procedures .

ohcs continues to analyze subrecipient needs for equipment , vehicles , training and hiring , monitoring and reporting , and feasibility analysis for special projects .

ohcs has evaluated at - risk and vulnerable agencies and continues to work with those subrecipients to develop action plans .

ohcs continues its coordination with the oregon employment department , workforce development , oregon energy coordinators association and community action partnership of oregon to develop training plans and the possibilities of leveraged arra funding sources .

davis bacon certified wages were determined and provided to the agencies .

follow - up training for the subrecipients regarding certified payroll issues has been provided .

a payroll specialist joined the staff of ohcs during the quarter to facilitate the collection and retention of payroll the certified payroll and to provide guidance to the subrecipients .

the monitoring staff has begun scheduled site visits to the subrecipient agencies across the state , evaluating completed jobs and providing weatherization technique training and guidance .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 4,635 homes throughout the state will undergo weatherization activities ; the estimated energy savings is 141,368 mbtu .

commerce , north dakota dept of weatherization of low income homes weatherization of low income clients in the state of north dakota .

it is planned to weatherized approximately 3267 homes .

weatherization will receive general heat waste measures , insulation measures , diagnostics , windows and doors , health and safety measures including furnace replacement and repair .

residiential , multi - family and mobile homes will be weatherized with all measures with a sir of greater than 1.5 .

310 homes completed as weatherized .

330 homes in - progress .

place of performance - street address ( optional field ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description each weatherization measure to be installed must have savings - to - investment ratio ( sir ) equal to or greater than 1 in order to be included as a priority .

the award will result in an estimated energy savings of 85,917 mbtu .

development , ohio department of communications recovery act weatherization award for state of ohio weatherization program provides services to low - income households in ohio to reduce energy costs .

the home weatherization assistance program ( hwap ) weatherized over 5,500 homes with arra funds in the state of ohio since july 1st , 2009 .

additional training courses have been added to the corporation for ohio appalachian development ( coad ) training center to meet demand due to the considerable increase of crew and contractor based personnel hiring .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 32,180 homes throughout the state will undergo weatherization activities , including water heater insulation , air leakage repair , furnace tune - up , duct insulation in nonconditioned areas , duct sealing , and the installation of low - flow showerheads .

social services , connecticut department of arra supplemental funding for the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) : to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

dss has provided 2 combustion safety , 2 lead safe , and one osha 10 training for weatherization crews and subcontractors .

dss also sponsored 2 davis bacon trainings and hosted one statewide arra wap meeting in early december .

through the cctcs , 1 building analyst course was provided to 14 students .

through two workforce investment boards , 2 weatherization installer courses were provided to 36 students .

to date , more than 125 people have received training for the arra wap program .

all dss arra wap durational project positions have been filled .

dss holds monthly weatherization directors meetings .

through an agreement with the owc and ct's workforce investment boards , regional workplans have been developed for weatherization training and job creation / retention programs .

in addition , the cctc system is in the process of developing a statewide weatherization training curriculum and building training labs at the vocational and technical high schools .

decd began its pilot project in which 500 state financed elderly housing units will be weatherized in northwest ct .

the sub recipients have finalized their procurement processes and 98 contracts for services and materials have been executed .

total ftes for the reporting period are 34.33 ; however , approximately 79 persons have worked for arra wap during this quarter .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 7,500 homes throughout connecticut will undergo weatherization activities , such as attic insulation , sidewall insulation , air - sealing / infiltration measures , basement / crawlspace ceiling insulation , pipe and duct insulation , and install storm windows / doors and primary windows / doors .

health and welfare , idaho department of department of energy - weatherization the department of energy arra weatherization award will be used to weatherize an additional 3,198 low and moderate income ( at or under 200% federal poverty income guidelines ) homes by march 31 , 2011 .

this will result in job creation , projected to at least double current staffing as well as increase the use of contractors , promoting retiention .

projections indicate that the material purchased to weatherize homes will at least triple during the project period .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award includes weatherization activities such as attic , floor , and wall insulation , door / window replacement , furnace repair / replacement , refrigerator replacement , duct sealing and insulation , water pipe insulation , and water heater replacement .

weatherization assistance program for low income persons under the recovery act arra supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

arra supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

legislative building 416 sid snyder avenue s.w .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 7,170 homes throughout the state will undergo weatherization services such as an energy audit , a complete visual assessment , assessment of electric base load measures , diagnostic tests , energy - related health and safety assessments , client education , appropriate low - cost measures , applicable weatherization - related repairs , and a thorough consideration of the client and residence .

there is an estimated energy savings of 701,927 mbtu .

business and industry , nevada department of weatherization assistance for low - income persons arra supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons ; to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

with $11,572,667.00 of grants awarded in the first cycle , nhd anticipates providing weatherization assistance to approximately 2,000 homes .

production began the first week of november due to state stipulations that had to be met , and work is now moving forward .

department of employment , training and rehabilitation ( detr ) is contracting with nonprofit collaboratives to provide weatherization worker training to approximately 300 individuals who we anticipate will be absorbed into the workforce by our current contractors .

nhd has hired a compliance auditor / inspector , project specialist , and a davis bacon compliance specialist with additional staff to be added as needed .

1535 old hot springs road , suite 50 carson city , nv 89706-0679 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities by five service providers throughout nevada .

the activities include minor home repairs , floor and duct insulation , refrigerator replacement , and shell infiltration sealing .

legislative office of the state of west virginia to increase the energy efficiency of dwellings owned or occupied by low - income persons , reduce their total residential expenditures , and improve their health and safety , especially low - income persons who are particularly vulnerable such as the elderly , persons with disabilities , familes with children , high residential energy users , and households with a high energy burden .

to weatherize low - income persons homes throughout the state of west virginia according to the department of energy and west virginia weatherization field standards .

950 kanawha blvd .

e. , 3rd floor less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will support weatherization activities for 3,574 homes throughout west virginia .

these activities include cleaning and tuning heating systems ; air sealing ; duct , attic and floor insulation ; and replacement of heating systems , doors , and windows .

the award is expected to result in an energy savings of 57,269 mbtu .

recovery act - weatherization formula grants - low - income households second qtr activities included ramping up by increasing the number of state monitors , issuing grants to subrecipients , and providing training on american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) rules , the davis bacon act , and other related regulations .

weatherization - related training opportunities have been provided to new state and service provider weatherization assistance program staff .

the mn department of commerce ( doc ) hired additional weatherization field and fiscal monitoring staff .

1,392 homes have been weatherized using arra funds .

101 of these homes were monitored by arra doc weatherization staff .

these monitoring visits were also used to train new doc weatherization staff .

85 seventh place east , suite 500 saint paul , mn 55101-2198 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for about 16,850 homes in all minnesota counties and 6 of the state's 11 native american reservations .

weatherization activities include air leakage and infiltration reduction , attic insulation , wall insulation , health and safety repairs / replacement , duct sealing and room - by - room pressure balancing , cleaning and tuning heating systems , efficiency - based heating system replacements , and belly and duct repairs / sealing .

arra weatherization assistance for low income persons arra weatherization assistance program for low income persons provides funding for improving the energy efficiency of low - income dwellings to decrease energy consumption and thereby decrease the cost of energy for low - income families .

arra weatherization assistance program for low income persons provides funding for the improvement of energy efficiency of dwellings to decrease energy consumption and thereby decrease the cost of energy for low - income families .

this is accomplished through the state's network of community action agencies and is headed by community action of kentucky , the subrecipient of grant funds .

grants less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports weatherization activities for 9,907 homes throughout kentucky .

these activities include attic , wall , and floor insulation ; incidental repairs ; infiltration reduction ; and health and safety measures .

the award is expected to result in an energy savings of 268,644 mbtu .

community affairs , florida department of the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) awarded $175,984,474 to florida for the weatherization assistance program ( wap ) through the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

these funds are to help reduce the monthly energy burden of florida's low - income population households by making those dwellings more energy efficient .

to date , doe has released 50% of the total award amount to the state .

the funding , administered by the florida department of community affairs , will be passed through to the existing 27 provider agencies ( community action agencies , non - profit entities and county governments ) covering the 67 counties statewide .

each of these providers , along with the contractors and vendors participating in the program , have an integral role in job creation and retention by providing energy efficiency improvements on low - income dwellings .

weatherization activities may include: addressing air infiltration with weather stripping , caulking , thresholds , minor repairs to walls , ceiling and floors and window or door replacement ; applying solar reflective coating to manufactured homes ; adding ceiling and floor insulation ; evaluating efficiency of heating and cooling systems , refrigerators , water heaters ; and installing solar screens , low flow shower heads , compact fluorescent light bulbs , water heater and water line insulation .

one hundred percent of the beneficiaries of the wap are below the 200% federal income guidelines .

during the first quarter , primary activities were focused on capacity - building and training at the local provider level .

local providers were required to complete specific benchmarks , prior to receipt of arra working weatherization grants .

benchmarks included: completion of one - week weatherization inspector training for existing and new employees with follow - up field testing , purchasing of additional equipment , and validation and eligibility verification of client waiting lists .

during the second quarter , all but one of the 27 local providers completed the required benchmarks .

weatherization grant awards were executed with 26 agencies and those agencies began weatherizing dwellings .

a new oversight measure of field monitoring was also implemented within the second quarter .

field monitors were trained by state weatherization staff and in november the monitors began their ongoing responsibility of reviewing 100% of client files and inspecting 50% of the weatherized homes .

training on davis bacon requirements was also provided statewide by a representative of the u.s. department of labor .

statewide contractor training curriculum was developed and implementation begins in the third quarter .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for approximately 19,090 homes .

housing & community affairs , texas department of recovery act - weatherization assistance program for the state of texas the weatherization assistance program assists low - income households control energy costs to ensure an healthy and safe living environment .

qualified households may receive weatherization materials installed in their residences and / or energy conservation education .

continued administrative activities at the prime recipient level and weatherization work at the subrecipient level .

$326,975,732.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for 33,908 homes across the state .

weatherization activities include measures to reduce air infiltration , such as replacement of doors and windows , repairing of holes and caulking ; installation of ceiling , wall and floor insulation ; replacement of energy inefficient appliances and heating and cooling units ; and energy education to help families reduce their energy consumption .

subawardees will receive training that will include basic and advanced weatherization , weatherization program management , neat software , and davis - bacon administration .

the executive offic of the commonwealth of puerto rico the weatherization assistance program helps low - income families to attain a reduction of household energy expenditures , while securing and enhancing the health and safety of the home .

of particular concern to the program is to provide assistance to the elderly , families with children , persons with disabilities , and those with a high energy burden in their household .

due to the warm climate of the island , weatherization efforts will be directed at improving the efficiency of cooling systems , reduction in electrical energy demand of light fixtures and selected household appliances , and mitigate energy - related health and safety concerns .

to maximize the benefits of the program , work will be performed by trained personnel , and the process will be monitored from initial client application to certification of completed weatherization work .

the period of performance is estimated from 4-1-2009 to 3- 31-2012 .

the evaluation committee for the call center studied the proposals received and made their recommendations to subgrantee's , prifa , board of awards .

the pre - bid meeting for the refrigerator replacement services bid was held .

refrigerator replacement services bid documents were prepared , and the newspaper bid announcement was published .

the evaluation committee for the compact fluorescent lamps ( cfls ) bid began evaluating the proposals received .

water heater replacement services bid documents were prepared , and the newspaper bid announcement was published .

trainers ( eca ) contract was signed and their first visit ocurred on december 29 and 30 .

the evaluation committee for the qualification of auditors and inspectors met and selected the inspectors to be invited for the training .

evaluation of auditors started this period .

probable intake locations were visited to evaluate the physical conditions and necessities to adjust the locations to the intake process .

evaluation of probable training facilities was finished and sent to prifa for their comments and final decision on which facility to use .

draft report on the energy audit tool to be used by auditors in puerto rico wap was prepared .

after grantee's , eaa , revision , the agency will submit the document to the doe .

the document includes a brief description of the puerto rico housing stock , photos , climate description , explanation of audit tool for all the weatherization measures for which the savings to investment ratio ( sir ) needs to be calculated , samples of sir calculations for each of the measures , and a priority list which describes sir tendencies for the different weatherization measures .

weatherization environmental agencies building floor 8 street 8868 , po box 41314 san juan , pr 00940-0285 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 5,500 homes throughout puerto rico will undergo weatherization activities such as installing reflective films ; addressing air leakage in air - conditioned areas ; installing solar water heaters ; replacing refrigerators , water heaters , and air conditioners with energy star rated units ; replacing incandescent lamps with compact fluorescent lamps ( cfl ) ; replacing shower heads ; installing smart power strips to avoid phantom loads ; and other work to mitigate energy - related health and safety concerns .

governor's office of economics development provide home weatherization services to eligible low - income households , includin furnace replacement , insulation , etc. , with the goal of reducing energy usage , energy production and greenhouse gas output , as well as reducing utility bills .

weatherization staff has been hired at 9 local area agencies responsible for implementing the weatherization assistance program .

558 homes have been completed and another 842 are in progress .

324 south state street , ste .

500 , n / a salt lake city , ut 84111-2388 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through the award , approximately 4,466 homes will undergo weatherization throughout the state .

weatherization of homes ultimately completes the plan to upgrade state energy infrastructure .

as the primary focus being on lowering energy liabilities electricity providers are charging onto the costumers .

through education , trainning and audits / assessments the consumers can learn the benefits of using energy efficiency and conservation measures in their homes .

however , the state plan wishes to initiate this program for the first time by focusing on replacing electricity appliances and other electricity devices with certified energy star units .

several deliverables applicable in the state plan include solar water heater , electric stove , refrigerator , air con , microwave , cloth washers , and etc.. home assessments are continued and an environmental regulatory issue needs be resolved prior to initiating any production to measures guided under the state plan .

this issue perhaps should be finalized before this quarter expires .

american samoa government , territorial energy office pago pago , as 96799-0000 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for approximately 225 homes throughout american samoa .

public health and human services , montana department of recovery act - weatherization assistance program for low icome persons arra - supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderlly , people with disabilities and children , by improving the energy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

these funds will provide grants for local human resource development councils that apply to pay to weatherize homes with the oriiginal created and retained remaining active .

 .

as with all weatherization projects , the applicants will be asked to provide planning and accountability documentation .

the weatherization program's mission is to increase the energy efficiency of homes occupied by low - income individuals , thereby reducing their energy costs .

the program has reduced the annual heating costs of recipient households by an average of approximately 32 percent .

it serves approximately 2,000 high energy burden households each year .

arra funding will allow the weatherization program to serve at least 2,500 more families and to double the average labor and materials expenditure per dwelling for cost - effective energy conservation measures .

as of november , 2009 , 253 homes have been weatherized and audited in montana with an additional 411 that are in the process of being weatherized .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for approximately 2,477 homes throughout montana .

these activities include stoppage of air infiltration ; heating systems tune - ups ; water heater , attic , floor , perimeter , and wall insulation ; installation of storm windows , replacement doors , moisture controls , ventilation materials , pipes , and duct wrap .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

community services & development , california department of recovery act - weatherization assistance program recovery act - weatherization assistance program formual block grant - doe wap .

the initial allocation is dedicated for csd & agency ramp up , this included training , new hires & vehicle purchases .

the training also included creating a web based wx training ciriculum web site .

700 n 10th st rm 258 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award allows 42 subawardees to weatherize 43,400 eligible low - income dwellings in all california counties .

in addition to start - up activities such as training , hiring , and vehicle purchases , this award supports weatherization activities , including the installation of ceiling insulation and carbon monoxide alarms .

the award will result in an estimated energy savings of 1,742,370 mbtu .

weatherization assistance for low - income persons arra supplemental funding for weatherization assistance to low - income persons: to reduce energy costs for low - income families , particularly for the elderly , people with disabilities , and children , by improving the envergy efficiency of their homes while ensuring their health and safety .

as this is the first report for wap arra funds , most activity has supported ramp up of workforce and infrastructure .

oklahoma city , ok 73104-3234 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for about 7,000 homes in all oklahoma counties .

these activities include cost - effective energy efficiency measures , including attic insulation , caulking , weather stripping , and air sealing .

the award is expected to result in an estimated energy savings of 310,640 mbtu .

human services , vermont departmnt of the arra weatherization assistance program mission in to reduce the energy burden of low income persons while ensuring their health & safety .

grants have been written to the 5 sub - awardees and training has begun .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports weatherization activities for approximately 1,612 homes in 15 counties in vermont .

weatherization activities include heating system modifications ; installation of cost - effective levels of attic , wall , floor , duct , and foundation insulation ; and water heater and water pipe insulation and modifications .

the award is expected to result in an energy savings of 60,588 mbtu .

family services , wyoming department of recovery act weatherization award for state of wyoming ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description through this award , approximately 900 units throughout the state will undergo weatherization activities such as installing insulation , sealing and balancing ducts , and mitigating heating loss through windows and door .

human services , tennessee department of weatherization assistance for low - income persons weatherization assistance program , recovery act reduce energy costs for low - income families through increased energy efficiency .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports weatherization activities for 10,524 homes throughout tennessee .

these activities include attic , wall , floor , and duct insulation ; air sealing ; heat waste reduction measures ; refrigerator replacement ; and window and door repairs .

the award is expected to result in an energy savings of 320,952 mbtu .

government of guam - department of administration mou being established with guam energy office and guam housing and urban renewal authority , an agency which works closely with hud and has the qualifications and the knowledge to assist in determing which dwelling qualifies and falls under the wap guidlines as stipulated in the grant activity .

548 n marine corps dr $1,119,297.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports weatherization activities for 204 homes throughout the territory of guam .

weatherization activities include the replacement or repair of refrigerators , air conditioners , low - flow shower heads , and faucets , compact fluorescent lamp ( cfl ) fixtures , and water heaters .

the award will result in an estimated energy savings of 3,060 mbtu .

within the department of energy , the geothermal technologies program ( geothermal program ) provides grants , cooperative agreements , and contracts to support scientific research to find , access , and use geothermal energy in the united states .

in fiscal year 2009 , the geothermal program received $43.3 million in annual appropriations ; the department of energy provided an additional $400 million in recovery act funds for geothermal activities and projects that should be completed within 3 years .

according to program officials , the geothermal program received a tremendous and unprecedented response to its solicitations announcing recovery act funding opportunities .

specifically , the program office received 529 applications in response to the grant solicitations and over 50 applications in response to a solicitation for the department's national laboratories .

out of these applications , the program office selected 151 projects — 124 projects were submitted by private industry , academic institutions , tribal entities , and local governments , and 26 projects were submitted by 10 national labs .

the program office also established an interagency agreement with the u.s. geological survey to work on 1 project .

in terms of awarding grants and contracts for projects , program officials told us that a grant is equivalent to a project because the grant is awarded to one recipient and funds are provided directly to the recipient .

however , this concept does not hold true for all contracts awarded to the national labs for a project .

this is because a national lab can be involved in a collaborative project that includes one or more partner labs .

in this case , individual “activities” from each national lab would be completed and contribute to the completion of the overall project .

unlike grants , funding from the program office is provided directly to the lab performing the work .

consequently , a national lab project can be equivalent to one contract or multiple contracts .

the department selected the projects to receive grants under the recovery act in october 2009 , but according to program officials , it had not finished awarding the grants until february 2010 .

the program officials told us that some lag time ( eg , 5 to 6 months ) between project selection and award is typical .

as of april 23 , 2010 , the program office had obligated almost $343 million of the $393 million in appropriations ( about 87 percent ) ; however , only 28 recipients had spent any funds , and they had only spent 2.6 percent ( almost $9 million ) .

program officials told us that the expenditure rate was low because many projects were recently awarded and had not started .

almost 60 percent of the geothermal program obligations under the recovery act were split evenly between enhanced geothermal systems research and development projects and innovative exploration technologies projects .

specifically , over $101 million ( 30 percent ) was obligated to 50 enhanced geothermal systems research and development projects , while about $98 million ( 29 percent ) was obligated to 22 validation of innovative exploration technologies projects .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

the rest of the obligations funded the following three project areas: almost $62 million ( about 18 percent ) was obligated to 37 ground source about $50 million ( about 15 percent ) was obligated to 14 geothermal about $31 million ( about 9 percent ) was obligated to 5 national geothermal data system projects .

we assessed the transparency of the descriptive information for geothermal awards available on recovery.gov .

we found that an estimated 33 percent met our transparency criteria , 62 percent partially met our criteria , and 5 percent did not meet our criteria .

for geothermal descriptions that partially met or did not meet our criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet our criteria .

the geothermal descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our criteria , and information that we found to provide a fuller understanding of the award are provided at the end of this appendix .

although supplemental materials were available to assist with recipient reporting , recipients did not always follow the directions in these materials .

additionally , geothermal program officials did not review narrative description fields in recovery.gov , which may have led to some reporting errors .

both the department of energy and the office of science provided supplemental materials that directed recipients to a source document ( eg , the award letter ) where information can be found to complete a required field .

in addition , the department provided training on the reporting requirements through webinars , while the geothermal program office held a video conference with recipients ( i.e. , the national labs ) .

furthermore , the department has a recovery act clearinghouse available to answer questions from recipients , and it posts responses to frequently asked questions on its recovery act web site .

moreover , geothermal program officials told us that they do not review these narrative description fields because information in these fields is available on the geothermal web site .

likewise , department officials told us that they do not review these fields because the information is fully described in the award documents .

however , we identified two issues with the fields that may have affected the transparency of some information reported by the national labs .

first , information on the overall status of four national lab projects that involve multiple labs may not come across clearly in the narrative description fields .

this is because recovery.gov was set up to track recovery act spending at the recipient level and not at the project level .

according to geothermal program officials , recovery act funds are provided directly to a lab to complete its activities on a project .

consequently , multiple labs working on the same project would report their individual activities in multiple records in recovery.gov .

for example , lawrence berkeley national laboratory was the prime recipient for a project on enhanced geothermal systems using carbon dioxide as a heat transmission fluid , and the idaho national laboratory was identified as a partner lab .

as required , both national labs reported their activities on this project in two separate records in recovery.gov .

unless narrative information disclosed that this project involved more than one lab , the expectation might be that these were two different projects .

second , six national labs did not submit a separate report for each activity as specified in the supplemental materials provided by the department .

the six labs combined two to four different activities into a single report .

as a result , 18 separate activities were reported in just six records .

when we spoke with program officials , they were unaware of the requirement that recipients report on projects separately .

they told us that their preference for national labs reporting on multiple activities is explained in the annual program guidance letter .

however , based on our review of a few program guidance letters , we believe that the preference of the program office is for the labs to report each activity separately because this is how the activities are presented in the letters .

according to geothermal program officials , information on the geothermal projects funded by the recovery act is made available to the public using other means besides recovery.gov .

for example: the geothermal technologies program web site ( http: / / apps1.eere.energy.gov / geothermal / projects / ) .

this web site provides detailed information on each project , including the technology type , recipient name , location , objectives , description , and targets / milestones .

it provides a database that allows the public to search for a project by , among other things , funding source , location , and technology type .

the department of energy recovery act web site ( http: / / www.energy.gov / recovery / ) .

it provides weekly updates on departmental projects and programs funded by the recovery act , including data on appropriations , obligations , and outlays .

press releases .

these provide information on major announcements , such as announcements on the availability of recovery act funding .

 ( http: / / www.eereblogs.energy.gov / geothermaltechnologies / ) .

this provides the public with the opportunity to learn about and discuss geothermal activities .

weekly recovery act success stories .

these highlight the results of recovery act funding on recipients .

if the department selects a geothermal story , then it appears on the department's recovery act web site .

program officials told us that the geothermal program has become more visible to the public during the past two years .

although the program office has not conducted any surveys to determine how consumers are becoming aware of the program , they believe that new articles and the recovery.gov web site could be contributing to the increased awareness .

program officials also told us that the public , the community , and reporters have provided positive feedback on the geothermal web site , noting that the web site is easy to navigate .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

geothermal technologies program enhanced geo science r&d task 1 ) design , develop , and field test highly integrated , high temperature data loggers using silicon on insulator and silicon carbide technologies .

task 2 ) develop a drilling system based upon pneumatic down the hole hammer bits and polycrystalline diamond compact bits .

task 3 ) test supercritical fluids in a pilot - scale brayton cycle and evaluate the performance of the working fluids .

requirements: task 1 milestones: field dewarless 240c ptc tool - 9 / 30 / 10 ; evaluate existing dewar technology - 9 / 30 / 10 ; design analog mcm - 01 / 31 / / 11 ; status report - 03 / 31 / 11 .

deliverables: 1 ) dewarless 240c ptc tool ; 2 ) report evaluating existing dewar technology ; 3 ) design of analog mcm ; 4 ) status report .

task 2 milestones: year 1: complete initial field trials - 9 / 30 / 10 ; year 2: implement design changes from initial field trials - 9 / 30 / 11 .

deliverables: report evaluating existing dewar technology .

task 3 milestones: 1 ) prediction of thermodynamic properties for a single component fluid through the critical point - 10 / 1 / 10 .

2 ) obtain full vapor - liquid equilibrium envelopes & critical points for one set of mixtures - 4 / 1 / 11 .

2 ) milestones 1: verification complete mixing & thermodynamic equilibrium between components can be obtained so appearance of new phase can be reliably detected ( go / no - go ) .

 ; deliverables 1 ) thermodynamic properties for several candidate working fluids ; 2 ) computational toolbox for analysis of mixtures of fluids , turbine design & cooling needs ; 3 ) experimental results from brayton cycle rests ; & 4 ) recommendations for new working fluids .

 ( for performance outcomes & measures see work authorization plan ) thie original project has been separated into three separate projects ; 1 ) arra drilling technology ( 145316 ) with $588,600 , 2 ) arra geo thermal turbines ( 146694 ) with $150,000 ; and 3 ) base technologies arra ( 144299 ) with $885,600 .

the budget total has remained the same .

the scope , deliverables and milestones are being developed .

al85000 develop a new type of biphasic working fluid for subcritical geothermal systems that utilizes microporous nanostructured metal - organic solids as the primary heat carrier and heat transfer medium to support an organic rankine cycle .

provide information on temperature distribution , fracture spacing , and fracture surface area in egs ( enhanced geothermal systems ) .

develop suites of tracers with different properties that can be injected into geothermal systems , extracting the desired information by interpreting the differences in transport behavior of these compounds in the reservoir .

sa 56595 - project team members from pnnl , lanl , and bnl participated in a meeting at the energy and geoscience institute ( egi ) at the university of utah on december 8 , 2009 .

the purpose of the meeting was to share information on the geothermal tracer programs at egi and the four national labs the project team plus inl ) and to explore ways that the programs can interact .

following this meeting , the project team discussed the next steps for 2004190- egs r&d and agreed to begin laboratory testing of pft compounds early next calendar year .

a tentative schedule was developed that included a meeting in late winter at los alamos to further plan laboratory testing .

in parallel with the laboratory effort , pnnl and lanl will develop a modeling approach , conduct predictive simulations to identify optimal thermal and surface adsorption properties for geothermal tracers , and examine the sensitivity of the model to a range of tracer properties .

results from this sensitivity analysis will be used to guide subsequent laboratory - scale testing of candidate tracers .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) less than 50% completed de - ac05-76rl01830 battelle energy alliance , llc enhanced geothermal systems ( egs ) technology r&d ( $1.953m ) .

this scope of work includes four scopes of work .

1 ) air - cooled condensers in next - generation conversion systems .

the idaho national laboratory ( inl ) will identify and resolve issues that are associated with using air - cooled condensers in next - generation energy conversion systems , achieve the full benefits of using mixed working fluids in air cooled binary cycles , evaluate the benefits of using air - cooled condensers with flash steam cycles , and establish criteria for designing air - cooled binary plant turbines .

2 ) enhanced geothermal systems with co2 as heat transmission fluid .

the inl will conduct experiments for evaluating the effect of supercritical carbon dioxide , at elevated temperatures , on precipitation and dissolution of mineral phases that are typical of geomedia found in geothermal reservoirs .

3 ) physics - based fracture stimulation , reservoir flow and heat transport simulator .

the inl will develop a physics - based rock deformation and fracture propagation simulator by coupling a discrete element model for fracture generation with a continuum - based multiphase fluid flow and heat transport model .

4 ) advancing reactive tracer methods for measuring thermal evolution in co2 and water - based geothermal reservoirs .

the inl will develop a set of tracer test planning and analysis tools to define the parameters necessary for successful testing , identify new tracers suitable to a wide range of potential reservoir volumes and permeabilities , and demonstrate the utility of newly developed tracers in a system representative of enhanced geothermal systems .

quarterly activities are listed below for the four scopes of work as mentioned above .

1 ) personnel have been developing power plant ( conversion system ) models that will be used to assess the benefits of applying different equipment concepts having the potential to increase performance from air - cooled binary plants .

emphasis has been on plants to be used with egs resources .

model development has been largely been completed .

the reasonability of model performance estimates are being assessed by comparing estimates to operating data from existing plants .

2 ) experimental design for batch experiments involving supercritical co¨2 / water / mineral reactions was planned .

reactor components were ordered and / or under construction .

initiated laboratory safety review and approval process .

3 ) over the past quarter , significant progress was made in the development of advanced computer models for predicting the behavior of enhanced geothermal systems .

4 ) a high - performance liquid chromatograph was purchased and has been installed in the laboratory to perform tracer analyses .

a computer program was developed to model the migration of thermally reactive tracers through a fractured geothermal system .

this code was used to evaluate testing strategies for tracer experiments .

experiments were conducted to encapsulate reactive tracers .

the experiments showed that encapsulsted tracers could be made and are stable at room temperature .

all other professional , scientific , and technical services idaho falls , id 83415-0001 less than 50% completed de - ac07-05-id14517 los alamos national security , llc lanl ? s project will develop a multipurpose ( simultaneous multiple physical parameter determination ) acoustic sensor for downhole fluid monitoring in egs reservoirs over typical ranges of pressures and temperatures and then demonstrate the capabilities and performance of this sensor for conditions in different egs systems ( with a wide range of temp / pressure and geophysical / geological conditions ) .

specific technical challenges are finding the right material for the sensor that can withstand working temperatures of up to 374×c and pressures up to 22 mpa ; developing the most efficient design / geometry for the sensor to sustain the high temperature ? .

high pressure conditions specific for a typical egs system ; and the fluid flow determination requires either high flow rates or turbulent flow ( vortices or disturbances ) and / or impurities / gas bubbles present in the fluid .

the multipurpose sensor that lanl proposes is capable of accurately measuring temperature , pressure , and fluid composition at in situ conditions expected in geothermal environments and is needed in nearly every phase of an egs project , including testing of injection and production wells , reservoir validation , inter - well connectivity , reservoir scale - up , and reservoir sustainability .

the swept frequency acoustic interferometry ( sfai ) technique was originally developed at lanl for noninvasive identification of chemical warfare compounds in a multitude of weapons and a wide range of containers for international treaty verification and counterterrorism purposes .

since then , the technique has been significantly refined and expanded , and lanl will adapt sfai and combine new approaches to extract multiple fluid parameters from a single sensor .

although the underlying basis of the sfai technique is proven , it has never been applied to geothermal exploration primarily because the requirements of high temperature and pressure were not needed in earlier applications ; this application will require some novel adaptation and sensor development and associated physics .

a thorough literature search was performed in order to identify the best choice of piezoelectric materials to be used .

curie temperature ( tc ) is an important factor in high - temperature applications , as the transducers lose their piezoelectric property completely at temperatures close to tc .

typically , it is best not to exceed half of tc .

piezoelectric materials and their tc , in ½c: pzt ( 195-300 ) , aln ( 600 ) , linbo3 ( 1150 ) , langasite ( 1000 ) , langatate ( > 1500 ) .

the langasites and langatates are piezoelectric materials discovered recently and are still under investigation by the scientific community .

we are planning to investigate the material properties at high - temperatures and determine if there are advantages in using these new piezoelectric materials in the development of the multipurpose acoustic sensor .

several pzt and lithium niobate transducers with different center frequencies , ranging from 1 mhz to 6 mhz , were investigated above room temperature .

langasite and / or langatate piezoelectric material has to be acquired and machined into transducers .

milestone status as planned .

significant procurements investigated and identified the equipment necessary: parr instrument pressure vessel , model 4681 ; air pressure amplifier , haskel aad - 30 ; thermocoax cables ( high temperature coaxial cables ) ; bode 100 vector network analyzer ; tektronix arbitrary function generator ; tektronix oscilloscope ; materials for transducers ( lithium niobate , langatate and or / langasite ) .

hiring a postdoctoral job was posted on several web - sites targeting recently graduated phd ? s .

from a pool of 30+ applicants , we narrowed the list to 2 potential postdocs , which we interviewed on site .

dr. blake sturtevant graduated in dec 2009 form university of maine , and is very experienced in the field of acoustics , with extensive experience related to high - temperature piezoelectric materials .

dr. sturtevant has accepted the job offer , and he is planning to start in middle of january 2010 .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) los alamos , nm 87544-1663 less than 50% completed university of utah , the economic impact analysis for egs the proposed project is aimed at studying the economic development and impacts associated with electric power production resulting from enhanced geothermal systems ( egs ) , conventional hydrothermal , low temperature geothermal , and coproduced fluid technologies .

the project also involves analysis of these results to develop an impact assessment model that could be used across the nation for impact assessments with an ability to quantify the potential employment , energy and other environmental impacts associated .

further to developing such a tool , we will also be carrying out a utah region study to validate the gec tool developed and will publish a detailed report on the economic impacts associated with geothermal technologies considered for this study in the utah state .

the 24- month project is divided into three discrete phases: phase 1: data gathering ? .

collect the associated cost data for each of the different technologies phase 2: economic impact analysis ? .

design studies to understand all the impacts associated , and phase 3: outreach activities ? .

communicate the findings to the industry and the research community to validate the studies used to roll out an impact assessment tool , the gec tool .

research & public policy analysis 75 s 2000 e rm 211 salt lake city , ut 84112-8930 de - ee0002744 los alamos national security , llc field tests ( fenton hill , usa ; hijiori , japan ) strongly suggest that our ability to image fluid flow and temperature distribution in enhanced ( engineered ) geothermal reservoirs ( egs ) needs to be dramatically improved to optimize the operation of injection and production wells and the placement of new wells .

the objectives of this project are to ( 1 ) improve image resolution for fracture detection , ( 2 ) image the flow in the fractures with super - resolution imaging , and ( 3 ) quantify fluid flow and temperature changes during and after stimulation .

this research will provide vastly improved , high - resolution images of pre - existing and created fractures and fluid flow in egs reservoirs .

focusing on the data available from short term - stimulation treatments , while developing imaging and modeling technology of importance to the long - term operation of an egs system , we will integrate lanl ? s and netl ? s unique capabilities in seismic imaging , fluid flow modeling , and laboratory measurements .

 ? .

develop a super - resolution , seismic imaging method for imaging fractures and fluid flow using time - lapse microearthquake ( meq ) and vertical seismic profiling data .

 ? .

improve fracture and flow imaging using meq and double - difference tomography .

 ? .

utilize imaging results , time - lapse seismic data and modified gassmann equations to quantify fluid flow and temperature changes in egs .

 ? .

develop a reservoir - scale fully coupled thermal - hydrologic - mechanical ( thm ) model .

 ? .

use netl ? s discrete fracture network modeling to scale up constitutive relationships for porosity and permeability needed for thm .

this project is innovative in that the development of super - resolution seismic imaging for mapping features and imaging fluid flow is a novel extension of a ground - breaking technique recently developed in medical imaging , and offers great potential to break through seismic imaging resolution .

typically , the use of microseismic data has been restricted to mapping gross flow paths affected by stimulation .

our proposed high - resolution mapping will provide additional information about fracture network geometry and induced deformation .

combining this information with the active seismic images will enable a more complete conceptual model of the fracture networks and fluid flow / temperature distribution in the egs , which is vitally needed for successful egs operations .

the ability to include stress - dependent fracture permeability in reservoir simulation models allows for ( more ) accurately predicting future reservoir performance and offers the possibility of help in managing thermal short - circuiting .

reservoir simulation software has evolved in the past decades to a point where complete reservoirs can be efficiently simulated with a single model .

thermal hydrologic mechanical ( thm ) software has also progressed to the point where large scale simulations including fluid flow , heat transfer , and stress changes can be made .

this capability allows ground displacement measurements and micro earthquake ( meq ) analysis to be used to calibrate and constrain reservoir models and thereby help predict future field behavior .

in the thm modeling of geothermal reservoirs , relating the fracture permeability to fracture aperture and fracture aperture to changes in stress or displacement is the key to realistic and efficient computations .

we surveyed the literature and found several conceptualizations of permeability - aperture - stress relationships .

we like a paper by bai et .

al .

 ( rock .

mech .

rock engng. , 32 , 195-219 , 1999 ) because it can represent compressive , tensile , and shear stresses .

we converted this to a displacement formulation and added a thermal stress term .

we are testing the model on grids we developed for this purpose .

in addition , we met and discussed with our collaborators at berkeley lab , geothermex , and ormat: one meeting at lbnl and another at san francisco during the agu meeting .

we have obtained some geophysical well log data from geothermex / ormat for building a reservoir model .

milestone status: programmed initial permeability - aperture - stress ( pas ) models in fehm created 2d and 3d numerical grids to test the pas models .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) los alamos , nm 87544-1663 less than 50% completed the united technologies research center ( utrc ) proposes to improve the utilization of available energy in geothermal resources and increase the energy conversion efficiency of systems employed by: a ) tailoring the subcritical and / or supercritical glide of enhanced working fluids to best match thermal resources , and b ) identifying appropriate thermal system and component designs for the down - selected working fluids .

by implementing these technologies , the overall energy conversion of binary geothermal power plants is projected to increase by at least 40% .

the technical approach is: 1 .

screen , evaluate , and down - select working fluids and mixtures that efficiently match source and sink conditions , meet environmental and safety requirements ( flammability , global warming potential , ozone depletion potential , toxicity , etc ) , and increase thermodynamic cycle performance .

2 .

develop necessary models to identify and evaluate opportunities for energy conversion technology advancements in subcritical , supercritical and trilateral cycles .

utrc shall identify optimal cycle configurations and component designs to take full advantage of the attributes of down - selected working fluids .

utrc shall also define a two - phase expander to best match chosen fluids and cycles and conduct a proof - of - concept demonstration .

3 .

conduct property measurements and develop validated thermophysical models for down - selected working fluids .

4 .

characterize the heat transfer and pressure drop performance of down - selected working fluids and perform experiments to quantify and mitigate the impact of heat transfer degradation characteristic of supercritical fluids and non - azeotropic mixtures .

the deliverables of the program are: 1 .

a comprehensive analytical study detailing the screening , evaluation , and down - selection of working fluids and identifying the appropriate technology advancements in subcritical , supercritical , and trilateral cycles 2 .

improved heat exchanger and turbine designs for down - selected working fluids 3 .

validated thermophysical models and experimental data for down - selected working fluids 4 .

heat transfer and pressure drop data and validated correlations for down - selected working fluids over a representative operational envelope , plus an analytical study of and recommendations for the mitigation of heat transfer degradation 5 .

definition and proof - of - concept demonstration of a two - phase expander research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases , only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

regents of the university of california , the we propose mathematical modeling work , using both analytical and numerical methods , to design and analyze laboratory and field experiments that would ( a ) identify tracers with sorption properties favorable for enhanced geothermal systems ( egs ) applications , ( b ) apply reversibly sorbing tracers to determine the fracture - matrix interface area available for heat transfer , and ( c ) explore the feasibility of obtaining fracture - matrix interface area from non - isothermal , single - well injection - backflow tests .

1 .

we performed a first series of design calculations for the laboratory heat extraction experiments with co2 as heat transmission fluid .

2 .

an improved model for the specific enthalpy of the co2-rich phase was implemented in the evolving eco2h fluid property module for tough2 .

3 .

we started a literature survey of rock - fluid interactions in geologic systems that may serve as ( partial ) analogues of egs with co2 .

reactive transport modeling studies have also been initiated .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) contracts less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds experiments on fluid flow , heat transfer , and rock - fluid chemical interactions conducted by the lawrence berkeley national laboratory , in partnership with idaho national laboratory .

the award supports an enhanced geothermal system ( egs ) development project that seeks to achieve a rational , science - based design that tests and interrogates critical process elements of egs with carbon dioxide .

regents of the university of california , the 1 ) develop a novel model and high performance code for analysis of coupled thmc processes in egs , 2 ) determine quantitatively the permeability of sheared fractures and its long term changes through thmc processes , 3 ) refine and validate the models and codes to laboratory experiments .

and 4 ) model couple thmc processes in near wellbore hydrofracture systems .

thermal - hydrological - mechanical - chemical code development: an initial coupling of toughreact v2.0 to flac , based on the tough - flac code has been done .

this code will be used to benchmark problems handled by the fully coupled thmc code under development .

improvements in toughreact v2.0 have been made to increase efficiency and speed for strongly coupled problems encountered in egs .

combinations of improved code and compiler capabilities have resulted in over 30% speed increases on test problems .

initial evaluation of thermal - hydrological - mechanical processes in rocmas was begun , that will form the basis of the fully coupled thmc code .

background investigation into chemical - mechanical processes in fractures under egs conditions is continuing .

experimental design and setup: the experimental design for the rock shearing test inside a triaxial cell was updated .

the new design is based upon double shearing of two axis - parallel fractures .

these fractures will be induced by sequential brasilian loading in two perpendicular directions along the core diameter a procurement request was placed for the test vessel , with the requisite operating requirements , to be used in the thmc experiments .

evaluation of potential egs rock samples and their suitability for experimental studies was begun .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) $511,200.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports experiments at the lawrence berkeley national laboratory related to thermal - hydrological - mechanical - chemical ( thmc ) processes with the outcome of model and code development for thmc processes , as well as optimization of enhanced geothermal system development and production .

the experiments will cover four different purposes: ( 1 ) develop a novel model and high performance code for analysis of coupled thmc processes in enhanced geothermal systems ( egs ) , ( 2 ) determine quantitatively the permeability of sheared fractures and its long - term changes through thmc processes , ( 3 ) refine and validate the models and codes to lab experiments , and ( 4 ) model couple thmc processes in near wellbore hydrofracture systems .

regents of the university of california , the lawrence berkeley national laboratory will determine the feasibility of jointly using data from microseismic and electrical surveys to image the fluid distribution with enhanced geothermal systems .

 ( 1 ) we conducted feasibility studies on using electromagnetic methods to monitor enhanced geothermal processes .

the preferred approach is to use time lapse measurements to image fluids associated with the geophysical attribute of electrical conductivity .

the modeling experiments were based upon the desert peak geothermal field .

findings show that it is critical to isolate the fluid imaging volume for successful outcome .

this volume can be provided by micro earthquake hypocenter locations , obtained through standard and double difference earthquake location algorithms .

 ( 2 ) we initiated evaluation of standard and double difference earthquake location and corresponding tomographic algorithms to reconstruct p and s wave seismic velocities .

the double difference seismic tomography looks favorable in reconstructing velocity images of greatest resolution in the earthquake stimulated region .

our future plans will include coupling of these velocities to electrical conductivity to better image fluid stimulation .

this is to be done using a common structural constraint between velocities and conductivity .

 ( 3 ) we have successfully implemented and tested a cross - gradient constraint in our electromagnetic imaging codes .

we can now image subsurface electrical conductivity , which is associated with fluids , that is constrained by seismic velocity structural information obtained from seismic tomography .

we have now just started this implementation in our seismic tomographic codes , where velocity will be constrained by electrical conductivity structural information .

 ( 4 ) the desert peak egs experiment will not go forward as planned .

we are now investigating two new field test sites to make measurements .

bardys nevada or raft river idaho .

plans call for an earthquake monitoring networks to be installed at both sites , and we are evaluating logistics for making time lapses electromagnetic measurements .

a contractor has been found that will make these measurements , pending final selection .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) berkeley , ca 94720-0000 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds collection of data at an enhanced geothermal system ( egs ) site to provide a baseline study and a large egs injection to map fluid attributes .

the project will determine the feasibility of jointly using data from micro earthquake and electrical surveys to image the fluid distribution within egss .

regents of the university of california , the laboratory will conduct a series of laboratory experiments to quantify the reactivity of a suite of natural chemical and isotopic tracers as a function of fluid chemistry , temperature , surface area , and time ; and incorporate the measured solute reactivities into a tracer analysis model .

1 .

quantification of bulk reactivity and surface area: in collaboration with , egi , university of utah and pi on the raft river egs demonstration project , core samples from the raft river site were examined and arrangements have been made for shipping core samples to lbnl .

preliminary assessment of potential core samples from the desert peak egs demonstration site has been completed .

sample selection is underway .

the core samples will be used in the surface area reactivity experiments .

arrangements have been made with rock prep lab at uc berkeley's department of earth and planetary science for preparing the core samples for the surface reactivity tests .

2 .

tracer transport simulation in this quarter , we have focused on task 2.1 tracer transport simulation for the modeling part of the project .

specifically , we have incorporated the analytical solution of neretnieks ( 2002 ) into the framework of the channelized flow that is expected to occur in an egs system .

the work of neretnieks ( 2002 ) deals with both conservative and reactive ( simple kd - approach ) tracers for one - dimensional flow conditions .

we are also extending the analytical solution for steady - state isotopic compositions of fluids flowing through fractured rock ( depaolo , 2006 ) to transient conditions that are important for new fractures created in an egs system .

in addition , we are evaluating whether or not the touhreact code ( xu et al. , 2006 ) needs to be modified when bulk - reactivities for species , determined as part of the experimental phase of the project , are used in place of assumed reaction rates for specific species .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) $564,600.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports activities that will quantify the mineralogy of reservoir rocks and the chemical composition of fluids needed for an enhanced geothermal system ( egs ) to incorporate into numerical models and evaluate the reactivity of different solutes as a function of surface area , temperature , fluid chemistry and time to develop the tracer - interpretation technique .

the activities will develop an innovative approach for estimating the change in fracture surface area induced by well stimulation .

egs technology r&d ( project code 2004190 ) consists of the following 3 subprojects: enhanced geothermal - - egs r&d for synchrotron x - ray studies in accordance with the approved eere geothermal technologies program , these funds are for synchrotron x - ray studies of supercritical carbon dioxide / reservoir rock interfaces .

argonne will use synchrotron x - ray measurements to monitor all aspects of atomic to nanoscale structural changes resulting from chemical interactions of scco2-h2o binary fluids with rocks under enhanced geothermal systems conditions .

egs r&d for utilization of geothermal energy in accordance with the approved eere geothermal technologies program , these funds are for the utilization of geothermal energy .

argonne will develop chemical energy carrier processes to recover heat from enhanced geothermal systems as chemical energy .

egs r&d for waveguide - based ultrasonic and far - field electromagnetic sensors in accordance with the approved eere geothermal technologies program , these funds are for waveguide based ultrasonic and far - field electromagnetic sensors for downhold reservoir characterization .

argonne national laboratory will develop waveguide - based ultrasonic and far - field electromagnetic sensors to measure enhanced geothermal systems reservoir parameters .

two sensor technologies to be examined are ( 1 ) microwave ( mw ) radiometer and ( 2 ) ultrasonic waveguide ( uw ) sensor .

major activities in fy2010 include: ( 1 ) establish a laboratory hot - rock test facility , ( 2 ) evaluate mw antenna performance under high temperature and humidity , and ( 3 ) evaluate uw sensor performance under high temperature and humidity .

synchrotron x - ray studies: silica surfaces were prepared for synchrotron x - ray reflectivity .

the roughness of the surface was found less than 1 nm .

x - ray reflectivity measurements of the silica surfaces under static scco2-sch2o fluids showed no measurable dissolution and roughening as expected .

the x - ray / pressure cell was modified to accommodate thinner windows ( 0.5~1 mm ) of synthetic diamond , boron carbides , or silicon carbides .

the boron carbide windows were ordered and tested .

the synthetic diamond windows were ordered and yet to be delivered .

utilization of geothermal energy: potential reversible reactions have been identified .

preliminary thermodynamic analyses were performed to match the temperature conditions of some of these reactions to temperatures potentially available from egs .

aspen plus analysis of the methane reforming / methanantion reaction cycle was conducted .

because the reforming reaction generally occurs at higher temperatures than what may be available from egs reservoirs , a search was conducted to identify new catalysts that may enhance the performance of this reaction system at lower temperature .

waveguide - based ultrasonic and far - field electromagnetic sensors: completed the literature and commercial sensor / instrumentation search and a brief knowledge capture report was documented .

both literature search and commercial instrument survey show lack of high - temperature instruments and sensing techniques and development in this area is needed .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the first project on synchrotron x - ray measurements will consist of two phases: one studies rock and superconcentrated co2 interface and the other performs measurements under variable component binary fluids with a new flow cell .

the second project on chemical energy carriers ( cec ) consists of six tasks for conducting tests , analysis , and development for the cec systems .

the third project on waveguide based ultrasonic includes three phases for developing and building the ultrawave sensor and microwave radiometer .

brookhaven science associates , llc the recovery act funds received by brookhaven national laboratory for the geothermal technologies program will be used to fund ( 3 ) separate projects: $200.4k will be used for fwp#est436neda and will enable bnl to elucidate the carbonation reaction mechanisms between the supercritical carbon dioxide and reservoir rocks in aqueous and non - aqueous environments , and to develop chemical modeling of co2-reservoir rock interactions .

$347.4k will be used to fund fwp#bch139 and will allow bnl to develop and characterize field - applicable geopolymer sealing materials .

$225k will fund fwp#ee632eeda and will be used to fund the development and implementation of suites of tracers consisting of compounds with different chemicals and physical properties .

geothermal technologies - on fwp#est436neda , we are working with alta rock energy for assistance in developing core samples and analysis for egs sites .

the key technical leader on this project will start at bnl the first week of january 2010 .

on fwp#bch139 , work is continuing on lab setup and equipment requirements .

on fwp#ee632eeda , a specification has been written for a subcontract to develop methods of encapsulating pfts in temperature sensitive microbeads .

we expect the process to be completed in january .

all other professional , scientific , and technical services $772,800.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports three geothermal technologies projects at brookhaven national laboratory .

brookhaven will collaborate with four other labs on the projects .

 ( 1 ) the project on elucidating a carbonation reaction mechanism of reservoir rock will result in , among other things , a report on chemical analysis .

 ( 2 ) the project on developing and characterizing geopolymer sealing materials will , among other things , result in field demonstrations and validations .

 ( 3 ) the project on determining the temperature distribution and fracture / heat transfer surface area in geothermal reservoirs will result in tracer and model development , including field test design and execution .

egs technology r&d: geothermal technologies program enhanced geo: this award provides funding to four subprojects in support of enhanced geothermal systems technology: 1 ) feasibility and design studies for a high temperature downhole tool - - ornl will perform feasibility and design studies for a high temperature downhole tool that can measure the porosity , lithology , and density profile of geothermal wells ; 2 ) wear - resistant nanocomposite stainless steel coatings and bits for geothermal drilling - - ornl will develop ultra hard , wear resistant nanocomposite stainless steel coatings and bulk components to increase the lifetime of drill tooling in harsh geothermal environments ; 3 ) working fluids and their effects on geothermal turbines - - ornl will evaluate working fluids for a geothermal turbine cycle based on property measurements , molecular dynamics modeling , and thermodynamic modeling to increase the turbine cycle efficiency in binary power plants ; and 4 ) properties of co2 rich pore fluids and their effect on porosity evolution in egs rocks - - ornl will characterize co2 and water bulk and pore fluids by vibrating tube densimetry , determine changing pore and fluid structures using neutron scattering , and conduct real time imaging of the dissolution front and evolution of porosity using x - ray and neutron computed tomography .

1 ) high temperature downhole tool - - a furnace for detector testing has been ordered but not received .

several scintillator materials for testing purposes have been ordered .

design for test apparatus for temperature and vibrations tests is in progress .

preliminary modeling studies have been performed to determine the change in tool response with the change in temperature and surrounding formation environment .

2 ) nanocomposite stainless steel coatings and bits - - ornl is working with carpenter powder products to gas atomize a 500 pound melt of an alloy specifically designed to devitrify from an amorphous state into a corrosion resistant alloy with increased hardness for use as coating materials in geothermal applications .

carpenter has scheduled this run for late january 2010 and ornl should receive powder in early february .

ornl is currently processing the same alloy using conventional casting techniques .

a parametric study was developed to analyze the effect of various processing parameters on the laser / metal interaction .

a preliminary conceptual design for an impact - abrasion testing apparatus has been developed .

3 ) working fluids - - a review has been conducted on the properties of supercritical fluids to identify where there are needs for additional or corroborative data and where models need to be developed for physical properties .

work carried out during this quarter will allow us to focus both experimental and computation efforts to address gaps and deficiencies in the thermodynamic database for the heat transfer fluids selected for binary geothermal power plant operation .

4 ) properties of co2 rich pore fluids - - the high temperature vibrating tube flow densimeter ( vtd ) was tested and disassembled to make repairs and improvements needed to restore reliable operation .

proof of principle experiment was successfully conducted to synthesize low density silica mesoporous solid inside the vibrating tubes of different geometries .

oak ridge , tn 37830-8050 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award to the oak ridge national laboratory consists of four projects .

 ( 1 ) the high temperature down - hole tool project will investigate the feasibility of developing components for enabling operation at higher temperatures , up to 400 degrees celsius for use in geothermal wells .

 ( 2 ) the project on carbon dioxide fluids will use four complementary approaches to improve geochemical modeling .

 ( 3 ) the project on stainless steel coatings and bits will have two stages for analyzing a specific type of metal and then showing the possibility of using complex metal - boron carbides into stainless steel matrix for a type of alloy .

 ( 4 ) the project for working fluids will take advantage of expertise in prediction and measurement of thermodynamic properties , and accurate modeling of complex turbine cycles based on those properties .

los alamos national security , llc this arra - funded project addresses the research topic area: tracers and tracer interpretation ? .

to adapt or develop reservoir tracers and / or tracer interpretation techniques that provide information beyond well - to - well connectivity such as fracture surface area or fracture spacing .

commercial development of geothermal energy requires quantitative characterization of temperature distributions and surface area available for heat transfer in engineered ( enhanced ) geothermal systems ( egs ) .

this project will provide integrated tracer and tracer interpretation tools to facilitate this characterization by developing and implementing 1 .

suites of tracers consisting of compounds with different chemical and physical properties that can be injected into wells and will interact in different and measurable ways with the fractured rock matrix .

2 .

single - and inter - well test designs and corresponding interpretation methods to extract the temperature distribution and surface area information from differences in the tracer concentration - versus - time histories ( breakthrough curves ) .

we anticipate significantly advancing tracer - based methods available to geothermal operators by developing ( 1 ) tracers that can be reliably applied to provide quantitative information on temperature distribution and fracture surface area , ( 2 ) tracer test designs ( both single well and interwell ) to exploit the use of these tracers , and ( 3 ) interpretive methods to allow this information to be used to provide practical guidance to operators to improve heat extraction .

the members of the research team participated in a meeting at the energy and geoscience institute ( egi ) at the university of utah on december 8 , 2009 .

the purpose of the meeting was to share information on the geothermal tracer programs at egi and the four national labs and to explore ways that the programs can interact and share information .

pete rose opened the meeting with introductions and an overview of the geothermal tracer programs at egi .

he described laboratory programs investigating the properties of different tracer candidates under geothermal conditions and field programs where fluorescent dies have been used in actual wells .

kevin leecaster , also of egi , described laboratory equipment and experiments used to characterize potential tracer compounds , discussed results , and presented plans for flow through reactor experiments .

paul reimus of los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) discussed methods for modeling tracer behavior in geothermal applications and described the laboratory capabilities at lanl .

contact paul reimus or the lanl spo office for additional details related to the meeting .

the meeting finished with a discussion of how the three programs , egi , inl , and the combined program of bnl , lanl , and pnnl , could establish working collaborations .

we agreed to share information on field programs and to work towards incorporating tracers from all three programs in future field tests as well as share in design , operation , and results of laboratory experiments .

on dec. 9th , the lanl , pnnl , bnl team discussed the next steps for 2004190- egs r&d and agreed to begin laboratory testing of pft compounds early next year .

we developed a tentative schedule and will have a meeting in late winter at los alamos to plan laboratory testing .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) los alamos , nm 87544-1663 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award has seven milestones , including identifying materials operable at high temperatures , developing a sensor model , and determining the optimum approach for flow measurements .

recovery act: decision analysis for enhanced geothermal systems , project 2004190 recovery act: decision analysis for enhanced geothermal systems project 2004190 .

not started yet .

start date is feb 1 2010 research & public policy analysis 77 massachusetts ave. , e19-750 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the development of a decision analysis procedure to assess development of an enhanced geothermal system ( egs ) .

activities will include the development of several models: a cost / time estimation model , a simple circulation / heat transfer model , and a subsurface cost / time model .

the models will be integrated to assess egs development and made accessible to egs stakeholders to provide feedback for improvements .

pressure sensor and telemetry methods for measurement while drilling in geothermal wells the scope of the proposed project is to develop a pressure sensor system consisting of silicon on sapphire based sensor transducer and sic - based electronics to operate at 300c in measurement while drilling ( mwd ) conditions that are expected to be found in a geothermal well .

performance and deliverables in accordance with the grant statement of project objectives .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award will develop a pressure sensor system operating at 300 degrees celsius and capable of surviving shock and vibration conditions similar to measurement while drilling ( mwd ) environments .

activities include integrating and testing a pressure sensor system and developing and testing a telemetry module and pressure system at 300 degrees celsius .

both systems will be tested for shock and vibration conditions typically found in measurement while drilling environments .

the technology can aid in the economic completion of ( enhanced geothermal systems ) egs wells .

altarock energy , inc .

this project will demonstrate the development and operation of an engineered geothermal system , including site and resource investigation , well drilling and completion , stimulation of wells to create a geothermal reservoir , testing of well productivity and assessment of reservoir characteristics , construction of a well field and power plant , and extended operation and monitoring of the constructed facility with continuous power generation .

altarock energy has not commenced the project activities as described in section 2.0 ( task schedule ) of the project management plan submitted as part of its application .

altarock is currently negotiating the award agreement with doe and revising budget and project activities in relation to these negotiations .

power and communication line and related structures construction newberry volcano , mckay butte road / nf - 600 la pine , or 97739-0000 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the building of a power plant and production facility that will be capable of generating no less than 15 mwe and operating for 30 years .

this will provide long - term power generation through engineered geothermal system ( egs ) and the first source of indigenous geothermal power in oregon .

the award will allow geothermal experts to enhance geoscience and engineering techniques that are essential to the expansion of egs throughout the country .

baker hughes oilfield operations , inc. recovery act: high temperature 300c directional drilling system the scope of work will be to develop a reliable drilling and steering system for the creation of enhanced geothermal systems .

the drilling and steering system will provide optimum performance in temperatures of up to 300×c ( 572×f ) in hard rock formations , and under the high pressures encountered in boreholes at depths of up to 10,000 meters ( 33,000 feet ) .

the drilling and steering system will be comprised of the following components: a drill bit to break up the rock formation , a downhole drive to rotate the bit , some steering means associated with the drive unit to steer the well in a pre - determined way , and a dedicated drilling fluid ( mud ) to serve several purposes including carrying the rock cuttings out of the wellbore .

project not started since award made very late in quarter: 12 / 29 / 2009 information gao gathered to improve the description the award has four phases and 26 tasks with activities including a concept review , designing equipment like drill bits and waste management equipment , conducting design reviews , manufacturing and assembling prototype equipment , and conducting integrated testing of the prototype drilling system under geothermal conditions .

colorado museum of natural history , the recovery act: education and collection facilty ground source heat pumps demonstration project recovery act: education and collection facility ground source heat pumps demonstration project no activity ; start date was 12 / 29 / 09 denver , co 80205-5798 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds installation of a commercial scale ( 100 ton ) ground source heat pump ( gshp ) heating / cooling system that will be operated and maintained for 2 to 3 years .

the project is expected to significantly reduce traditional gshp installation costs while boosting the efficiency of the gshp system .

activities will include , among other things , developing a detailed engineering design , procuring and installing the proposed gshp system , operating and maintaining the system for 2 to 3 years , and developing a national awareness campaign for gshp systems .

the successful design and installation of the system can drastically reduce building energy consumption , require less area and capital to install , and be economically implemented wherever access to recycled water is available .

the following award description contained little or no information that allowed readers to understand the general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

alliance for sustainable energy , llc geothermal demonstrations ; geothermal analysis literature search was conducted on the status of dry / wet cooling options for power plants .

interviews with candidates are scheduled .

research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) $1,200,000.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports enhanced geothermal systems ( egs ) research and development in air cooling .

the award will identify and analyze advanced cooling strategies that allow air - cooled geothermal power plants to maintain a high electric power output during periods of high air dry bulb temperatures while minimizing any water consumption .

the research will include activities such as an hour - by - hour cost / performance simulation of a cost - optimized 50 mw binary - cycle geothermal power plant at resource temperatures of 125 and 175 degrees celsius for three different heat rejection systems .

within the department of transportation , the federal railroad administration's ( fra ) high - speed intercity passenger rail program is working to build an efficient , high - speed passenger rail network of between 100- and 600-mile intercity corridors , as one element of a modernized transportation system .

this relatively new program is based on two pieces of legislation: the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 and the recovery act .

the 2008 investment act established new competitive grant programs for high - speed and intercity passenger rail capital improvements , and the recovery act provided $8 billion for these grant programs .

in order to meet the goals of the recovery act , fra proposed to advance the following funding tracks: projects .

provide grants to complete individual projects that are “ready to go” with preliminary engineering and environmental work completed .

corridor program .

enter into cooperative agreements to develop entire phases or geographic sections of corridor programs that not only have completed corridor plans and environmental documentation but also have a prioritized list of projects to meet the corridor objectives ; this approach would involve additional federal oversight and support .

on january 28 , 2010 , the administration announced the first recipients of grant funding for the high - speed rail program .

in total , 70 projects were selected for funding , but no awards have been made .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

fra is working with the selected recipients to refine the projects' scope and descriptions .

the selected projects are focused on the following three key areas that may provide transportation , economic recovery , and other public benefits: build new high - speed rail corridors that will fundamentally expand and improve passenger transportation in the geographic regions they serve .

upgrade existing intercity passenger rail services .

lay the groundwork for future high - speed passenger rail services through smaller projects and planning efforts .

although fra has not made any awards for rail projects , it has entered into five contracts to assist the agency with program administration and architectural and engineering issues related to the evaluation of proposals and feasibility studies .

for example , fra can use the architectural and engineering contractors for site visits to specific locations to confirm engineering assessments in proposals and check calculations of various loads and capacities .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for these five contracts: one met our transparency criteria .

one partially met our criteria .

three did not meet our criteria .

for the four descriptions that partially or did not meet our criteria , we collected information necessary to make the description meet our criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our transparency criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

since the program is relatively new , fra focused on selecting projects and getting awards out and did not issue any supplemental reporting guidance to eligible applicants .

fra officials considered the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance sufficient to outline reporting requirements .

while fra has not yet issued supplemental guidance , it may in the future .

the department of transportation and fra make high - speed rail project information available to the public in several forms: the department's recovery web site ( www.dot.gov / recovery ) .

this agencywide map provides the location , cost , and a brief description for each award .

fra web site and high - speed rail interactive project map ( www.fra.dot.gov / pages / 2243.shtml ) .

this provides information by region .

press releases .

also on its web site , fra provides press releases detailing the goals and plan for the high - speed rail program .

fra is also developing a more interactive recovery web site for the general public .

fra officials told us they have not received much public feedback about the high - speed rail awards to date .

however , fra has received questions on its web site from the public about job opportunities , and when it was soliciting grant applications , it received questions from industry officials about the application process .

the following award description contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

provide assistance consisting of mission - oriented business consulting services in support of fra's office of passenger and freight programs , with a specific focus on advising fra in the establishment of a grants management program that is commensurate with the significant increase in discretionary grant activity resulting from arra .

program support - coordinate information and develop processes to administer arra grant program .

activities include: development of tools and databases to drive workflow and assist fra in meeting statutory objectives and deadlines ; support fra in the capture , sorting and organization of all relevant grant and stakeholder information and utilize tools and processes to provide information to program leadership for analysis and presentation to relevant stakeholder audiences .

policy / process - assist with tasks such as project planning , grant administration process design and execution across the grants management lifecycle ( application and approval , award and disbursement , management and monitoring , closeout ) , stakeholder policy issues tracking , risk identification and mitigation .

communications and resourcing - assist program and fra leadership in managing communications planning by monitoring , cataloging and coordinating responses to stakeholder inquiries submitted via program email account and docket ; work with program and fra leadership to conduct workforce analysis to identify core capabilities , organizational structure and resourcing requirements necessary to successfully administer agency programs at current stage and into the future .

the following award description did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

booz allen hamilton inc. booz allen hamilton will provide general technical support in environmental engineering , historic documentation , and financial analysis and organizational planning to assist rdv in reviewing arra high speed rail grant applications .

there were no invoices submitted for this reporting period .

administrative management and general management consulting services information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a contract for activities such as conducting site visits to specific locations to confirm engineering assessments in applications and conducting calculations of various loads and capacities .

the activities that will occur under this contract will allow senior engineers from the federal railroad administration ( fra ) to do higher level assessment work on the various applications and interface with the prospective grantees .

the following award descriptions contained little or no information that allowed readers to understand the general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

archiect and engineering support services for passenger rail programs architect and engeering support services for passanger rail programs 3101 wilson boulevard , 4th floor information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a contract for assistance to the federal railroad administration ( fra ) as it evaluates and considers the feasibility of high - speed rail proposals .

activities under the contract include conducting site visits to specific locations to confirm engineering assessments in proposals and conducting calculations of various loads and capacities .

these activities will allow senior engineers from the fra to do higher level assessment work on the various proposals and interface with the prospective grantees .

pb americas , inc. a / e contract for support services in areas of intercity passenger rail programs and high speed rail programs .

465 spring park technology center $99,000.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a contract for assistance to the federal railroad administration ( fra ) as it evaluates proposals and considers feasibility of high - speed rail proposals .

activities that can occur under the contract include conducting site visits to specific locations to confirm engineering assessments in proposals and conducting calculations of various loads and capacities .

these activities will allow senior engineers from the fra to do higher level assessment work on the various proposals and interface with the prospective grantees .

provide environmental engineering and historic documentation support and financial / organizational planning support for analysis of high speed rail systems .

 ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a contract for assistance to the federal railroad administration ( fra ) as it evaluates and considers the feasibility of high - speed rail proposals .

activities under the contract include conducting site visits to specific locations to confirm engineering assessments in proposals and calculations of various loads and capacities .

these activities will allow senior engineers from the fra to do higher level assessment work on the various proposals and interface with the prospective grantees .

within the department of transportation , the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) grants - in - aid for airports program ( airport improvement program ) provides grants for the planning and development of public - use airports .

the recovery act provides $1.1 billion for discretionary airport improvement program grants , with priority given to projects that can be completed within two years .

faa had obligated nearly $1.1 billion in recovery funds by april 22 , 2010 .

as of april 22 , 2010 , about $650 million had been disbursed by faa to airports .

about two - thirds of obligations have been for runway and taxiway projects .

approximately $481 million ( 44 percent ) is being used on runway construction and rehabilitation projects , while nearly $220 million ( 20 percent ) is being used for taxiway construction and rehabilitation projects .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

for example , the denver international airport's taxiway project rehabilitated portions of taxiway p by removing and replacing identified distressed concrete pavement panels .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for aviation awards available on recovery.gov , as described earlier in this report .

an estimated 18 percent met our transparency criteria , 82 percent partially met our criteria , and zero percent did not meet our criteria .

for descriptions that partially met or did not meet our criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet our criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

for recipient reporting , faa provided technical assistance and other support to recipients but did not issue supplemental guidance .

faa officials told us they considered the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance sufficient to outline reporting requirements , so the agency did not issue its own supplemental guidance .

however , faa distributed guidance and provided technical assistance to recipients through each airport's division office .

faa officials said field offices have discretion in how to distribute omb's guidance .

one field official , for example , said the division office hired a contractor to oversee recovery act efforts who distributed information and guidance to every airport in the division by e - mail .

in addition , faa annotated , for a few fields , the template that recipients used to enter information into federalreporting.gov .

these annotations direct recipients to use information on their grant agreement as entered into faa's internal grants database .

many of the recipients we spoke with indicated that they populated the award description field with the description that was on the original grant .

for example , officials we spoke with for the quad city international airport located in moline , illinois , stated that they used the amount of the award , execution date , and award description from the grant award to populate fields on federalreporting.gov .

in addition , a number of recipients we spoke with stated that they received help from faa division office officials to complete their reporting .

according to faa officials , only a small portion of airport improvement program grantees — 10 percent , or about 300 — received recovery act funds .

specifically , according to officials at the midland - bay city - saginaw international airport in michigan , they received a tremendous amount of support from faa's division office with regard to identifying and explaining reporting requirements .

however , several recipients we spoke with reported problems with federalreporting.gov or omb's guidance .

for example , officials at the john murtha johnstown - cambria county airport had difficulty determining the correct zip code to use to accurately identify the location of the project receiving recovery act funds .

the faa district official was able to identify the correct zip code to enter into federalreporting.gov .

beyond recovery.gov , the department of transportation and faa make award information available to the public through various means , including the following: department of transportation interactive map of awards ( www.dot.gov / recovery ) .

this agencywide map , which includes aviation awards , provides the location , cost , and a brief description for each award .

faa web site ( www.faa.gov / recovery ) .

the web site contains a spreadsheet that outlines each award's location , cost , and name , among other things .

in addition , the web site provides a pie chart to display awards by category ( i.e. , runway , taxiway ) .

in addition , airport improvement program recipients use web sites and other tools to provide award information to the public .

several airport improvement program recipients we interviewed disseminate award information to the public on their web sites .

for example , the web site for the washington metropolitan airport authority , recipient of the dulles international airport award includes , among other things , a narrative description of the project and the estimated cost of the investment .

another web site , for the midland - bay city - saginaw international airport authority , describes the ongoing construction project but does not mention that recovery act funds are being used .

dulles international airport also erected a sign to alert the public that its runway project was funded by the recovery act .

according to faa headquarters officials , the public has provided little feedback on airport improvement program recovery act awards , but they were unsure if the regions had received any feedback .

the airport improvement program recipients we interviewed generally reported the same experience .

officials from los angeles world airports told us that they had not received many calls , but those calls were typically from construction companies or individuals looking for work .

the williamson - sodus airport in new york and the john murtha johnstown - cambria county airport in pennsylvania received negative media attention because the media considered them smaller airports and maintained their funds could have been better spent at larger airports .

however , recipients at both airports told us they received support from faa and the local communities that they service .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

rehabilitate taxiway d ( + / - 3,000 feet by 50 feet ) and overlay this project consisted of the design , bid and award , and construction phases for the rehabilitation of taxiway 'd' at the bartow municipal airport .

taxiway 'd' and associated ttaxiway connectors are approximately 3000' in length and 50' wide and had severe cracking and spalling .

the cracks were sealed and covered with a self - adhesive engineering fabric prior to the p - 401 overlay .

the project improved the quality of the pavement of our primary taxiway at the bartow airport .

this project now provides a safer environment for aircraft by placement of the asphalt overlay on a poor pavement surface which was oxidized and raveling , creating a fod situation .

the overall purpose and expected results of this project is the project improved the quality of pavement of a primary taxiway at the bartow municipal airport .

the project provided a safer environment for aircraft by the placement of the asphalt overlay on a poor pavement surface which had oxidized and raveled , creating a fod situation highway , street , and bridge construction airport improvement project to replace and rehabilitate runway and taxiway lighting and associated navaids .

this project will bring the current airfield lighting system into compliance standards , prevent further failures and increase safety , and reduce associated maintenance and operational costs .

current system tests show that the megohm readings are out of acceptable range to by an excessive amount .

the new system is designed to prevent pre - mature deterioration and reduce maintenance and operational costs while providing a more reliable and visable lighting system .

an overall cost savings will be realized over the life of the new system .

contractor has run 1,137 ft of homerun conduits from the regulator station .

contractor has installed one pull box at the end of the 512 ft run .

contractor has completed 7 runs of homerun conduits to the junction box where the conduits split to the various runways and taxiways .

contractor trenched and ran conduits to taxiways alpha and fox trot .

contractor has completed the conduit runs to taxiways alpha and fox trot .

contractor started installation of the threshold lights on the north end of 12 / 30 and installed conduit for taxiways alpha and fox trot through the threshold .

contractor completed installation of the threshold cans on the north end of 12 / 30 , ran 1800 feet of conduit along the north side of 12 / 30 , and set runway light cans .

contractor completed installation of the conduit and cans on the northwest side of 12 / 30 .

contractor installed ground rods in homerun junction boxes back to the regulator station .

contractor installed pull strings from the regulator station through the homerun conduits in prepartion for pulling wire .

contractor completed the work at the intersection of 12 / 30 and 18 / 36 and has cleared the runway safety area of 18 / 36 .

contractor completed the installation of the cans and conduit on the west side of runway 12 / 30 and is currently working on the reils .

contractor pulled conductors on the west side of runway 12 / 30 and completed the installation of the reils on the north end .

contractor pulled the home run wiring on five active circuits .

contractor began installing lights on the northwest end of runway 12 / 30 .

contractor began installation of the lights and transformers on the northwest end of runway 12 / 30 .

contractor backfilled and grated around the newly installed cans .

contractor completed installation of the cans and lights on the west end of the runway .

contractor tied in the existing lights on the east end of the runway and tested the runway lighting .

the runway was opened for air traffic .

less than 50% completed sierra vista , city of runway 12-30 reconstruction and taxiway j realignment design and reconstruct runway 12-30 and construct taxiway j realignment at the sierra vista municipal airport - libby army airfield .

the existing taxiway j pavement was removed .

all excavation and subgrade compaction was completed on taxiway j .

the pavement at the intersection of runway 12-30 and taxiway j was milled off and the existing base course was removed to finish grade .

approximately 17,042 square yards of subgrade at the intersection was repaired to eliminate unstable spots .

base course materials have been placed and compacted on taxiway j and runway 12-30 .

approximately 23,576 sy of concrete pavement was placed on taxiway j and 14,445 sy concrete on runway 12-30 that intersects with taxiway j and d. asphalt pavement was placed on the taxiway j shoulders and a test strip has been placed for the p - 401 asphalt on runway 12-30 .

electrical conduit crossings and extensions have been installed , guidance signs were installed and the shoulder pavement has been cored for the new taxiway edge lights .

the existing concrete storm drain pipe was extended 80 feet .

highway , street , and bridge construction sierra vista , az 85635-6334 more than 50% completed 373715-rehabilitate taxiway and 377259-runway incursion markings airport development - this project included the rehabilitation of t / w b and its adjacent apron , as well as constructing holding position markings for runway 12-30 .

this project included rotomilling approximately 20,000sy of pavement , excavating and backfilling 13,000 cy of material , installing 2,300 lf of edge drain , 5000 tons of bituminous surface course , 45,000sf of airfiled markings ( including enhanced and surface painted holding position markings ) , and other miscellaneous airfield improvements to taxiway bravo .

construct new taxiway , apron , and safety markings on airport to maintain safe taxiway and airfield for commercial , jet , and general aviation fleet .

highway , street , and bridge construction east wenatchee , wa 98802-9233 more than 50% completed 3-53-0084-030-2009 redwood falls , city of rehabilitate runway 12 / 30 and taxiway airport development to include runway 12 / 30 and adjacent taxiway pavement rehabilitation project at the redwood falls municipal airport ( rwf ) .

project scope includes bituminous mill & overlay of the pavement , incidental grading , and pavement markings per faa pavement management program requirements .

project will extend the useful life of the runway and taxiway pavement complying with the overall airport pavement management program at the redwood falls municipal airport .

project includes construction and engineering costs .

activities on this project include engineering and construction activities .

total project engineering includes preparation of engineering plans and specifications on the project , construction observation and administration , and grant assistance activities .

project construction tasks include completing a bituminous mill & pavement overlay , incidental grading , and pavement markings on runway 12 / 30 and adjacent taxiway at the redwood falls municipal airport .

project plans and specifications were completed in april 2009 .

construction and construction observation was completed september 25th , 2009 in the first reporting period .

on - going grant administration was also completed .

for this reporting period ( october 1 ? .

december 31 ) , construction administration , documentation , as - built plans were completed .

grant administration , reporting , and closeout procedures were also completed .

highway , street , and bridge construction redwood falls , mn 56283-2827 wood county airport authority ( inc ) acquire aircraft rescue and fire fighting vehicle replace old worn out arff vehicle with new more capable and lower maintenance vehicle for this quarter all payments have been made to the engineering firm for developing bid specs and awarding the bid for construction of the new arff vehicle .

this vehicle will be paid for in a lump sum upon delivery .

the truck has been delivered , we are awaiting maintenance / operations training .

highway , street , and bridge construction grants more than 50% completed economic recovery program construction to remove obstructions - relocate powerlines in the runaway 30 approach zone at the north las vegas airport .

this grant is for removal and relocation of a high tension power line located beneath the final approach to runways 30l and 30r of the north las vegas airport .

the power line is located approximately 1,200 feet from the threshold of runway 30l and 1,500 feet from the threshold of runway30r .

the lines are 45 feet tall ( agl ) and are listed as an obstruction in the airport facilities directory .

the transmission and distribution ductbanks are now approximately 95% complete .

four of the six transmission vaults are in place .

the next phase of construction involves the construction of the foundations for the six new towers , which will allow the transmission and distribution ductbanks to be completed .

cable installation is not expected to take place until the local power company can arrange for an outage on the existing lines .

electric bulk power transmission and control 2730 airport drive , suite #101 north las vegas , nv 89032-0000 more than 50% completed airport development: rehabilitate runway 3 / 21 survey , excavation , compacting , grinding existing asphalt , re - laying new asphalt , replace electrical lighting to insure safety of national air transportation system .

highway , street , and bridge construction 9000 w airport dr , #204 more than 50% completed rehabilitate taxiway e 4 from sta.9-46.86 to sta .

16-20.65 , rehabilitate taxiway e5 from sta 9+46.29 to sta 15+97.53 the objective of this grant is the rehabilitation of a portion taxiway e - 4 from the edge of the runway 17l - 35r pavement to just west of the runway hold - lines including the shoulders and electrical replacement , and rehabilitation of a portion of taxiway e - 5 from the edge of the runway 17l - 35r pavement to just west of the runway hold - line including shoulder and electrical replacement at the colorado springs airport .

this taxiway system supports the primary runway for passenger carriers and peterson air force base .

the project includes the reconstruction of existing concrete , replacement of airfield lighting , and an upgrade of all associated drainage systems .

the existing airfield pavements are deteriorating due to the existeance of alkali - silca reactivity ( asr ) and will experience failure if the pavement is not replaced .

project physically completed ; final inspection completed in november highway , street , and bridge construction 7770 milton e proby parkway colorado springs , co 80916-4961 more than 50% completed 3-08-0010-046-2009 metropolitan knoxville airport authority ( the ) ( ) mcghee tyson airport ( tys ) is the sole commercial service airport for the greater knoxville and east tennessee areas .

the airport has two parallel 9000 ft. runways with rwy 5l / 23r being the primary instrument approach runway equipped with an instrument landing system ( ils ) .

funds provided by the arra are being executed on twy bravo to reconstruct sections b1 to b6 ; twy bravo is the taxiway network that services our primary instrument approach runway ( rwy 5l / 23r ) that is used by both commercial and military aircraft .

in essence , twy bravo is our second highest priority paved aircraft movement area with rwy 5l / 23r being the first priority .

twy bravo from b1 to b2 was constructed in 1976 and received a portland cement concrete ( pcc ) maintenance overlay in 1986 .

this section of taxiway had received numerous spall repairs , crack repairs and full - depth slab repairs over the past 20 years and was becoming a revolving maintenance and fod issue .

as part of this project , an aggregate surfaced access roadway to the airfields automated weather observation station ( awos ) will be improved with a durable solid surface course ( asphalt ) .

the runway safety action team ( rsat ) recommended paving this section of roadway thus greatly reducing the potential for fod on the aircraft movement areas .

the arra funds being spent on this twy bravo project have a direct impact on the safety and level of service to the traveling public at mcghee tyson airport .

significant deliverables will be concrete measured in square yards and asphalt measured in tons .

funds provided by the arra are being executed on twy bravo to reconstruct sections b1 to b6 .

as part of this project , an aggregate surfaced access roadway to the airfields automated weather observation station ( awos ) will be improved with a durable solid surface course ( asphalt ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed 3-47-0037-057-2009 moses lake , port of rehabilitate t - hangar taxilanes ; install enhanced taxiway centerline markings taxiway rehabilitation and runway incursion markings .

this project will replace the failed pavements of that t - hangar areas , including the taxiway leading into the area , and the taxilanes within .

the project will also complete the enhanced runway markings .

this project is designed to replace the failing asphalt and concrete in the t - hangar area of the airport , and also includes the installation of enhanced markings for protection of runway incursions .

the completion of this project will do two things: 1 ) opens up an area of t - hangars that have not been previously usable and 2 ) create a safer environment for pilots .

the use of the t - hangars will increase the need for other airport employees to handle aircraft maintenance , fueling , tower operations , etc .

highway , street , and bridge construction grant county international airport , 7810 andrews street , ne , suite 200 moses lake , wa 98837-3204 more than 50% completed construct aircraft rescue and fire fighting ( arff ) building - phase iv fitiuta airport does not have an arff facility to comply with faa regulations part 139 for this airport .

therefore to comply and satisfy this requirement , a certified complying arff facility is required to be built .

this project is 18% complete .

preliminary items to start the project moving as in mobilization of equipment and personnel to fitiuta island is completed .

excavation of project site is currently in progress .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases , only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

final project checkout and reporting , developing grant cloesout papers .

information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds rehabilitation of the existing general aviation apron , which is the extensive paved part of an airport immediately adjacent to the terminal area or hangers , at the upshur county regional airport .

the rehabilitation activities will consist of removing the existing pavement section , lowering the profile grade of the existing subgrade , installing a new pavement section , apron markings , tie - downs , and lowering of the existing taxiway lights to accommodate the change in grade .

also the taxiway hold - short markings and the replacement of the runway light globes inside the “caution zone” will be enhanced to bring the airport into compliance with current federal aviation administration ( faa ) standards .

rehabilitation of apron , south field , oia quarterly activities include: project surveying and marking of project limit ; installation of temporary pavement striping and marking ; demolition of taxiway centerline line light and edge light fixtures .

procurement and installation of new centerline and edge light fixtures , demoliton of existing jet blast fence , utilities , and storm drains ; installation of water line and fire hydrant ; installation of miscellaneous asphalt pavement patches .

vendors: manufacture and furnish electrical and general co highway , street , and bridge construction 530 water street , po box 2064 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of the apron - - a surface where aircraft park and are serviced - - adjacent to the port maintenance shop , terminal 1 luggage area , and terminal 2 tug ramp area at oakland international airport .

the award will provide long - term pavement reliability to maintain airport air cargo , flight , and baggage operations .

rehabilitate runway 14-32 phase 3 airport development - rehabilitate runway 14-32 - pittsburgh international airport - allegheny county airport authority winter weather activities only .

highway , street , and bridge construction pittsburgh international airport , findlay and moon township p.o .

box 12370 $9,770,201.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of runway 14-32 at pittsburgh international airport , including activities such as improving pavement and grading , and updating pavement markings , airfield signage and lighting systems .

the rehabilitation is expected to maintain the airport's primary runway for night time arrivals and noise abatement procedures , thus enabling continued environmentally friendly and efficient operations for military and civilian aircraft .

rehabilitate taxiways d,e,f & g airport development - rehabilitate taxiways d,e,f & g - allegheny county airport - allegheny county airport authority project 35% complete .

winter weather activities .

highway , street , and bridge construction allegheny county airport , lebanon church road west mifflin , pa 15122-2605 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates 75,000 square feet of new airfield asphalt pavement .

rehabilitation activities include the removal of deteriorated pavement and base materials , the rebuilding of the base and repaving of the taxiways , the rebuilding of any necessary storm water drainage infrastructure , and the remarking and relighting of the taxiways in accordance with federal aviation administration ( faa ) specifications .

the rehabilitation will help maintain airfield safety and usefulness , preventing extensive maintenance costs , correcting an antiquated physical layout , and allowing for airport economic development .

airport development rehabilitate runway 17r / 35l highway , street , and bridge construction grants less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award completes a total rehabilitation project of runway 17r / 35l at laredo international airport that began roughly 7 to 10 years earlier .

the rehabilitation work encompasses an area of approximately 5,900 feet long by 150 feet wide .

specific activities include engineering , surveying , and demolition of existing pavement ; replacing underground drainage ; compaction of the sub base , adding a 6- inch asphalt base and a 16-inch concrete pavement ; and testing , grooving , cleaning , and repainting the new surface .

the rehabilitation will provide a safer runway that is less costly to maintain by using a rigid portland concrete that does not create foreign object debris ( fod ) and does not require frequent sweeping .

rehabilitate runway , rehabilitate taxiway the project is for airport development , specifically , the reconstruction / realignment of the taxiway and rehabilitation of the runway .

the project will enhance safety , protect the federal investment and increase the life of the pavements .

mix designs and test strips are complete .

paving is underway .

project is 60% complete .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports airport development activities at salinas municipal airport .

these activities include rehabilitating runway 08 / 26 , taxiway b , taxiway d , and converting runway 14 / 32 to a taxiway .

delaware river & bay authority construct runway ( design , phase vi ) - 09 / 27 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the design of a new runway and taxiway system at delaware airpark .

the project will include a new runway 9-27 ( 4,200 feet by 75 feet ) and a parallel taxiway .

the taxiway will incorporate the old runway pavement ( 3,582 feet by 60 feet ) plus new pavement ( 1,300 feet by 35 feet ) .

it also will include connector taxiways , a wetland mitigation site , lighting , signage and drainage .

the award will result in a design for a new runway in accordance with the 2003 airport master plan , which recommended a new runway to accommodate projected regional general aviation growth .

palm beach , county of airport development - the award purpose is to rehabilitate runway 05 / 23 .

the overall purpose of this award is to rehabilitate runway 05 / 23 .

highway , street , and bridge construction boca raton , fl 33431-6409 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates a runway in boca raton airport in order to improve its quality .

rehabilitation activities include removing the asphalt , relaying it , and marking up the two ends of the runway .

rehabilitate taxiways 'c'& 'l' ; rehabilitate taxiways 'd' & 'm' this project can be described as the rehabilitation of pavements on taxiways 'c' and 'l' and taxilane 'k' , including the replacement of existing taxiway edge lights with led lights , the replacement of failed drainage pipes beneath affected airfield pavement areas , and re - shaping of taxiway shoulders .

the project also includes the rehabilitation of pavements on taxiways 'd' and 'm' ( approximately 1,200 ft. x 50 ft. ) and the adjacent customs apron ( approximately 5,800 sf. ) .

to include full depth pavement reconstruction , replacement of failed drainage pipes beneath affected airfield pavement areas , re - shaping of taxiway shoulders , and adjustment of existing edge lights .

this project can be described as the rehabilitation of pavements on taxiways 'c' and 'l' and taxilane 'k' , including the replacement of existing taxiway edge lights with led lights , the replacement of failed drainage pipes beneath affected airfield pavement areas , and re - shaping of taxiway shoulders .

the project also includes the rehabilitation of pavements on taxiways 'd' and 'm' ( approximately 1,200 ft. x 50 ft. ) and the adjacent customs apron ( approximately 5,800 sf. ) .

to include full depth pavement reconstruction , replacement of failed drainage pipes beneath affected airfield pavement areas , re - shaping of taxiway shoulders , and adjustment of existing edge lights .

highway , street , and bridge construction 8 airport rd .

information gao gathered to improve the description the award is for rehabilitation at morristown municipal airport .

upgrade edge lights , taxiways a , b , c , d , and h ; upgrade edge light base housings runway 17l / 35r and taxiway h. upgrade airfield lighting and lighting equipment on select runway and taxiways .

electrical contractors and other wiring installation contractors will rogers world airport , 7100 terminal drive oklahoma city , ok 73159-0937 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award upgrades the 20-year - old lighting and lighting fixtures at will rogers airport in oklahoma city , oklahoma , which will increase energy efficiency , improve safety , and make it easier to obtain replacement parts in the future .

saw cut groove ( 7400' x100' ) .

mark ( 7400'x100' ) & transition the connecting twys to overlay on rw 17-35 stillwater reginal airport rehabilitate runway to increase safety and decrease delays .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates the south 4,800 feet of existing runway 17-35 to bring it to a level or quality equivalent to that of the north 2,600 feet of runway .

rehabilitation activities include a geotechnical investigation of soils analyses to determine optimum stabilization methods and parameters , as well as a field survey to determine appropriate grades and profiles for new pavement .

airport development .

columbia owens downtown airport airfield pavement rehabilitation project - phase iii ( taxiways , taxilanes , & partial apron ) during the quarter ending december 31 , 2009 , the paving operation and pavement markings were completed .

crews began seal coating , but stopped due to weather issues .

there were no hours completed during the month of december due to weather .

the purpose of this project is to rehabilitate and resurface major portions of the aircraft parking ramp and active taxiway at the jim hamilton - l.b .

owens airport .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award includes specific activities such as milling of old asphalt ; application of asphalt overlay , pavement rejuvenator and temporary markings ; quality control material testing ; and application of permanent markings .

the construction will improve safety , reliability , and general aviation service to the airport and surrounding area by improving the condition of the taxiway , taxi lanes , and apron pavements .

 ( an apron is a surface where aircraft park and are serviced. ) .

the airport provides facilities for general aviation traffic and flight training activities and serves as the reliever airport to columbia metropolitan airport .

the existing pavements were constructed in 1985 and were exhibiting signs of deterioration , including lane separation , block cracking , and loss of asphalt content due to aging and oxidation from sunlight exposure .

this condition has the potential to contribute to foreign object damage ( fod ) to aircraft .

columbus , civil city of rw re li rehabilitate runway lighting completed design & bid phases for project required to receive grant , substantially complete with site work .

highway , street , and bridge construction 4770 ray boll blvd .

columbus , in 47203-4764 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the design , construction , inspection and testing of a new electrical vault at columbus municipal airport .

the award will ensure the safety of aircraft in the event of a power failure affecting airport lighting and communication systems .

boulder city , city of the project is for airport development , specifically , the rehabilitation of the primary runway .

the project will enhance safety , protect the federal investment and increase the life of the pavements .

completed pavement mix designs , test strips and pavement preparation taking the runway project over 50% complete .

highway , street , and bridge construction boulder city , nv 89006-1350 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for runway 9r - 27l at boulder city municipal airport .

rehabilitation activities include leveling and covering the safety area around the runway in aggregate to provide a stable surface , sealing cracks , constructing a 2-inch overlay , grooving and repainting .

airport authority for the city of greenville & county of pitt terminal building addition ( lobby / circulation - 3500 sq ft and new departure lounge - 10,400 sf ) terminal building improvement ; footings poured , commencement of steel erection commercial and institutional building construction grants less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the expansion of a terminal and improvement of the facade by incorporating green technologies such as solar panels and ground source ( geothermal heat pumps ) .

the expansion will allow the pitt - greenville airport's capacity to better meet the community's air service needs due to increased air traffic .

acquire mobile aircraft rescue and fire fighting training facility acquire mobile aircraft rescue & fire fighting training facility approval of configuration drawings and start of fabrication for the acqisition of a mobile aircraft rescue and fire fighting training facility regulation and administration of transportation programs less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award will support preparations for the facility , including installing electrical components , running propane lines to and from the facility , as well as fabrication ( bending steel to specification ) and engineering .

the award will result in improved aviation safety , as this facility will provide training to firefighting departments throughout the entire state of virginia for the next 15 years .

asphalt overlay and pavement markings highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) dauphin island , al 36528-0000 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports activities to fix damaged pavement on dauphin island airport's runway 12 / 30 , the only runway at this airport .

the activities included reconstruction of the pavement on the entire runway , which measures 3,000 feet long and 80 feet wide .

the result of the award was to improve the quality of the runway .

transportation and public facilities , alaska department of akiachak airport relocation - stage 1 .

this project will construct a new airport facility approximately 1.5 miles northwest of the community , consisting of a new 60 ft by 3300 ft runway , 120ft by 3900ft runway safety area , a 35ft by 400ft taxiway with a 79ft wide safety area and a 200ft by 400ft apron .

the project is approximately 6% complete .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award replaces the current airport with a new airport that meets current design standards .

the result of this award will be an airport that improves safety and operational efficiency by reducing injuries , fatalities , and property damage , and by improving the mobility of people and goods .

rehabilitation of the center portion of runway 6 / 24 - 960 feet long by 150 feet wide - bring the entire runway up to the same length , at decatur airport .

decatur , illinois engineering & construction services for decatur airport highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports reconstruction activities for 960 feet of runway 6-24 .

these activities include pavement milling , paving , grooving , and marking .

the award will result in a preserved runway with strengthened pavement that meets federal aviation administration ( faa ) requirements .

airport development .

the rehabilitation of the primary air carrier runway and the construction of runway shoulders and blast pads .

project has been beset with weather delays .

no invoices received for reporting quarter other support activities for air transportation $5,400,000.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates the entire length of runway 13 / 31 in order to increase safety features and create a better landing surface .

additionally , two shoulders and blast pads will be added to the runway .

activities include milling , or stripping , the top layer of runway , putting down a new overlay , and repainting / restriping the runway .

reconstruct efd taxiways a , d , & f airport development - - reconstruction of taxiways a , d and f taxiways a and d are complete the existing concrete on taxiway f has been removed .

the base is being laid .

anticipated completion is before march 31 , 2010 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the reconstruction of around 42,000 square yards of pavement for taxiways a , f , and two portions of d at ellington airport .

reconstruction includes removing pavement that had been in place for over 20 years and replacing it with concrete pavement .

activities included construction phasing , sodding and seeding , pavement markings , and preservation of the existing electrical facilities along the taxiways , in order to meet new industry standards .

a b won pat international airport authority rehabilitate 1000 feet of runway 06l / 24r to maintain and improve safety for aircraft operations highway , street , and bridge construction grants less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for runway 06l - 24r at a b won pat international airport .

these activities include removal of the existing blast pad , localizer concrete pads and steel posts , electrical conduits , wiring and signs ; and construction of the runway extension subgrade and subbase , and base course .

the activities also will include milling the existing asphalt pavement and construction of pavement surface pending resolution of voids in mineral aggregate ( vma ) , a hot mix asphalt mixture property ; restoration of taxiway julia ; installation of runway lighting ; runway grooving ; and painting the runway and taxiway .

modify aircraft rescue and fire fighting ( arff ) building site work , drainage , foundation , structural steel , decking , finish exterior brick , electrical & plumbing rough - in highway , street , and bridge construction 9430 jackie cochran blvd. , suite 300 baton rouge , la 70807-8020 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the renovation and expansion of the existing aircraft rescue and fire fighting building .

the award will result in a building that will accommodate airportwide training activities and facilitate the use of an emergency command center .

st mary , parish of project completed / runway asphalt patched , rejuvenated , and restriped .

highway , street , and bridge construction harry p. williams memorial airport information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds rehabilitation of a deteriorating runway , runway 06 / 24 , which is approximately 5,400 feet long .

the rehabilitation covers the entire surface of the runway , patching places where the concrete joints have come through the asphalt , and where lightning has taken out chunks .

additionally , the runway will be coated and restriped and the new runway will meet general aviation standards .

windom , city of ( inc ) windom municipal airport runway project rehabilitate runway 17 / 35 ( approximately 75'x3,599' ) rehabilitated runway - concrete overlay of existing runway by placing 3 inches of gravel and 5 inches of concrete to replace runway asphalt surface .

the shoulders were re - graded due to the raised concrete surface .

shoulders were filled with black dirt and seeded .

highway , street , and bridge construction 48572 county road 28 , po box 38 $1,149,062.00 information gao gathered to improve the description this award replaces runway 17-35 , which was originally constructed in the late 1960s and is the only hard - surfaced runway available in cottonwood county .

the runway's condition was recently classified as "fair poor" in the minnesota department of transportation annual survey of airport pavement .

this award ensures continued access to aviation for business , medical , agricultural , and private use by re - constructing this runway and its taxiways .

rehabilitate runway ( phase iii ) - 09r / 27l survey and layout were performed , permits were obtained and contractor mobilization costs were incurred .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for runway 9r - 27l , philadelphia international airport's longest runway .

these activities include replacing the runway's pavement and lighting system .

the award will result in extended life for this runway .

install guidance signs ( phase ii ) install airfield signs .

demobilization .

highway , street , and bridge construction 100 terminal drive more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award encompasses the signage for all of the airfield runways and taxiways .

the award will update wiring for runway and taxiway edge lights installed prior to 1970 and signage last updated in 1991 .

palm beach , county of airport development - the award purpose is to rehabilitate runway 05 / 23 .

the overall purpose of this award is to rehabilitate runway 05 / 23 .

highway , street , and bridge construction boca raton , fl 33431-6409 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for runway 5 / 23 , boca raton airport's only asphalt runway .

these activities included removing the existing asphalt , overlaying the runway with new asphalt , and marking it up .

the award improved the quality of the runway .

the milling and asphalt pavement are 100% complete .

the striping is 95% complete .

the project is 98% complete .

grants more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a rehabilitation project for runway 18-36 ( 75 feet by 5,002 feet ) at orlando sanford international airport .

a pavement management program evaluation conducted by the florida department of transportation in 2008 determined that runway 18-36 was past due for routine maintenance , and therefore in poor condition , requiring total rehabilitation .

reconsturct parallel taxiway a , station 9+20 to 22+50 , including two connecting taxiways airport development - reconstruct parallel taxiway a , station 9+20 to 22+50 , including two connecting taxiways .

the existing taxiways have numerous large cracks and failures throughout the surface .

a site investigation has shown that organic debris ( tree stumps ) was used as a fill material under the existing taxiways and apron .

this organic debris is causing failures in the asphalt in several locations .

full depth reconstruction is required .

reconstruct parallel taxiway a , station 9+20 to 22+50 , including two connecting taxiways highway , street , and bridge construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award reconstructs approximately 1,330 lineal feet of parallel taxiway , including two connecting taxiways at shoshone county airport .

activities include removing existing pavement ; constructing the parallel taxiway , including transitional pavement , shoulders , grading and reflectors ; constructing connector taxiways ; and relocating aircraft tie - downs .

reconstruction of the taxiway will help maintain a safe aircraft operational surface .

peoria international airport - pia - 3912-arra construction of a new terminal building ( phase 5 - electrical , doors & windows & site preparation divisions ) at the peoria international airport , peoria , illinois .

architectural and building construction services for an airport terminal expansion .

commercial and institutional building construction 6100 w. everett mckinley dirksen parkway less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description .

the award supports work which will facilitate completion of the new terminal building at the peoria international airport , which replaces the original terminal building built in 1959 .

acquire aircraft rescue and fire fighting ( arff ) vehicle construction of the vehicle began in december 2009 , currently 19% complete .

99 sinclair drive , c / o muskegon county airport less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this vehicle will provide necessary fire fighting capabilities as required by the federal aviation regulation part 139 .

crack route and seal , 2' asphalt overlay on runway 4 / 22 highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of all of runway 4 / 22 , which is 75 feet wide by 4,000 feet long , at mankato regional airport .

rehabilitation activities include obtaining materials and services to prepare the area , removing old runway pavement , laying new pavement , and repainting the runway .

the rehabilitation will improve the pavement condition and extend the useful life of the runway by sealing the surface to prevent water damage .

dixon municipal airport c73-3914-arra ; waukegan regional airport ugn - 3908-arra airport development under the state block grant program , including: dixon municipal airport ( c73 ) - rehabilitate apron ; waukegan regional airport ( ugn ) - rehabilitate runway 14 / 32 .

engineering services for waukegan regional airport and dixon municipal airport .

power and communication line and related structures construction 3580 n. mcacree rd .

$2,155,560.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates the apron - - a surface where aircraft park and are serviced - - at dixon municipal airport ; specific activities include 11,000 linear feet of cleaning and sealing cracks and 3,450 square feet of pavement marking .

the award also rehabilitates a runway at waukegan regional airport ; specific activities include approximately 14,000 square feet of pavement marking , 8,200 square yards of pavement milling , and 4,100 feet of cleaning and sealing cracks .

the rehabilitation at both airports will strengthen the pavement to federal aviation administration ( faa ) requirements and preserve the existing investments .

albert lea , city of airport development: construct new runway 16 / 34 work this quarter involved site grading , draintile , and subbase .

highway , street , and bridge construction albert lea , mn 56007-2081 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds construction of a new , asphalt runway that is 5,000 feet long , reconstruction of the existing runway ( as a 35-foot wide parallel taxiway ) , and rehabilitation of the crosswind runway that is 2,899 feet long at albert lea municipal airport .

the activities will include grading , drainage and paving work for the relocated runway ; new edge lighting for the runway and taxiway ; new navigational aides for the runway ; new airfield signage ; and rehabilitation of a runway involving milling , asphalt overlay , and painting .

these activities will assist in accommodation of the airport's current and projected aircraft fleet .

rehabilitate apron to extend life highway , street , and bridge construction grants more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for the existing south paved asphalt apron - - a surface where aircraft park and are serviced - - and taxiways leading to this apron at the somerset airport in bedminster , new jersey .

these activities include an excavation to remove deteriorated asphalt surface and sub - base soils for placement of a geotextile stabilization fabric , new sub - base course , and asphalt pavement and pavement markings .

the award is expected to result in improved surface drainage .

tw st co construct taxiway relocate taxiway a ( construction phase 3 - 5000' x 100' ) construction substantially completed in 4th quarter .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will improve the safety of the airfield geometry and correct the pavement condition of runway 18-36 at findlay airport to be within the recommended federal aviation administration ( faa ) standards .

the runway will be relocated to 400 feet from the runway centerline north of runway 7-25 .

along with relocating the runway , activities include construction of connector taxiways as appropriate , and the completion of construction of a second taxiway to access the apron ( a surface where aircraft park and are serviced ) from the south .

transportation , wisconsin department of construct runway safety area - 01l / 19r the grant to general mitchell international airport improves the airport's infrastructure by constructing phase ii of runway safety area improvements to runway 01l / 19r .

the outcome of this project will be to enhance the safety and efficiency of the airport .

power and communication line and related structures construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the second phase of a project that will construct a tunnel to provide a clear runway safety area .

airport development .

rehabilitate runway - 09 / 27 .

paving , pavement marking applications and grading highway , street , and bridge construction 41771 highway 77 , p.o .

box 187 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of a runway at ashland / lineville airport .

rehabilitation activities will preserve airport infrastructure by removing old runway pavement , preparing the area , laying new pavement , and repainting the runway .

san diego county regional airport authority install airfield guidance signs and elevated runway guard lights airport development .

project mobilization including construction trailer ; review of product submittals ; beginning of construction of electrical dutc bank , laying conduit and surveying for location of trenches , pull boxes , and new lights and signs .

highway , street , and bridge construction san diego , ca 92101-1045 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will replace aging lights and signs throughout the san diego international airport with new led lights and directional signs that meet federal aviation administration ( faa ) standards and improve safety .

the new led lights also will be more energy efficient , thereby reducing the cost of their operation .

san francisco , city & county of reconstruction of a runway ( 28r - 10l ) airport development .

this project will overlay and reconstruct runway 28r - 10l to repair deteriorating pavement , improve the surrounding drainage system , upgrade the electrical runway and taxiway lighting system , and repaint runway markings to increase visibility and improve safety for aircraft on the airfield .

additionally , this project consists of pavement grinding , excavating , paving , runway marking , and installing of runway and taxiway lights .

activities included pavement grinding , asphalt paving , shoulders grading and watering ; demolition of existing steel conduits ; and installation of runway centerline light extensions , edge lights installation , wiring , transformers , and steel conduits on runway 28r - 10l .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports work at san francisco international airport .

this overall program consists of increasing the height of the existing perimeter fence to 10' in height and the installation of underground wildlife deterrent .

highway , street , and bridge construction $845,698.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports increasing the height of the perimeter fence to 10 feet and installing wildlife deterrent measures .

the award will result in securing the airport property from wildlife .

iowa city , city of rehabilitate runway 12 / 30 ( phase 2 ) construction , engineering design and construction observation .

highway , street , and bridge construction iowa city municipal airport , 1801 south riverside drive iowa city , ia 52246-5704 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for approximately 2,500 feet of runway 12 / 30 at iowa municipal airport .

this runway is 60 years old and the award will result in improved safety .

madisonville , city of ( inc ) other heavy and civil engineering construction madisonville , ky 42431-0000 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of the ramp and apron - - a surface where aircraft park and are serviced - - at madisonville municipal airport .

the apron is 272 feet wide and 385 feet long .

this award will allow the airport to continue its mission of catering to military , corporate , private , and recreational flyers .

in addition , the award will provide more space to aircraft when they are parked and tied down overnight .

transportation , wisconsin department of the grant to rhinelander - oneida county airport improves the airport's infrastructure by rehabilitating taxiways a , b , and d. the outcome of this project will be to enhance the safety and efficiency of the airport .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports taxiway rehabilitation activities , including removing old taxiway pavement , laying new pavement , and preparing the new taxiways for use .

transportation and public facilities , alaska department of allakaket airport improvements .

repair and stabilize the runway embankment , taxiway and apron to correct areas that have experienced serious differential settlement , side slope failures and erosion .

highway , street , and bridge construction grants ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports activities to improve taxiways a - e and aprons - - surfaces where aircraft park and are serviced - - including resurfacing and installing new lighting .

burbank glendale pasadena airport authority rehabilitation of taxiways c , d & g rehabilitation of taxiways c , d & g to improve pavement highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description taxiways c , d , and g at bob hope airport are deteriorating and reaching the end of their life spans .

this award funds the rehabilitation of these runways to bring them up to federal aviation administration requirements and give them life spans of approximately 10 years .

activities include removing the existing pavement by milling and replacing with new asphalt pavement , installing new striping , and applying creak seal and seal coat .

denver , city & county of rehabilitate a portion of runway 17l / 35r from station 494+57 to station 583+62 rehabilitate a portion of runway 17l / 35r from station 494 + 57 to station 583 + 62 .

pavement rehabilitation of portions runway 17l / 35r complex including runway 17l / 35r by removing and replacing identified distressed pccp pavement panels and portions of asphalt shoulders .

benefits include replacement of distressed aircraft pavement to improve safety , increase overall runway and taxiway pavement life , and reduce fod and possible aircraft damage fod can cause .

all work was completed september 3 , 2009 .

pavement rehabilitation of portions runway 17l / 35r by removing and replacing identified distressed pccp pavement panels and portions of asphalt shoulders .

benefits include replacement of distressed aircraft pavement to improve safety , increase overall runway and taxiway pavement life , and reduce fod and possible aircraft damage fod can cause .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the removal and replacement of deteriorated concrete panels on portions of the east runway at denver international airport to , among other things , reduce foreign object debris ( fod ) .

gulfport biloxi regionall airport authority ( inc ) mill and overlay runway 18 / 36 overlay and groove runway 18 / 36 ( 4,93'5 + - x 150' ) completed and closed out related contract on time and under budget .

highway , street , and bridge construction $1,828,988.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the overlay covers holes that develop in the runway concrete .

the grooving reduces the slick nature of the runway to meet federal aviation administration ( faa ) friction requirements .

the result of the award enhances the safety of landing aircraft and will help attract more general aviation aircrafts to use the airport .

airport development - runway 15-33 is in need of improvement to reconstruct pavement to reconstruct pavement , upgrade the lighting system , and provide better airfield drainage .

purchase construction materials & project administration .

highway , street , and bridge construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the reconstruction of runway 15-33 at harry stern airport .

reconstruction of this runway is a state priority because the north dakota aeronautics commission determined that the runway was in poor condition .

transportation , texas department of rehabilitate and mark runway 17 / 35 and reconstruct 17 / 35 end in pcc runway improvements to increase and sustain economic activity for the airport and its local community primary runway reconstruction at the curtis field / brady municipal airport highway , street , and bridge construction 3821 n us hwy 377 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the reconstruction of 500 feet of runway 17 / 35 involves pouring portland cement concrete ( pcc ) to fix the failures in the pavement .

the rehabilitation of 4,104 feet of the runway includes resurfacing with asphalt and remarking of the runway .

demo of existing asphalt apron , add de - icing catchment and pave the area with concrete .

po box 1677 , 1801 roeder avenue more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award reconstructs the portion of taxiway d at the intersection of taxiway e and a at bellingham international airport .

since the runway is currently experiencing rapid pavement failures , the reconstruction will improve the pavement and add drainage to ensure the runway has a longer life .

rehabilitate emergency generator and acquire index b air rescue and fire fighting vehicle the project involves the cosntruction of a new backup generator that will serve the airport terminal , airfield lights,fbo and arff building .

the project also involves the purchase of a new arff vehicle .

the generator is installed .

the punchlist will be completed next week .

the arff vehicle has been delivered .

waiting on the training which should be later this month .

highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds a backup generator at north central west virginia airport , including construction of two different facilities to house the generator and installation of the generator .

the award also funds the acquisition of the new air rescue and fire fighting ( arff ) vehicle including designing the specification of the arff and the purchase itself .

transportation , georgia department of federal aviation administration - grants - in - aid for airports , recovery act faa airport improvement program grant for non - primary development projects in the state block grant program .

this grant provides 100% federal funding for five general aviation airport construction projects in georgia .

this grant provides 100% federal funding for five general aviation airport construction projects in georgia .

all five of georgia's aviation projects received notice to proceed with construction in june 2009 .

all projects to be funded with this grant are under construction .

: adel - cook county airport: construct parallel taxiway for $656,000 alma - bacon county airport: construct parallel taxiway for $734,000 brunswick - mckinnon - st. simons airport: rehabilitation of terminal area apron for $5,864,000 mcrae - telfair - wheeler county airport: rehabilitate runway 3 / 21 for $890,000 peachtree city - falcon field airport: construct area 'c' aircraft parking apron - phase ii for $2,000,000 other heavy and civil engineering construction 600 west peachtree street , nw less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award funds projects at five airports that not only were ( 1 ) previously delayed due to lack of funds and ( 2 ) part of the state's respective airport layout plan and airport improvement programs , but which ( 3 ) could begin construction within 45 days .

airport development - design and construction of a building to house fire fighting equipment site work , framing , roofing , siding , plumbing , electrical installation highway , street , and bridge construction 143 caruso drive , suite 1 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides adequate space at the hancock county - bar harbor airport for fire fighting personnel , vehicle , equipment and their related functions .

the recovery act provides funding to states for restoration , repair , and construction of highways and other eligible surface transportation activities under the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) federal - aid highway surface transportation program and for other eligible surface transportation projects .

fhwa apportioned $26.7 billion in highway funds to states and the district of columbia through existing federal - aid highway program mechanisms , and states must follow existing program requirements and recovery act requirements in the use of funds .

fhwa has obligated $26 billion in recovery act highway infrastructure investment funding .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

as of may 3 , 2010 , fhwa had reimbursed states for about $7.6 billion ( 29 percent ) .

almost two - thirds of recovery act highway obligations nationally have been for pavement projects , including reconstruction , resurfacing , and widening projects .

in addition , $1.6 billion ( 6 percent ) is being used on new roadway construction projects .

transportation enhancements account for about $1 billion ( 4 percent ) of highway obligations .

of this $1 billion for transportation enhancements , the largest portion — 71 percent — went to facilities for pedestrians and bicycles , while an additional 18 percent went for landscaping and other scenic beautification projects .

 ( see table 7. ) .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for highway awards available on recovery.gov , as described earlier in this report .

we found that an estimated 25 percent met our transparency criteria , 69 percent partially met our criteria , and 6 percent did not meet our criteria .

for highway descriptions that partially met or did not meet our criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet our transparency criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our transparency criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

fhwa established a new data system and guidance to support recipient reporting , which may have affected the transparency of reported information .

for the recovery act , fhwa created a new database called the recovery act data system ( rads ) to help fulfill recovery act reporting requirements .

in addition to oversight and agency reporting requirements , highway recipients — state highway departments — can use rads to complete their recipient reports .

rads information , including descriptive information , can be uploaded by recipients into federalreporting.gov .

fhwa officials told us that highway recipients can also use rads information to check the accuracy of their own state highway award data before submitting the data as part of their recipient reports .

several highway recipients we interviewed said they relied heavily on fwha guidance , specifically rads guidance , to fulfill their recipient reporting requirements .

rads includes several data fields to describe highway awards , including one specifically designed to provide descriptions more understandable to the public .

after a state certifies a highway project , the highway recipient submits descriptive information to the database .

fhwa's guidance for rads provides specific instructions on this information ; for example , the project name data field in rads should be consistent with the name used in state planning documents .

in fall 2009 , fhwa added a narrative field to rads to describe awards in plain terms to facilitate public understanding .

fhwa division offices in each state were tasked with submitting this information to rads .

in several cases , state highway department officials we spoke to helped division offices generate this information .

colorado and ohio state highway officials , for example , told us they generated the information from various sources , such as state databases and project managers .

in some cases , the addition of this plain - language description field in rads may have improved the narrative information in recipient reports to make it more understandable for the second reporting round .

for state highway recipients that used rads data to complete recipient reports , the new rads description field was reported on recovery.gov .

the ohio highway department submits rads data to fulfill its reporting requirement , and for one pavement improvement project in ohio , the narrative information changed between reporting rounds as follows: first round project description: “it is proposed to widen sr104 from us35 to the new relocated sr207 by adding additional thru traffic lanes and a center turn lane .

pe only - 100% lpa funds.” second round project description: “state route 104 is currently a two - lane highway between u.s. route 35 and the new state route 207 extension to u.s. route 23 , and it serves as the northwest bypass of chillicothe .

the project consists of widening approximately three miles of roadway from two to four lanes .

it also provides for adding traffic signals at two intersections , the rerouting of pleasant valley road and the upgrading of entrances to the two state prisons located on the route .

one of the signals will serve moundsville road , a main artery for union scioto schools and one of the largest districts in the county ; the other signal will serve gateway industrial park.” as state highway recipients can choose whether to use rads data for recipient reporting , the addition of this plain - language description field will not affect all highway recipient reports .

moreover , fhwa is still working to gather plain - language descriptions in all states .

fhwa officials told us they regularly check that the new field in rads contains information for each award and subsequently work with fhwa division officials in each state to get the necessary information when it is missing .

because of the fluid nature of the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance , fhwa officials told us that aligning their agency's supplemental guidance with omb's has been a challenging process .

however , fhwa officials said communication with omb has improved over time .

during the first two reporting rounds , fhwa worked with omb to revise its guidance in response to concerns over the agency's definitions for the award amount fields , including amounts received and expended .

however , omb did not provide formal approval of this guidance .

for the third reporting round , fhwa officials told us they did receive written approval for fhwa's supplemental guidance , after again working with omb to address problems with the award amount fields , though it took 2 to 3 months to finalize and gain approval of this guidance .

in addition to the rads database and guidance , fhwa provided other reporting assistance to recipients .

first , fhwa held webconferences for recipients prior to the second reporting round .

fhwa also provided targeted assistance to state highway recipients to discuss specific problems or concerns with recipient reporting .

some state - specific factors may also have affected the transparency of recipient - reported information .

for the state's transparency web site , the massachusetts recovery and reinvestment office required the state highway department to write detailed descriptions understandable to the public .

massachusetts highway officials told us that creating these descriptions was time - consuming for the first round of reporting but that descriptions did not change for second round of reporting .

in georgia , the state highway department typically develops both a short and an extended description for a highway project .

according to georgia highway officials , the extended descriptions are written in nontechnical terms and include details beyond the project's name and location .

georgia officials told us they used these extended descriptions in fhwa's rads database and used them to fulfill recipient reporting requirements .

regarding award location , several recipients we interviewed said they experienced problems entering information into federalreporting.gov .

recipients faced difficulty entering zip code and congressional district information for awards .

while highway projects can occur in more than one locality or congressional district , federalreporting.gov allows only one zip code and congressional district per award .

in these cases , highway officials in colorado and pennsylvania told us that multiple entries for location would be useful .

in pennsylvania , for example , a project to construct curb ramps compliant with the americans with disabilities act in chester county spanned two congressional districts , forcing the state department of transportation to select a single zip code — the geocenter of the county — and one congressional district — the lowest number — to report for the award .

the department of transportation and fhwa make highway award information available to the public in several forms .

for example: department of transportation interactive map of awards ( www.dot.gov / recovery ) .

this agencywide map , which includes highway awards , provides the location , cost , and a brief description for each award .

fhwa online map ( fhwaapps.fhwa.dot.gov / rap / ) .

the map provides , among other things , the cost , type ( eg , bridge improvement ) , and a brief description of each award .

fhwa weekly summary of projects ( http: / / www.fhwa.dot.gov / economicrecovery / index.htm ) .

on its recovery act web site , fhwa publishes location , cost , and descriptive information on awards in three stages — awarded , in construction , and completed .

fhwa also provides a weekly summary of obligation and status information by state .

at the state and local level , recipients provide various types and amounts of award information to the public .

the six state highway departments we interviewed posted descriptive information on recovery act awards on their web sites .

several state web sites provided a list of awards , while some state highway departments provided award information in alternative formats .

in massachusetts , for example , the state highway web site made award information available through an interactive map .

other state highway departments provided more extensive award information .

for most recovery act awards to the state , the ohio highway department provides cost , location , and status information , as well as a description and photos .

for highway awards administered at the local level , some localities also used web sites and other tools to promote award information .

the city of olmsted falls in ohio used the city web site and newsletter to share information on the construction of a new bridge on state road 252 to improve safety by eliminating a railroad crossing .

fhwa officials and recipients we interviewed said they had not received much feedback from citizens on recovery act highway awards .

as they have no data for comparison , fhwa officials told us that they could not determine whether recovery act awards received more public feedback than regular awards .

based on their experience , public feedback on the recovery act often involves requests for a definition of a transportation enhancement and an explanation for why it is included in a highway program .

at the recipient level , state highway departments experienced varying levels of feedback from the public and the media .

massachusetts highway officials told us they were surprised at the level of inquiry received on the recovery act .

by contrast , new jersey and colorado highway officials said they had received little public feedback on recovery act awards .

according to colorado officials , the state highway department has not had to respond to many inquiries , since award information is available on the department's web site .

at the local level , officials from the city of olmsted falls in ohio told us that they had received both positive and negative comments on the bridge project .

in addition , officials told us that the availability of award information has kept public interest alive and created an outlet to publicize volunteer opportunities to landscape the project area after the new bridge is completed .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

us 6 channahon rd railroad st highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will extend the pavement life by resurfacing 3.0 miles on us route 6 in channahon and rockdale ( northeast illinois ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) transportation , maryland department of resurfacing pegg road from forest run drive to westbury boulevard highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) to have projects underway that will preserve our existing highway infrastructure and thereby prevent further decay , improve conditions , extend the overall life of roadways and bridges , and further other associated highway improvements .

in some cases , the projects will improve safety and environmental conditions for the motoring public and / or pedestrians .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) 0003129 resurfacing and related work on route 2 harvard littleton - resurfacing & related work on route 2 resurface route 2 from the vicinity of the littleton road bridge to the boxborough town line , a distance of approximately 4.4 miles .

work includes minor box widening to extend existing sub - standard acceleration and deceleration lanes .

contract has been awarded and project advanced to 91% of scheduled construction before winter weather forced paving work to shut down .

the project will resume in the spring .

highway , street , and bridge construction 10 main st. more than 50% completed transportation , north carolina department of highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k replace deficient bridge carrying nc 73 over long creek in stanly county .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed 0073019 highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will extend the bridge life by replacing the bridge deck and making other roadway improvements on 112th place over i - 57 in chicago in cook county .

 ( northeastern illinois ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed transportation , north carolina department of highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements this project provides for the acquisition of right - of - way to construct trailhead parking area to access the lake brandt greenway on us 220 north of strawberry road in guildofrd county .

this is a locally administered project bu the town of summerfield .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) 0729002 transportation , north carolina department of highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements this project adds sidewalks along sr 1149 ( lee street / old nc 11 ) in ayden from west barwick street to allen drive in pitt county to improve pedestrian safety .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) transportation , new york department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) , rural areas with population under 5k replace two culverts on ny route 242 in the towns of ellicottville and little valley , cattaraugus county .

this project will eliminate culvert deficiencies and ensure good structural condition .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed 5017283 highway and transportation , arkansas department of i - 40 off ramp - on ramp ( conway ) ( rehab ) highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) the purpose of this project is to rehabilitate 0.37 mile of highway 65 between the interstate 40 off and on ramps in the city of conway , faulkner county .

work includes pavement rehabilitation , cold milling , maintenance of traffic , pavement marking and miscellaneous items .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed transportation , georgia department of sr 9 from chattahoochee river to marietta hwy highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this is a maintenance construction project in fulton county .

this project is the milling and resurfacing of sr 9 from the chattahoochee river to marietta highway .

this section of sr 9 needs resurfacing because the existing pavement is deteriorating .

sr 9 was last resurfaced in 2000 .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed m003942 highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population this project will extend the pavement life by resurfacing on wondermere rd from greenwood rd to thompson rd in the village of greenwood ( northeastern illinois ) highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed transportation , georgia department of cr 41 / green top rd @ csx railroad 2 mi ne of newnan highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project is the replacement of a structurally deficient bridge in coweta county .

this project will replace the bridge on county road 41 over the csx railroad , 2.0 miles northeast of newnan , georgia .

the existing bridge , constructed in 1950 , is a 92-f x 21.33-f steel truss structure with a sufficiency rating of 21 .

county road 41 at this location is a rural two lane roadway with 10-f lanes with variable 3-f to 8-f grass shoulders with a posted speed of 45 mph .

county road 41 is an east - west roadway classified as an urban local road .

the project will construct a new 170-f x 40-f concrete bridge over csx railroad at the existing bridge site .

the approaches will consist of two 12-f lanes with 8-f rural shoulders .

the existing bridge will be closed to traffic during construction .

traffic will be detoured using an offsite detour .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) 0006956 west virginia division of highways highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k this project will improve safety for motorists by replacing the mcbee bridge due to condition .

the bridge is located on county route 17 at approximately milepoint 3.68 in wetzel county .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) transportation , mississippi department of highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k the city of pontotoc will resurface industrial drive / south industrial circle east of first national bank on hwy 15 to intersection of bolton street .

this project will make the road smoother and extend the life of the pavement .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) 0102008 transportation , iowa dept of us 52 from just s. of ncl garnavillo n. to just s. of ia 13 this project includes performing cracking and seating of the existing portland cement concrete pavement and then applying a hot - mix asphalt overlay on approximately 9.0 miles of us highway 52 from just north of the northern coprporate limits of garnavillo north to just south of iowa highway 13 in clayton county .

improvements will also include the addition of 4- ft paved shoulders .

the project will result in an improved driving surface and enhance safety .

us 52 from just s. of ncl garnavillo n. to just s. of ia 13 highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed transportation , indiana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population this project will improve the surface and rebuild sections of the bridge on sr 912 over i - 80 in lake county .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) 0900336 transportation , indiana department of hma overlay , preventive maintenance highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k this project will improve sections and extend the life of walnut street from center street to wayne street in dekalb county with a pavement surface overlay .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) transportation , florida department of cr 491 ( lecanto hwy ) from n of pine ridge blvd to sr 200 resurfacing - this award was reported 3rd quarter 2009 as 4261501arra091 in citrus county , due to the poor condition of the road , this project resurfaces 6.8 miles of county road 491 from pine ridge boulevard to state road 200 .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) citrus ( county ) , fl 34434-8125 less than 50% completed arra091 transportation , florida department of citrus way fm cr484 ( ft dade ave ) to kensington rd widen / resurface exist lanes - this award was reported 3rd quarter 2009 as 4261271arra107 in hernando county , due to the poor condition of the road , this project resurfaces 3.8 miles of citrus way and widens the 11-foot lanes to 12-foot lanes from ft. dade avenue to south of centralia road .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) hernando ( county ) , fl 34601-8659 less than 50% completed transportation , florida department of sw 72 st / sunset dr. from s.w .

65 avenue to s.w .

63 avenue resurfacing - this award was reported 3rd quarter 2009 as 4264161arra409 the city of south miami will enhance sections of sunset drive by resurfacing , reconstructing sidewalks , upgrading drainage , and installing median landscaping and irrigation .

this project will create a pedestrian - friendly corridor .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) miami - ft lauderdale - wpalm bch , fl 33143-3242 less than 50% completed arra409 transportation , iowa dept of s23 highway: g24 highway to ia hwy 5 warren county will resurface 3.2 miles of county road s - 23 with new asphalt between county road g - 24 and iowa highway 5 west of the city of hartford .

this project will improve driving quality by providing a more smooth riding surface .

s23 highway: g24 highway to ia hwy 5 pave highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases , only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

transportation , maryland department of updating existing traffic barrier and design new median barrier - district 4 highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) to have projects underway that will preserve our existing highway infrastructure and thereby prevent further decay , improve conditions , extend the overall life of roadways and bridges , and further other associated highway improvements .

in some cases , the projects will improve safety and environmental conditions for the motoring public and / or pedestrians .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) bel air , md 21014-9999 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the as - needed replacement of guardrails along us 40 , md 41 , i - 83 , and md 151 , located in baltimore and harford counties in maryland .

the award will result in increased safety for the traveling public .

transportation , alabama dept of stmaa - 0010 ( 520 ) highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project involves the repaving of 2 miles of state highway 10 ( camden bypass ) from state highway 28 to state highway 28 in camden .

wilcox county highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports resurfacing of the road , which is needed for safety reasons and to prolong the life of the road .

based on current traffic patterns , the repaved road may last up to 12 years .

highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will extend the pavement life by milling , patching and resurfacing various locations throughout kane county ( northeastern illinois ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the repair of roads which had significant pavement damage from winter weather conditions .

the project repaired the following locations: il 19 ( shales pkwy .

to barrington rd .

 ) ; il 25 ( i - 88 to banbury rd .

 ) ; il 31 ( huntley rd .

to miller rd .

 ) ; il 31 ( il 64 to indian mound rd .

 ) ; il 38 ( il 47 to east side of anderson rd .

 ) ; il 38 ( peck rd .

to west ave. ) ; il 58 ( il 47 to i - 88 ) ; il 64 ( il 47 to peck rd .

 ) ; and il 72 ( west of i - 90 bridge to il 31 ) .

transportation , colorado department of i 25 - commercial to main ? .

sb ( stimulus highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) constructs the purgatoire river pedestrian trail , adds street lights , parking lot paving , curb and gutter , drainage inlets , landscaping and sidewalk along i - 25 in trinidad .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) $7,044,806.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds reconstruction of i - 25 for both northbound and southbound lanes from goddard ave. to van buren st. , which will replace aging infrastructure and provide a safe transportation system to and from the city of trinidad , colorado .

this award includes construction of a multi - use / pedestrian trail along the purgatoire river , under and adjacent to the main st. exit and entrance ramps .

these activities will extend the city of trinidad's planned trail to van buren st. , a distance of 2500 feet .

construction includes earthwork , pre - cast panel retaining walls , riprap , trail / path paving , and pedestrian guardrail .

transportation , mississippi department of upgrade roads in sharkey county - streets in the town of anguilla - various streets highway infrastructure investment grant: rural areas with population under 5k this project will resurface various roads in the town of anguilla , sharkey county .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award resurfaces 3.85 miles of 20 roads to improve rideability of the roads .

hot asphalt will be laid over the old road , and new grass will be planted along the shoulders .

once construction is completed , roads will be restriped and new signs will be placed along the roads .

highway infrastructure investment grant: rural areas with population under 5k this project will extend the pavement life by resurfacing a section of shady rest road approximately 15 miles west of champaign ( east - central illinois ) highway , street , and bridge construction grants ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports road resurfacing from fas ( federal aid secondary ) highway 1532 to il10 .

transportation , missouri department of jackson county , route 150 widen from two lanes to four lanes from horridge road to route 291 highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) kansas city , mo 64106-2706 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the change of the original rural section of route 150 to a narrower urban / suburban section to reflect the community's future development and changing land uses .

roads , nebraska department of highway n - 116 , concord southwest highway infrastructure investment - bridge replacement - from funding for use in any area ( flexible ) this bridge replacement project brings this roadway to a state of good repair .

it replaced a 52-year old structure with a new quintuple 10' x 8' box culvert .

as of december 31 , 2009 , project is substantially complete .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the bridge is on highway n - 116 southwest of the town of concord in dixon county .

transportation , arizona dept of us - 95 ( 16th st ) @ i - 8 ( mp 24.2 to mp 24.8 ) in yuma highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) the arizona department of transportation proposes to construct a widening project in yuma county along us 95 ( 16th street ) , i - 8 to palms ave. highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports widening of the road in order to reduce traffic congestion .

transportation , california department of highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the city of live oak .

the project is described as: rehabilitate apricot st: n st - broadway highway , street , and bridge construction 703 'b' street more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award repaves 0.2 miles of apricot st. from north st. to broadway .

the resurfaced road will result in a smoother driving surface .

transportation , wisconsin department of this is a reconstruction project in dodge county on county highway g , beaver dam - randolph .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports pavement improvement activities on 2.1 miles of county highway g in dodge county to provide two 12-foot travel lanes and two 6-foot shoulders ( including 3 feet paved ) .

the activities will include pulverizing , injecting and relaying existing asphalt pavement , spot grading , culvert replacements , base aggregate dense , concrete curb and gutter , pavement , pavement marking and all incidental items necessary to complete work .

the award will improve rideability of the road and increase safety of the road's intersections due to grading to meet current standards .

transportation , missouri department of city of washington resurfacing of various streets resurfacing of various streets within the city of washington .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds asphalt resurfacing on approximately 3.1 miles .

the activities include sealing of cracks , providing an asphalt level course and a 2-inch surface course , and americans with disabilities act ( ada ) compliant curb access ramps .

the streets include w. eighth st. , w. main st. , grand ave. , pottery rd. , old route 100 , and route 47 to stafford st .

these activities are a cost - effective method to extend the life of the pavement , provide a smoother riding surface , increase the structural capabilities of the pavement , and postpone a costly reconstruction project .

transportation , oklahoma department of usdot - fhwa transportation infrastructure project in partnership with the oklahoma department of transportation transportation infrastructure project for the oklahoma department of transportation identified as resurface okc arra: multiple locations on macarthur , meridian , may &nw 10th highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) oklahoma city , ok 73102-3457 $2,202,725.00 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports resurfacing 6 miles of road in oklahoma city and installing new curb ramps in order to improve ride quality and extend the life of the pavement .

transportation , california department of highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the city of gilroy .

the project is described as: rehabilitate local street highway , street , and bridge construction information gao gathered to improve the description this award repairs 11 street sections that are roadway corridors for arterial and collector streets and repairs sidewalks that lead to schools .

the sidewalk construction project will improve the sidewalks for safety on the following streets: welburn ave. from santa teresa blvd .

to wayland ln .

 ; murray ave. from lincoln ct. to lewis st. ; sixth st. from wren ave. to eigleberry st. ; princevalle st. from sixth st. to luchessa ave. ; westwood dr. from first st. to third st. ; eighth st. from uvas park dr. to monterey st. ; forest st. from i.o.o.f ave. to sixth st. ; wren ave. from first st. to mantelli dr. ; miller ave. / wayland ln .

from arnold dr. to eighth st. ; mantelli dr. from santa teresa to lions creek dr. ; church st. from first st. to las animas ave. transportation , california department of pedestrian and class 1 bike path highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements this is a facilities for pedestrians and bicycles project by a local agency in the city of orange .

the project is described as: construction of a class i bike trail along the santiago creek from tustin street to collins avenue and other amenities highway , street , and bridge construction grants 3347 michelson dr ste 100 information gao gathered to improve the description the award will result in a grade separated and safe class i bikeway from central orange to main place mall and the discovery science center .

transportation , montana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements installation of accessible curb ramps on existing sidewalks at multiple locations within the city of missoula .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award will install between 100 to 200 sidewalk curb ramps in missoula , montana to make sidewalks americans with disabilities act ( ada ) accessible , install and repair sidewalks where the need is greatest , and upgrade existing sidewalks .

the award will improve walkability in missoula by providing a continuous sidewalk system throughout the community , provide safe and efficient pedestrian movement and meet the standards of the ada , as well as identify pedestrian corridors for creating preferred routing for schools , children , disabled residents , elderly , community and neighborhood trips .

transportation , rhode island department of state ccve / rvd installation for incident detection and data collection highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project involves the installation of radar - based vehicle detectors , at the same location as existing traffic cameras , to collect data on traffic volume and speeds .

the new detectors provide alerts to traffic management center operators to announce increasing traffic congestion .

technology will allow ridot to post travel time on electronic message signs ( 40 locations ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the installation of radar detectors at 43 stations , including narragansett , warwick , north smithfield , lincoln , richmond and middletown .

transportation , pennsylvania department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) bridge deck replacements for various structures in bedford county highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports bridge rehabilitation activities on two structurally deficient bridges in bloomfield and monroe townships on state route 2029 .

rehabilitation activities include removing the existing overlay , placing a new concrete deck , and paving the new deck with asphalt .

the award will extend the life of these bridges and improve safety by replacing the existing deteriorated bridge decks .

transportation , california department of highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the county of marin .

the project is described as: rehabilitate local street highway , street , and bridge construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the construction of a high - occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lane and bike path along us 101 in san rafael from 0.8 km south of coleman pedestrian overcrossing to north san pedro .

the current hov lane stops and starts at various locations in marin county .

this project , called the gap closure project , will provide an uninterrupted hov lane through the most densely populated section of marin county .

the award will result in an alternative to single - occupancy commuting .

highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will substantially improve the roadway by reconstructing a section of armour road in the city of bourbonnais ( east - central illinois ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award improves pavement and safety by resurfacing 1.23 miles of armour rd .

between us 45 / 52 and il 50 .

transportation , idaho department of stc - 6762 , main st ; bridge st to 6th e , st anthony highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will repair and overlay 0.5 mile of pavement on main street in city of st.anthony , fremont county and will include minor drainage improvements , replacement of traffic signal detection loops , and adjustments to manholes and valves .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description this award will repair the road , as it was in a state of disrepair .

highway and transportation , arkansas department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) the purpose of this project is to widen 4.91 miles of highway 167 between the saline river and north millerville in grant county .

work will include widening the existing roadway to 4-lanes with an 11' painted median and 8' shoulders , two bridges , drainage improvements , erosion control and miscellaneous items .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the widening of the road which goes to the growing town of el dorado .

this widened road , which will be 4 lanes , will connect el dorado to the highway system .

the award will result in reduced congestion and help spur economic development .

transportation , california department of resurface , repair , restripe and concrete repairs highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k and available for use in any area ( flexible ) this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the city of san buena ventura .

the project is described as: steet rehab .

olive street phase i highway , street , and bridge construction los angeles , ca 90012-3712 information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides a new roadway surface on olive st. , from stanley to main st. , because the road was in a state of disrepair .

transportation , california department of pavement rehabilitation - 2009 on system roads .

highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the county of ventura .

the project is described as: on system roads - phase a various locations highway , street , and bridge construction los angeles , ca 90012-3712 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award rehabilitates roads which were in a state of disrepair ; the rehabilitation will result in new roadway surface pavement .

the locations of the rehabilitation are mission dr. , beardsley rd. , corsicana dr. , simon way , west petrero rd. , center school rd. , tico rd .

and spring rd .

transportation , missouri department of north sarah street belle to page preliminary engineering associated with resurfacing and sidewalk improvements from north sarah street to belle .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) saint louis , mo 63101-1371 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports widening sidewalks , improving pavement , and replacing street lights and traffic signals to improve safety .

transportation , wyoming department of federal project i801176 , involving microsurfacing and miscellaneous work on 23.20 miles of i - 80 at various locations between carter and labarge , in sweetwater and uinta counties .

100% of funds are under contract .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will support preventive maintenance , including microsurfacing , to improve the pavement and safety of the road .

transportation , oklahoma department of usdot - fhwa transportation infrastructure project in partnership with the oklahoma department of transportation transportation infrastructure project for the oklahoma department of transportation identified as bridge & approaches co br: over spring creek , 1.0 mi west & 0.7 mi south ofus - 177 / sh - 66 jct .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award replaces a structurally deficient bridge that was scheduled for replacement in the next couple of years .

the award provided the county with the necessary funding to accelerate the construction process .

the new bridge will be approximately 1 / 4 mile in length and will provide improved safety and enhanced capacity for the lincoln county road system .

transportation , ohio department of highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population resurface a portion of the reed hartman hwy .

also , perform pavement repair , curb & gutter repair , replace signal loops with video detection , replacing pavement striping , place new rpms , and where ap highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) $799,432.86 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports rehabilitation activities for the reed hartman roadway from cooper to glendale - milford roads .

these activities include removing the existing deteriorated asphalt surface and replacing it with a stress membrane and a new surface course of asphalt .

in addition , ramps will be constructed at all intersections within the project area to comply with the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

video vehicle detection cameras will also be installed at intersections instead of wire "loops" in the pavement to improve intersection performance .

transportation , texas department of add shoulders : fm 372 ; highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award widens 8.58 miles of highway fm 2071 , from fm 372 to fm 922 , by adding shoulders to the north and southbound lanes to improve road safety .

executive office of the commonwealth of kentucky highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) grind pavement and rehabilitation of pavement on i - 264 in louisville , kentucky from newburg road at milepoint 13.710 to breckinridge lane at milepoint 18.410 in jefferson county .

highway , street , and bridge construction grants ( information not reported ) louisville urban service area , ky 40207-1112 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award is for a section of road that is in poor condition and will help to improve pavement of the road .

transportation , california department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the city of baldwin park .

the project is described as: ramona boulevard roadway preservation and rehabilitation ( a ) - interstate 605 to francisquito .

this project consists highway , street , and bridge construction los angeles , ca 90012-3712 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports repaving the roadway to make a smoother driving surface .

transportation , ohio department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) replace existing box beam bridge on sr 154 , located approximately one mile east of sr 7 at rogers , with a steel beam superstructure .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the replacement and modernization of a bridge in columbiana county , near rogers , ohio .

the award will increase the bridge's life expectancy to up to 75 years .

transportation , utah department of ada ped access region one - package 1 highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements this project constructed safe sidewalks and installed pedestrian ramps in various locations in region 1 ( northern utah ) .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) salt lake city , ut 84119-5977 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds construction of 43 pedestrian access ramps , 38 of which are at primary need locations - - those locations that had existing curb , gutter , and sidewalk , but no curb cuts .

the ramps will improve safety and compliance with americans with disabilities act ( ada ) standards and are located in the counties of davis , weber , morgan , box elder , cache and rich .

transportation , pennsylvania department of hawthorn bridge no .

4 highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) replacement of pa 28 hawthorn bridge over pine creek in redbank township highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award will replace a bridge that was built in 1931 .

transportation , maryland department of safety and resurfacing from garrett county line to east of tisdale street highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k to have projects underway that will preserve our existing highway infrastructure and thereby prevent further decay , improve conditions , extend the overall life of roadways and bridges , and further other associated highway improvements .

in some cases , the projects will improve safety and environmental conditions for the motoring public and / or pedestrians .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award improves pavement along 0.79 miles of us 40 alt .

the resurfacing will fix a deteriorating roadway and improve ride conditions .

transportation , washington dept of highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k reconstruct approximately 0.7 miles of speyers road , from the west city limits to fremont avenue , including curb and gutter , sidewalk , stormwater drainage system , and street lighting .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the activities under this award will improve pedestrian safety .

transportation , california department of highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements this is a facilities for pedestrians and bicycles project by a local agency in the city of san francisco .

the project is described as: pedestrian enhancements highway , street , and bridge construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award covers an area in san francisco bounded by 4th ave. , moraga st. , 9th ave. and lincoln way .

the sidewalk bulb - outs will encourage people to use alternative forms of transportation by improving pedestrian safety and comfort while also improving the connections between new cultural attractions in golden gate park , the commercial corridor , the university of california medical school , schools , a dense residential area , and several transit lines .

transportation , new york department of sfy 09 / 10 pmi paving ; orange and ulster counties highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) repave approximately 22 miles of state roadway in orange and ulster counties .

the top layer of worn , deteriorated pavement will be removed and replaced with new asphalt and fresh pavement markings to extend the service life of pavement .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) pine bush , ny 12566-0000 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports repaving of short sections and intersections along state routes 10 , 104 , 104a , 109 , 115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 120a , and 121 .

transportation , tennessee department of highway infrastructure investment: urbanized areas over 200k population this project is for improvements to the intersection of sr - 8 ( ringgold road ) at camp jordan parkway and including traffic signals highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the installation of 10 traffic signals and 4 pedestrian signals at the intersection of ringgold rd .

and camp jordan pkwy .

in order to help reduce congestion and improve pedestrian safety .

transportation , georgia department of cr 415 / phillip causey road from sr 33 to cr 412 / sumner road highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project is a roadway maintenance repaving project in worth county .

this project is the milling and resurfacing of county road 415 / phillip causey road from sr 33 to county road 412 / sumner road for a total project length of 5.48 miles .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the pavement had deteriorated , and the resurfacing will bring the roadway into a state of good repair .

transportation , connecticut department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) installation of epoxy pavement marking lines and intersections highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award enhances safety for both the motoring public and pedestrians in district 2 by replacing crosswalks , stop bars , and lane arrows at 396 intersections .

transportation , indiana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will improve drainage by replacing the structure on us 41 over jane feddeler ditch in lake county .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) saint john , in 46373-0000 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the drainage structure , called a "culvert," is located on us 41 over jane feddeler ditch , 0.08 km north of us 231 .

the new structure is a four - sided box culvert with a 10-foot span and 9-foot rise , and is 88 feet in length .

the new structure is a sound structure satisfying contemporary design standards and has an estimated functional life of 60 to 80 years .

due to its age , overall structural condition , and , more specifically , deterioration at the widening joints , the structure is being replaced .

south dakota , state of us18 - from the east junction with sd50 to the east junction with us281 ; us281 - from the east junction with us18 to the south city limits of armour .

 ; us18 - from the east junction with us281 to the junction with sd37 ; sd50 - from the east us18 junction highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) $6,323,010.95 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the milling and paving of sections of us highways 18 and 281 and south dakota highway 50 in charles mix , douglas , and hutchinson counties .

these sections of highway were rated by the south dakota department of transportation as being in "fair" condition , the project would take little time to begin , and the area that these roads are located in was economically distressed at the time of project proposal .

the total length of roadway to be milled and paved is 30.2 miles and has a life span of about 15 to 18 years .

transportation , indiana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) sr 39 - 1.25 miles n of e jct of sr 10 highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the purpose of the award was to correct existing structural deficiencies and safety hazards by lining the existing pipe .

the award supports lining for a corrugated metal pipe 5 feet in diameter and 58 feet in length .

an high density polyethylene ( hdpe ) liner is placed in a pipe when an existing pipe is structurally deficient .

a pipe liner is more cost effective in many cases than a full pipe replacement .

the award will result in a newly lined pipe with an estimated functional life of 80 years .

transportation , indiana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will restore the pavement on madison county road 600 w with a new surface course .

highway , street , and bridge construction grants ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the resurfacing of county road 600 west from county road 400 north to state route 128 in madison county .

transportation , indiana department of highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population , available for use in any area ( flexible ) this project will improve the traffic signals on market street from state st to vincennes street .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports a traffic signal modernization project .

this project includes the replacement of existing mast arms ( with span mounted signals ) , controllers , signal indications ( vehicular and pedestrian ) , and the installation of new vehicle detection at the following six intersections: three signals on east market st. at pearl st. , bank st. , and east 7th st. , and three signals on east spring st. at pearl st. , bank st. and east 7th st .

the vehicle detection system being installed is wireless , which eliminates issues typical to wired loop detection systems such as broken loop wire .

the pedestrian signal indications will visibly countdown the remaining crossing time .

new controllers and antennae will be installed where state st. intersects east market st. and east spring st. to create a coordinated traffic signal system .

signal heads will be led lights which are brighter , last longer , and much more energy - efficient .

transportation , michigan department of hot mix asphalt base crushing and shaping , resurfacing , trenching and aggregate shoulders .

to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state of michigan .

power and communication line and related structures construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides resurfacing for 1.37 miles of west holt rd .

from heatherton dr. to thornburn st. in ingham county to improve rideability and make the roadway smoother .

transportation , michigan department of cold mill , hma resurfacing hot mix asphalt base crushing , shaping , cold milling , resurfacing , ramp realignment , misc safety and drainage to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description in order to make the road smoother and improve driving quality , the award resurfaces 2 miles of us - 10 from the west county line of osceola to the us - 131 interchange in the vicinity of reed city .

transportation , michigan department of pavement remremoval , hot mix asphalt pavement , concrete curb and gutter and earth work to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides resurfacing for 0.5 mile to maintain the pavement condition and improve the ride quality of riverside dr. in port huron .

transportation , california department of resurfacing from austin rd to airport way highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) this is a pavement restoration and rehabilitation project by a local agency in the city of ripon .

the project is described as: rehabilitate roadway between airport way and austin road highway , street , and bridge construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the resurfacing of west ripon rd. , which is in a state of disrepair .

the resurfacing will result in a smoother driving surface .

transportation , mississippi department of north st / court st. ( 8035 / 8032 ) highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k the city of cleveland will construct sidewalks along court street and north street .

this project will improve pedestrian access along these roads .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award will cover 0.55 miles .

transportation , new york department of hudson valley rail trail: haviland road to comercial avenue highway infrastructure investment grant: available for use in any area ( flexible ) a project for a new / improved bicycle facility on the hudson valley rail trail from haviland road to commercial avenue in the town of lloyd .

all other specialty trade contractors ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description this award converts 1.36 miles of abandoned rail corridor into a continuous multi - use trail facility for bicycles by constructing the missing links in a publicly owned bicycle / pedestrian facility .

the trail will increase accessibility and mobility options , enhance the integration and connectivity of the transportation system , and preserve and improve existing transportation systems .

transportation , idaho department of stp - 7181 , gould st br , pocatello highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k this project will remove and replace existing bridge joints on gould street bridge in the city of pocatello and improve pavement markings along the roadway .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the repair of the bridge deck joint seals and associated concrete work in order to seal the bridge expansion joint system and protect the structural components below the joint .

recent bridge inspections indicated deteriorated elements of the gould street bridge , including the deck expansion joint seals , deck wearing surface , and girder bearings .

failed deck joints can cause extensive damage to bearings , abutment back walls , and diaphragms , resulting in improper movement of the bridge , diminished structural integrity of the structure , and further deterioration of the deck .

transportation , new jersey dept of chester branch rr rehabilitation - morris county highway infrastructure investment grant: urbanized areas over 200k population rehab of existing rail road highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) $5,800,000.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of 4 miles of rail track alignment including five rail spurs , bridge and steel structures , and grade crossings , as well as rehabilitation of the rail right of way to include the following: change out the rails ; remove and replace tie ; lay new ballasts ; new switches and switch timbers ; surface the entire right of way ; new runarounds and turnouts ; and brush cutting and wood chipping .

transportation , new mexico department of highway infrastructure investment grant: areas with population equal to or less than 200k this project will include grinding down existing old pavement and replacing with new pavement on 12th street from gold street to mississippi street .

in addition , it will include inspection and oversight .

on silver street from us 180 to 32nd street , new pavement will be placed .

highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) silver city , nm 88062-0000 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports pavement improvements to ensure that the road complies with the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

transportation , kansas department of greenwood hotel bus depot @ 300 n main in eureka highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements restore part of the interior and exterior and establish a transportation museum / welcome center in the former bus depot of the greenwood hotel at 300 n main highway , street , and bridge construction grants ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the renovation of the first floor and exterior restoration of the greenwood hotel .

transportation , alabama dept of stmte - te09 ( 927 ) highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements 'this project involves a historic downtown sidewalk and canopy restoration for hartselle highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the reconstruction of .24 miles of sidewalks and the canopy above the sidewalks in the historic downtown area of hartsell , alabama .

this reconstruction is being done so that the sidewalks meet americans with disabilities act ( ada ) standards and the canopy meets historical preservation standards .

the following award descriptions contained little or no information that allowed readers to understand the general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

transportation , north carolina department of highway infrastructure investment grant: transportation enhancements highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds one shelter , four trash containers , two tables , and one bike rack at the bayview beach ferry terminal in beaufort county , which will increase pedestrian access and safety .

transportation , michigan department of to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports pavement improvement activities by the clinton county road commission .

the commission will improve 4 miles of pavement on west colony rd .

from the west clinton county line to tallman rd .

the award will result in improved safety and extend the service life of the roadway .

transportation , michigan department of to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description in order to improve road safety , the award resurfaces 2.282 miles of shoulder on county road 498 in schoolcraft county from newborn rd .

to the county line .

the resurfacing defines the inside edge of the shoulder , adds additional gravel material and grade shoulder to proposed slope , removes excess material , and compacts the shoulder with a roller .

transportation , michigan department of to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports pavement improvement activities to resurface 7.8 miles of featherstone rd .

from m - 66 to engle rd .

north of sturgis .

the award will result in improved driving quality by making the road smoother .

transportation , michigan department of to improve the transportation infrastructure and the economic development capacity of the state power and communication line and related structures construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the resurfacing of .1 miles of shook rd .

in romulus , michigan .

the award will result in improved driving quality and increase the service life of the road .

the recovery act appropriated $1.5 billion to the supplemental discretionary grants for a national surface transportation system — which the department of transportation termed “tiger grants.” the purpose of the program is to make capital investments in surface transportation that will have a significant impact on the nation , a metropolitan area , or a region .

the act required the selection of awards on a competitive basis .

although grant agreements have yet to be signed , the department announced the selection of 51 awards on february 17 , 2010 .

department officials said they received over 1,400 applications from all 50 states , territories , and the district of columbia for projects totaling nearly $60 billion .

with $1.5 billion available , about 3 percent of the projects will be awarded grant funds .

the projects selected include a range of efforts to improve highways , bridges , rail , port , transit , and intermodal facilities .

as shown in figure 5 , transit projects totaled about $383 million ( 26 percent ) , and rail projects totaled about $374 million ( 25 percent ) .

these were the largest transportation categories for projects to improve the movement of people and freight .

these projects are geographically dispersed throughout the united states .

highways were the next largest category at $338 million ( 23 percent ) .

most of these projects are located in the west and south .

according to the department , these projects were selected because they demonstrated the potential to meet all of the selection criteria , which included such key components as the ability to have a significant impact on desirable near - and long - term transportation outcomes of the nation , a metropolitan area , or a region and the creation of jobs , and the ability to apply innovation and partnership to achieve long - term transportation outcomes or new approaches to financing , contracting , or project delivery .

as no tiger grants have been awarded , the department has not issued any reporting guidance or other assistance to date .

therefore , for this program , we could not perform our transparency assessment .

according to an official , the administrative oversight and reporting requirements for these awards will be similar to those for other department of transportation recovery act awards .

each tiger grant will be administered by the modal administration responsible for the majority of the activities within the award .

for example , an award for public transportation activities will be administered by the federal transit administration .

the modal administration will also oversee recipient reporting for these grants .

department officials have implemented steps to inform the public about the tiger grants and selected projects: department of transportation web site ( www.dot.gov / recovery / ost / . ) .

a web site was established to provide information about the tiger grants and to address general questions .

in announcing the grant awards , the department issued a press release along with a report listing the grant amounts .

the report also included for each project a brief summary that describes the project and its benefits .

 ( see table 8. ) .

the press release and report are also available on the web site .

department of transportation interactive map of awards ( www.dot.gov / recovery ) .

this interactive map will include the tiger awards and provide the location , cost , and a brief description for each award .

according to an agency official , there has been little public feedback regarding the announced grants or the information that is available on the agency's web site .

to date , most of the public comments on tiger grants are not from the general public but from unsuccessful applicants — that is , the 97 percent of applicants that were not selected .

under the $6.9 billion transit capital assistance program , the federal transit administration ( fta ) apportioned recovery act funds to recipients through existing program formulas .

recipients of funds include both large and medium urbanized areas , as well as states , which administer transit awards for small urbanized and nonurbanized areas .

these funds can be used for activities such as vehicle replacements , facilities renovation or construction , preventive maintenance , and paratransit services .

the transit capital assistance program also includes a new discretionary grant program to support transit projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions or energy use .

fta had obligated nearly all the recovery act transit capital assistance program funding as of april 5 , 2010 .

of the amount obligated , $1.6 billion had been reimbursed by fta .

almost half of recovery act transit obligations have been for transit construction and non - vehicle infrastructure activities .

this includes about $1.2 billion for station stops and terminals and about $1.1 billion for support facilities and equipment .

in addition , 30 percent is being used for purchasing or rehabilitating buses ; a majority of these funds are being used to replace or rehabilitate buses .

 ( see fig .

6. ) .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for transit awards available on recovery.gov , as described in the report .

we found that an estimated 50 percent met our transparency criteria , 50 percent partially met our criteria , and zero percent did not meet our criteria .

for transit descriptions that partially met our transparency criteria , we collected information necessary to make the descriptions meet our criteria .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our transparency criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

for the first two reporting rounds , fta created detailed assistance documents for recipients that may have affected transparency results .

fta annotated the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance — specifically , the data reporting model — by adding a transit - specific comment and example for each reporting field .

for some data fields , such as project name , fta directed recipients to use information from fta's grants database , transportation electronic award management .

in the award description field , fta outlined items that recipients should include in their narrative .

 ( see table 9. ) .

according to fta officials , omb's guidance is open to different interpretations and does not provide enough information to guide recipients to provide descriptions understandable to the public .

in its reporting model , therefore , fta provided clarification to help recipients do so .

several recipients we interviewed told us this annotated reporting model was very useful in crafting their recipient reports .

chicago transit authority officials , for example , told us that fta's annotated reporting model helped them interpret the ambiguous parts of omb's guidance .

for many of the transit awards we reviewed in detail , the recovery.gov reports directly reflected fta's annotated reporting model .

specifically , recipients included the introductory language and other conventions suggested by fta in the award description field .

for the third reporting round ( for the quarter ending march 31 , 2010 ) , fta updated its annotated reporting model .

however , officials told us they called this updated reporting model and all other reporting resources “technical and training assistance” for this round .

they did so because omb's march guidance directs agencies to not call any of their materials “guidance” unless they have been formally approved by omb .

in general , fta officials said that the agency has had to adjust its plans and processes for recipient reporting because of the fluid nature and late release of omb's guidance .

in addition , fta conducted webinars for each reporting round to support transit recipients .

for the second reporting round , fta's webinar provided tips on completing narrative fields that advised recipients to use plain language and avoid acronyms and jargon , imagine that you are writing for your mother , who will have to explain what is written to someone else , and think about the public , reporters , and auditors reading published reports .

according to several recipients we interviewed , fta's webinars were helpful in completing reports .

officials from the port authority of allegheny county told us that the fta webinars were the main source of assistance used to complete their recipient reporting .

fta also held a webinar with recipients after the first reporting period to identify concerns and collect lessons learned for use in future reporting rounds .

other fta efforts may have affected the transit transparency results .

first , fta produced a tip sheet to help recipients avoid and resolve problems when reporting .

a few recipients we interviewed also said that fta regional office staff helped clarify reporting guidance and solve problems .

officials from the greater attleboro - taunton regional transit authority in massachusetts told us they worked closely with fta regional staff to initially develop a description for the recovery act award , as it required more detail than normal .

in addition , massachusetts bay transportation authority officials told us that fta regional staff were helpful in answering questions that arose during the reporting process .

finally , fta regional officials reviewed narrative descriptions to ensure that they were understandable and accurate , though the volume of descriptions prevented them from doing a thorough review .

while fta's transparency results were generally positive , a few recipients we interviewed told us that space limitations in the narrative reporting fields affected their ability to fully convey award information on recovery.gov .

for example , officials from the greater attleboro - taunton regional transit authority said that they wanted additional space to explain activity details and status information .

massachusetts bay transportation authority did not face space limitations ; however , officials told us that the multiple activities under their grant , from purchasing paratransit vans to repairing fencing systemwide , did not lend themselves to a single description , as is the convention in federalreporting.gov .

beyond recovery.gov , the department of transportation and fta make award information available to the public through various means , including the following: department of transportation interactive map of awards ( www.dot.gov / recovery ) .

this agencywide map , which includes transit awards , provides the location , cost , and a brief description for each award .

fta grants digest ( www.fta.dot.gov / index_9440.html ) .

published on fta's recovery act web site , this searchable digest provides a short summary of each grant including location , cost , and an overview of activities .

fta spreadsheet of awards .

also on fta's web site , the spreadsheet outlines information on each award like the grant number and a short , descriptive title .

this spreadsheet does not include detailed descriptions of the activities within each award .

the source of the data — fta's transportation electronic award management database — limits the length of the descriptive field .

fta fact sheets .

for a limited number of awards , fta posted on its web site detailed fact sheets that describe the purpose and nature of the award .

in addition , transit recipients use web sites , newsletters , and other tools to provide award information to the public .

several transit recipients we interviewed disseminate recovery act award information to the public on their web sites .

in california , the orange county transportation authority created a dedicated web site for the county's recovery act transportation awards ( www.octa.net / rtw_response.aspx ) .

this web site includes , among other things , information on the transit activities in the authority's transit award , including bus preventative maintenance and facility repairs in irvine , california .

on its web site , the chicago transit authority posted press releases to announce plans and progress on activities .

press releases covered the delivery of the first hybrid bus purchased under the award and a status update on the replacement of 7 miles of subway track .

similarly , the northeast illinois regional commuter railroad corporation — metra — used its monthly newsletter to announce recovery act activities , including the construction of a new station on the rock island line .

a few recipients also used social media like facebook and twitter to make award information available to the public .

the metropolitan transportation authority in new york , for example , maintains a facebook page that contains a video explaining the long island rail road atlantic avenue viaduct span replacement project .

according to fta officials , most of the feedback on transit recovery act awards has been positive .

the press also reported on the use of funds for specific projects at the local level , but press coverage has decreased over time as the recovery act has become more routine .

many of the transit recipients we interviewed said that , in general , they had not received much public feedback .

pennsylvania state transit officials told us they had not received any public comments on the state's rural transit award , which involved transit activities like building an intermodal transit center and replacing buses in various locations in the state .

the port authority of allegheny county used its transit award to pay for a portion of the ongoing construction of its light rail system from downtown pittsburgh into the developing north shore area of the city , which involves tunneling under the allegheny river .

while the project received some negative feedback early on , port authority officials told us that those remarks have faded as the benefits of using public transportation to support development of the north shore have become evident .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

purchase of 17 replacement buses .

rehabilitaion of maintenance garage .

purchase of bus washer and vacuum cleaning system .

purchase of diagnostic equipment and tools .

invest in public transportation by purchasing 17 new compressed natural gas buses and related tools for repair , rehabilitating a bus maintenance garage , and replacing a bus wash and vacuum cleaning system .

this grant has allowed the birmingham - jefferson county transit authority to begin the administrative and soliciatation process to acquire 17 compressed natural gas buses and related diagnostic equipment and tools .

this grant sill also provide for the rehabilitation of a maintenance garage and replacement of a buswash and vacuum cleaning system at the same location within the next year .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems preventive maintenance and ada complementary paratransit service sustain mass transit service by funding alameda contra costa transit's ( ac transit ) preventive maintenance ( $23,165,013 ) , and ac transit / bay area rapid transit jointly funded complementary paratransit service ( east bay paratransit ) : ( $2,573,890 ) , financed by american recovery and reinvestment act funds appropriated through the federal transit administration urbanized area program ( section 5307 ; 49 cfr ) .

the purpose of this program is to sustain mass transit and paratransit operations in the ac transit service area and to preserve critical jobs to ensure service can be maintained at existing levels .

purpose of grant activities is to provide regular and ongoing bus maintenance and rehabilitation , including associated administrative costs , to sustain fixed - route transit service and paratransit service .

as one of the largest bus transit systems in the country , ac transit currently provides bus service to approximately 67 million passengers per year , in addition to nearly 500,000 paratransit riders annually .

this service covers a 364-square mile service area in alameda and contra costa counties , with over 100 bus lines providing bus transportation to 13 cities and 9 unicorporated areas , as well as to the city of san francisco via the san francisco - oakland bay bridge , and san mateo and santa clara counties via the hayward - san mateo and dumbarton bridges .

american recovery and reinvestment act funds allowed transit service to be sustained for nine ( 9 ) months .

these funds were committed to fund jobs critical to maintain fixed - route mass transit and paratransit services .

without the american recovery and reinvestment act funds , ac transit woul dhave been forced to make mandatory layoffs in all areas and draconian service cuts would have gone into affect last year .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ac transit , 1600 franklin street simi valley , city of shelters , buses , garage modernization , wheelchair scale , operating assistance and non fixed - route ada paratransit service fiscal year 2009 transportation enhancement projects eligible for funding under the federal american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) for the city of simi valley / simi valley transit include funding for the following: 1 ) transit shelter program ( $484,000 ) - like - kind replacement and upgrade of 26 deteriorated bus shelters , 72 concrete benches , and other amenities at bus stops throughout the city .

2 ) purchase of three replacement 40-ft buses ( $1,380,000 ) - like - kind replacements for compressed natural gas ( cng ) buses that have met their useful service life by accumulating in excess of 568,000 miles each .

the replacement vehicles will be low - floor , 40-ft new flyer buses that will have an expected service life of 12 years or an accumulation of at least 500,000 miles .

these buses will meet the clean air act standards ( caa ) and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) requirements .

3 ) transit garage modernization ( $563,949 ) - project to include work on electrical , ventilation and mechanical systems ; retrofitting the mechanic work bays ; upgrading the hydraulic lifts ; increased storage area and like - kind replacement of the bus washer .

4 ) wheelchair scale ( $5,000 ) - purchase of one scale to be used during the ada application process to weigh wheelchairs .

5 ) operating assistance ( $303,400 ) - 10% of total allocation to provide for operating assistance for the city's fixed - route and non - ada paratransit service .

6 ) non fixed - route ada paratransit service ( $303,400 ) - 10% of total allocation to assist with ada / dar paratransit operating costs .

have entered into a cooperative purchasing agreement with orange county transportation authority ( octa ) for the replacement of three ( 3 ) new flyer of america buses .

the design and locations for transit shelters is complete .

staff will be seeking authorization from city council to solicit bids by march 2010 .

architectural services on the garage modernization project have been approved .

staff will be seeking authorization from the city council by february 2010 to solicit bids .

purchase of the wheelchair scale has not been completed .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 490 west los angeles ave simi valley , ca 93065-1646 less than 50% completed los angeles , city of this grant applies the 2009 arra formula allocation of $8,022,665 to bus replacement .

the city of los angeles department of transportation will purchase approximately sixteen 40-foot over - the - road type coaches that will have an expected useful life of 12 years or 500,000 miles .

the vehicles that will be replaced have either met or exceeded their useful life of 12 years .

a federal ratio of 100 / 0 will apply .

the buses purchased through this grant will comply with both the clean air act ( caa ) standards as well as with the requirements of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

the goal of this project is replace approximately 16 existing buses .

the new buses will have a useful life of 12 years or 500,000 miles .

the new buses will also comply with current environmental standards as well as with the ada .

the city of los angeles initially anticipated that this project would be completed no later than june 30 , 2010 .

during the 4th quarter of calendar year 2009 , the project experienced slippage .

the city currently anticipates that the project will be completed by the second quarter of 2011 .

completion means that the buses will be assembled , delivered , placed into the service , and the grant closed out .

during the most recent quarter ( october 1 , 2009 to december 31 , 2009 ) arrangements were made with the proposed vendor to provide a sample bus for testing .

the sample bus is currently being shipped to altoona , pennsylvania .

if the sample bus performs as expected , production of the 16 buses are scheduled to begin in the summer of 2010 .

the city anticipates to begin taking delivery of these buses in the summer of 2010 .

to date , no funds have been expended nor obligated .

100 s. main street - 10th floor los angeles , ca 90012-3712 less than 50% completed transit capital - bus replacement transit capital - bus replacement of 6 hybrid gasoline - electric buses .

contract awarded on 8 / 11 / 09 to purchase 6 hybrid gasoline - electric buses from new flyer .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ca - 96-x051 napa county transportation & planning agency purchase 4 hybrid buses and construct multi - modal park and ride facility invest in public transportation - replace four 15+ yeal old diesel buses with new , clean air , gasoline / electirc hybrid buses .

in addition , funds will be used to construct a multi - modal park and ride facility featuring: commuter parking , transit hub , bicycle accomodations , and a potential future rail platform .

green building elements ( such as solar power ) will be incorporated into the design .

this grant will allow for the modernization of the transit fleet with the purchase of 4 gasoline / electric hybrid vehicles .

in addition , once the multi - modal park and ride lot is constructed , hundreds of residents / commuters a day will be able to make more efficient , safe and timely transit connections .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) preventative maintenance , capital cost of contracting , and paratransit offset this project invests the american recovery and reinvestment funds to preserve public transportation service by funding vehicle maintenance , providing fixed - route service , and help fund local transit services for the disabled community for 2010 .

the funds applied in this application will help reduce the potential reduction of these services as a direct result of declining local sales tax revenues .

due to declining sales tax revenues , mountain metropolitan transit is facing up to a 50% reduction in local fixed route services and up to a 10% reduction in paratransit services for 2010 .

this arra grant will allow mountain metropolitan transit to fund 3rd party captial cost of contracting for its fixed route service for 2010 ; fund a portion of the ada paratransit services for 2010 ; and fund building and vehicle preventative maintenance for 2010 .

as a result of these investments , the local match , annually budgeted for these grant funded capital expenditures , has been freed up to help preserve portions of the local fixed - route and paratransit services in 2010 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems grants ( information not reported ) colorado springs , co 80901-1575 santa rosa , city of invest in public transportation .

these funds will partially finance the purchase of one replacement bus .

the bus to be replaced is a 1998 40' diesel fixed route urban public transit bus .

this bus will have met the end of its 12 year useful life by 2010 .

the 1998 bus will be replaced with a 40-foot , low floor gasoline hybrid electric bus ( gheb ) fixed route , urban public transit bus .

this bus will be procured in accordance with fta's procurement requirements .

the bus will meet the clean air act ( caa ) standards and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) requirements .

these funds will partially finance the purchase of one replacement bus .

the bus to be replaced is a 1998 40' diesel fixed route urban public transit bus .

this bus will have met the end of its 12 year useful life by 2010 .

the 1998 bus will be replaced with a 40-foot , low floor gasoline hybrid electric bus ( gheb ) fixed route , urban public transit bus through the exercising of options on an existing contract .

this bus will be procured in accordance with fta's procurement requirements .

the bus will meet the clean air act ( caa ) standards and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) requirements .

expected contract award by march 2009 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1101 college avenue , suite 200 santa rosa , ca 95404-3940 less than 50% completed ca - 66-x010 tracy , city of ( inc ) invest in public transportation by imrpovement of bus stop including , but not limited to , installation of bus shelters , benches , and trash recepticles at over 50 locations .

the city of tracy currently operates 5 fixed bus routes serving over 90,000 passengers annually .

additionally , the city operates a paratransit system which services over 24,000 passengers annually .

the addition of bus shelters and benches will provide a safer environment for passengers to wait for the bus .

the city of tracy has not yet started its arra project this quarter .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) san francisco , city & county of infrastructure enhancement and maintenance projects invest in public transportation by restoring the door and step components on light rail vehicles ; engaging in preventive maintenance activities to preserve / extend the functionality of the sfmta's assets ; rehabilitating articulated motor coaches ; upgrading the sfmta's mileage and fuel tracking system for diesel and trolley coaches ; equipping an interim operations control center to support dispatching and rerouting of vehicles , incident detection and response , and voice communications with transit operators ; replacing the inductive loop cable in the subway ; procuring a customized software application for capital planning and grant management ; procuring new personal computers for the bus yards ; replacing sales kiosks for cable car fares ; replacing change machines in the subway system ; replacing track switches for light rail vehicles ; replacing the sfmta's existing subway fare collection system with a new fare collection system ; and engaging in rehabilitation and upgrade activities at various sites , facilities , and right - of - way locations .

this grant will allow the sfmta to restore the worn out door and step components of approximately 143 light rail vehicles ; engage in preventive maintenance activities to preserve / extend the functionality of the sfmta's assets ; rehabilitate about 35 standard and 27 articulated motor coaches ; upgrade the sfmta's obsolete mileage and fuel tracking system for diesel and trolley coaches ; equip an interim operations control center to support dispatching and rerouting of vehicles , incident detection and response , and voice communications with transit operators ; replace the worn out inductive loop cable in the subway ; procure a customized software application for capital planning and grant management ; procure about 70 new pcs for the bus yards ; replace up to 2 outdated sales kiosks for cable car fares ; replace obsolete change machines in the subway system ; replace approximately 19 worn out track switches for light rail vehicles ; obtain a new automatic fare collection system for the subway ; and engage in rehabilitation and upgrade activities at various sites , facilities , and right - of - way locations , including the sfmta's presido and burke facilities and right - of - way locations including 19th avenue , carl and cole streets , and duboce portal .

all applicable projects are under contract , with the sfmta actively working on performing preventive maintenance on its vehicles , implementing automatic fare collection equipment in the subway , rehabilitating the doors and steps of light rail vehicles , installing new workstations at bus yards , implementing various infrastructure and facility enhancements , and establishing the central control interim line management center .

the sfmta has completed the installation of change machines in the subway station .

 ( information not reported ) san francisco , ca 94103-5417 less than 50% completed lease ( 46 ) 40-ft buses monterey - salinas transit capitalized preventive maintenance ; lease ( 46 ) 40-ft buses , acquire mobile fare coll equip .

the project consists of the purchase up to forty ( 40 ) buses from gillig corp. and six ( 6 ) trolleys from optima bus corp. to replace 38 buses in current fleet and expand by 8 buses .

this will fund the remaining payments on bus financing payments 17 , 18 , 19 , and 20 .

buses have been paid off .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1 ryan ranch road purchase of 2 replacement paratransit vehicles .

invest in public transportation by purchasing new replacement paratransit vehicles .

this grant will allow the purchase of two paratransit vehicles to replace old vehicles that are currently in the fleet .

as a result of these investments , the agency will be able to continue to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , and accessible for people with disabilities .

 ( information not reported ) redondo beach , city of ( inc ) 30' and 35' bus replacement and bus stop improvements invest in public transportation by purchasing replacement transit vehicles and implementing bus stop improvements .

the fund will be utilized to 1 ) purchase up to three 18 passenger , 30' , cng - powered cut - away buses that have an expected useful life of five years or 150,000 miles ; 2 ) purchase one 29-passenger , 32' , cng - powered bus that has an expected useful life of 10 years or 350,000 miles ; and 3 ) to implement bus stop improvements throughout the city of redondo beach , which will include replacing the old concrete and terracotta bus benches with new , more durable and aesthetically pleasing corrosion resistant steel construction benches , replacing pre - existing bus stop sign poles with new standard rail poles , replacing bus stop signs with new high - visibility reflective signs , and replacing old and deteriorated or missing trash receptacles with new metal vandal resistant receptacles .

this grant allows the city of redondo beach to move forward with the purchasing of three , up to 27' , cng powered cutaway buses and procuring of bus stop improvements .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems redondo beach , ca 90277-2836 more than 50% completed transportation , florida department of fy 09 ( 4 ) arra locomotives invest the 2009 arra formula allocation of $13,431,438 to purchase up to four ( 4 ) locomotives # 802,803,804 and 805 .

the original locomotives were manufactured in the mid 1960's and were last remanufactured in 1988 .

they lack any fuel efficient technology and are not required to meet any epa emission standards .

due to the design of the hep unit , these locomotives consume excessive fuel .

the locomotives have an approximate expected useful life of 25 years .

a federal ratio of 100 / 100 will apply .

the new locomotives wll meet the clean air act ( caa ) standards and the american with disabilites act ( ada ) requirements .

this grant also includes transit enhancements ( $135,670 ) that will fund various station beautification improvements such as landscaping , painting , etc .

sfrta issued the notice to proceed to the consultants on september 22 , 2009 .

at this time the solicitation package is being prepared and is due to be advertised by the end of januar , 2010 .

it is estimated that the procurement period will be sixty ( 60 ) days .

the estimated notice of award to the manufacturer will be in late april early may .

all activities are in complaince with arra regulations .

pompano beach , fl 33064-2046 less than 50% completed fl - 96-x015-00 purchase of 4 replacement buses ; 3 replacement trolley buses ; enhancements replacement and security equipment installation .

invest in public transportation by purchasing new 35 ft low floor clean diesel transit buses , installing security cameras and annunciation systems on buses and replacing worn out transit enhancements to include , bus stops signs , bus shelters , benches and trash cans .

this grant allowed the transit agency to purchase 4 low - floor clean diesel and 3 trolley clean diesel buses , replace worn out bus shelters , trash cans , benches , install security cameras on 8 existing buses and install automatic stop announcements systems on 5 buses .

as a result of these investments , the transit agency will be able to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , and more enviromentally friendly .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed sioux city , city of 1 medium duty bus - flex funds purchase one ( 1 ) 31 ft low - floor medium duty ( md ) expansion bus .

the vehicle will help to expand the spare ratio for the fleet and provide much needed reliable service backup for the aging fleet .

these are flex funds through nebraska .

the vehicle will be procured via state of minnesota consortium .

one ( 1 ) 31 ft. medium duty ( md ) low - floor bus .

the md bus is an expansion vehicle for enhancement of the transit service primarily for disabled passengers and to provide backup for fixed route service .

this unit will increase the spare ratio to 4 units .

with 21 units in peak service , the 4 spares will increase the ratio to 16% once the vehicle is acquired .

2505 east 4th street , po box 447 sioux city , ia 51102-0447 purchase 15 biodiesel replacement buses .

invest in public transportation by purchasing new biodiesel buses .

the purchase of 15 low - floor , biodiesel , replacement buses allows madison county transit district to continue providing safe and reliable public transportation services in a more environmentally friendly manner .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems granite city , il 62040-2868 less than 50% completed pace , the suburban bus division of the regional transportation authority purchase 58 replacement fixed route 30' buses , puchase 190 replacement paratransit vehicles , and purchase 76 replacement support vehicles for maintenance and supervisory personnel as well as staff at headquarters .

invest in public transportation by purchasing 58 30' transit buses , 190 paratransit vehicles and a minimum of 76 support vehicles for maintenance and supervisory personnel as well as staff at headquarters .

this grant allows pace to purchase 58 30' replacement fixed route buses , 190 replacement paratransit vehicles , and 76 replacement support vehicles for maintenance and supervisory personnel as well as staff at headquarters .

as a result of these investments , pace will be able to provide public transportation service that is safer and more reliable .

in this quarter , we have awarded a contract for inspection services .

we received delivery of 10 trucks with plows for maintenance / supervisory personnel and 6 paratransit buses .

production will continue for the paratransit buses next quarter .

production will begin in february for the fixed route buses .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems arlington heights , il 60005-4412 less than 50% completed capital projects: buses , vans and facility improvements .

investing in public transportation by purchasing four new 35' buses to replace four 1993 35' buses , by purchasing two new wheelchair lift vans to replace two 1999 wheelchair vans , by repairing and remodeling the bus storage building built in 1980 , by installing a water recycling system in the existing bus washer to reduce the amount of water used , and by repairing and seal coating the existing asphalt parking lot and driving lanes around the transit administration building .

although no jobs were created and no funds were paid out this quarter , the city of decatur has already awarded purchase orders for 4 buses ( $1,500,000 ) and for 2 wheelchair lift vans ( $104,202 ) .

the buses are tentatively scheduled to be built by gillig corp. about july 15 , 2010 , and the 2 vans were tentatively scheduled for delivery around january 1 , 2010 .

staff advertised nationally for bids for the installation of a water recycling system .

since only one bid was submitted by the dec. 3 deadline and that bid was significantly higher than the pre - bid estimate , this project will be re - bid .

staff has been preparing to advertise for bids for the other facility improvement projects .

those projects are expected to be under contract this quarter , or as soon as the weather permits .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed il - 96-x014 arra funds for buses , lift , generator ots is investing in public transportation by purchasing three new transit busses , installing a commercial generator at the transit office , and rehabilitating the bus garage by installing a new hydraulic bus lift to assist with maintenance operations .

this grant will allow the transit agency to purchase three low - floor transit busses to replace busses which have exceeded their useful life .

the transit agency is also purchasing a hydraulic bus lift for the maintenance garage to assist with repairs and maintenance of the new busses .

the transit agency is also installing a commercial generator at the main transit office , so that transit operations can continue through times when the city is without power .

january 2010 update: three transit busses are on order from gillig .

the hydraulic lift will be installed in january 2010 .

the commercial generator has been ordered .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems owensboro transit sytem , 430 allen street less than 50% completed shreveport transit management , inc purchase buses , renovate facility , preventive maintenance , purchase miscellaneous equipment .

invest in public transportation by purchase of new compressed natural gas ( cng ) buses ; constructiopn of a cng fuel station ; conversion of existing maintenance facility to cng fueling ; rehabilitate / upgrade 22 year old bus terminal ; acquire maintenance support ewuipment , mobile surgeillance / security equipment , and upgrade of maintenance record system ; and perform preventive maintenance on existing buses .

this grnt allowd the transit agency to purchase a new computer and map software for the teminal information booth , purchase the first bus bike racks , select a bus vendor from which to purchase the first 5 cng buses , and issue reqest for bids for an architect to design and manage consturction of a cng fuel station and upgrade of maintenance facility .

as a result of these activities the agency's customers will be able to optain accurate information on best bus route to a sepcific destination , have a means to combine bus / bike transportation and prepare to purchase the first environmentally friendly buses and their support system .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems grants less than 50% completed purchase of two new vehicles and provide preventative maintenance on existing buses .

invest inpublic transportation by purchasing new wheelchair lift buses and performing preventative maintenance on existing buses .

this grant will allow the transit agency to purchase two new wheelchair lift equipped vehicles to expand its fleet and to conduct preventative maintenance on 4 existing vehicles .

as a result of these investments the the transit agency will be able to continue offering the public a safe , reliable and accessible service .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems la - 96-x013-00 this grant will allow mart to invest in public transportation by allowing us to purchase new vehicles and equipment and to construct a vehicle storage facility to protect our investment .

a budget of $750,000 is allocated to the purchase of 3 new hybrid buses to replace existing diesel buses for use on our fixed route service within the fitchburg / leominster / gardner service area .

this investment will allow us to bring down the maintenance costs by reducing fuel quantities and the disposal of olders buses which have higher maintenance costs than a new vehicle under warranty .

a budget allocation of $2.1 million is for construction of a vehicle storage facility at 840 n. main street in leominster , ma .

the a&e is complete and was funded through grant ma - 04-0004 for $1,485,000 .

the arra funds will pay for the actual construction .

mart , at this time , has a large number of vehicles which are stored outside .

the construction of this vehicle storage facility will allow us to get these vehicles out of the elements - which include a harsh new england winter .

this again will drive down overall maintenance and repair costs .

the remainder of the allocated funds will purchase bus maintenance equipment including a new bus washer for the fitchburg maintenance facility and related peripheral equipment .

the existing bus maintenance equipment is old and in need of replacement .

 .

this grant allowed mart to order the three hybrid buses , but delivery is not expected until february 2010 .

one bus has been completed and sent for altoona testing ( 1 of 3 tests are complete ) .

the other 2 buses are complete but will not be delivered until the 1st bus is finished testing .

the funds for these buses has been obligated but remains unliquidated at this time ( no expenditures have been made ) .

construction of the storage facility started on october 1st and is progressing .

the remaining items have not been ordered yet and are unobligated as of this reporting period .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed ma - 96-x003-00 greater attleboro - taunton regional transit authority purchase bus , minibus , vans ; construct improvements at train station , bus terminal , walkway , prev .

maint. , scheduling software , ada service ; smartcard & software invest in public transportation by purchasing low - floor buses , minibuses and vans ; purchase scheduling software ; construction of renovations to commuter rail station ; construction of improvements to bus facility ; construction of accessible walkway at commuter rail station ; preventative maintenance ; provision of ada paratransit service ; purchase smartcard equipment and software .

this grant allowed gatra to purchase 4 transit buses , 12 minibuses , and 10 vans ( all on order with delivery shortly ) , improvements to attleboro commuter rail station ( one project completed and ongoing ) , improvements to taunton terminal and maintenance facility ( 2 projects completed and ongoing ) , construction of ada accessible walkway ( design at 80% ) , preventative maintenance , provision of ada service , purchase of dispatch / scheduling equipment and purchase of smartcard equipment and software .

all of the above will enable gatra to offer public transportation service that's safer , more reliable and more accessible for people with disabilities .

all activities are less than 50% complete .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed arra bus replacement & bus wash rehab invest in public transportation by rehabilitating a bus wash facility and replacing two high maintenance low - floor buses that have exceeded their useful life of twelve years .

this grant allowed recipient ( city of billings met transit ) to rehabilitate the bus wash facility , which was built in 1983 , and to replace two low - floor buses that have incurred more frequent and higher than normal maintenance costs .

as a result of these investments , recipient will be able to continue to offer economical public transportation service that is safer , more reliable and more environmentally friendly .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1705 monad road , p.o .

box 1178 less than 50% completed invest in public transportation by supporting a portion of the construction activities ( 30.2% ) for a new transit maintenance and operations facility and administrative offices for the greensboro transit authority .

this 'leed gold designed' facility is being built to address current and future service delivery needs for maintenance and operations of gta transit vehicles and administrative functions .

phase 1 consists of the programming and schematic design of the facility , site design , permitting and the site work construction phase .

phase 2 will include a 64,000 sf facility building design and construction .

over the past five years , gta's ridership has doubled ( 2m to 4m passenger trips ) with the implementation of improved services and vehicles .

therefore , a new transit facility is desperately needed to replace an aging facilty that no longer meets gta's needs .

this project is one of the city's priority facility projects that will significantly enhance the gta's service delivery , efficiency and the quality of transit services to current and future transit riders ( over 200,000 population ) in the greensboro community .

completed phase 1 project activities .

efforts to comlete the final punch list .

specifically , checking the soil bearing pressure to make ready work for the building pad for phase 2 .

in addition , initiated phase 2 of the project , which includes the 69,254 sf facility building design and construction .

a ground breaking ceremony was conducted on 11 / 19 / 09 .

this project was initially advertised for bids on 1018 / 09 and bids were opened from all eight prequalified bidders on 11 / 19 / 09 .

all bidders had minimal dbe participation .

following discussions with fta , ncdot and gdot - public transportation division , it was determined that the project would need to be rebid due to the fact that the need to apply gs 143-28 and rebidding will provide an opportunity to improve dbe participation and buy america compliance .

efforts have been continued to ensure full compliance with the applicable federal requirements .

a conference call was held ( december 2009 ) with fta region iv officials to discuss the dbe and buy america compliance requirements .

fta concurrence was provided regarding the city's decision to rebid the project .

on 12 / 15 / 09 city council authorized the rebidding of the gta maintenance / operations transit facility and administrative offices phase 2 project .

the pre - bid meeting will be held on january 7 , 2010 , with the bid opening scheduled for january 26 , 2010 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems greensboro , nc 27406-3607 more than 50% completed avl / gps , fareboxes , vans , furnishings 2009 transit capital assistance grants - this grant applies the 2009 arra formula allocation of $700,000 an avl / gps system for complete tracking of 12 buses .

this includes hardware , software , and training for a total of $700,000 .

this grant applies the 2009 arra formula allocation of $320,000 for automated electronic fareboxes for 10 gillig buses , 2 ltv and 1 spare .

this includes additional vaults and docking / communication systems .

this project will have an estimated useful life of 12 years .

this grant applies the 2009 arra formula allocation of $145,000 for 2 non - revenue ltv service vans .

these will be used to augment late buses and missed stops as well as serving as driver relief vehicles .

these support vehicles will meet the clean air act standards ( caa ) and the american with disabilities act ( ada ) requirements .

they will have a useful life of 4 years .

this grant applies the 2009 arra formula allocation of $100,000 for furnishings and equipment for the new transit center to include cubicles , desks , chairs , passenger seating , computers , printers , copier , base station radio , antenna , phones .

 ( 1 ) avl system project is 40% complete .

installation for 10 buses complete with modems , base station , software , database , avm .

also mapping services for area .

 ( 2 ) automated farebox system is on order .

 ( 3 ) light transit vehicles on order .

 ( 4 ) transit center furnishings rfp to go out in january .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 850 warren c. coleman blvd .

less than 50% completed nc - 96-x011-00 arra tor ands tzx buses invest in public transportation by procuring two ( 2 ) 35 ft hybrid - electric buses , two ( 2 ) 40 ft hybrid - electric buses for transport of rockland ( tor ) , the county's inter - county bus system .

we will also procure three ( 3 ) 45 ft hybrid - electric over - the road coach buses for the tappan zeexpress ( tzx ) service , the county's commuter coach service over the tappan zee bridge to westchester county to meet connecting metro - north trains into new york city .

this grant will allow rockland county public transportation to purchase seven ( 7 ) environmentally friendly hybrid - electic replacement buses .

these buses will replace older buses that have reached their useful life and have become too costly to maintain and are no longer environmentally friendly .

as a result of these investments , rockland county public transportation will be able to offer the riding public service that is safer , more reliable , more environmentally friendly and more accessible for people with disabilities .

there were no building activities this quarter .

we have reviewed our commuter coach bid and expect our county legislature to make an award in 1st quarter 2010 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems new city , ny 10956-3664 new york , city of staten island ferry system asset maintenance nycdot operates the staten island ferry ( sif ) system that operates from st. george ferry terminal in staten island and whitehall ferry terminal in manhattan , new york .

it is the largest ferry system nationwide carrying 70,000 on weekdays or approximately 21 million passengers annually .

it is the principal means of transportation for staten island residents traveling to manhattan ? s central business district and other activity centers .

the major assets of staten island ferry system consist of a fleet of eight passenger ferries , the st. george ferry terminal in staten island and the whitehall ferry terminal in manhattan , new york , several support floating stock , bridges , slips , ramps , a ferry maintenance facility with auxiliary buildings .

this project will invest in public transportation by carrying out preventive maintenance activities of the staten island ferry system assets , for two different projects: 1 ) dry - docking services for ferry vessels through a third - party contract ( $37,747,237 ) 2 ) personnel costs for in - house maintenance on ferry vessels ( $9,000,000 ) in the past quarter , the shipyard dry - docking third party contractor completed all maintenance activities for the marchi ferry vessel including underwater hull repair , propulsion system repairs , and sea valve repairs .

the in - house maintenance personnel has maintained staten island ferry assets in a state of good repair by executing daily maintenance work .

staten island , ny 10301-2510 less than 50% completed butler , county of ohio purchase of vehicles , equipment , facility improvments and preventitive maintenance to invest in public transportation by purchasing five replacement small buses ( 14 passenger ) , purchasing eight small vans , and purchasing four service vehicles ( one service truck and three four - wheel drive vehicles to provide essential services during bad weather and to back up daily operations ) .

all vehicles being replaced are several years past their normal useful life cycle and the new vehicles will be more fuel efficient and help reduce routine operating costs .

in additon we will be replacing shop and office equipment which is past it normal useful life .

this grant will also allow for some facility improvements including a covered parking area to better protect the buses and extend their useful lives .

finally this grant will allow us to do necessary maintenace on our vehicle fleet and facilty to ensure all assets are maintained to the highest standards , thus helping to reduce operating cost in the future .

this grant allowed bcrta to order and receive eight replacement transit vehicles which are being used to expand service .

this investment will allow bcrta to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , environmentally friendly , and more accessible for customers with disabilities .

funds from this grant are also allowing us to replace outdated equipment , make much need facility improvements , and do preventitive maintenance on the existing fleet of vehicels and facility .

all of which will result in reduced operating costs and ensure that all assets are in prime condition .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems hamilton , oh 45011-5373 more than 50% completed greater dayton regional transit authority preventive maintenance , purchase of twenty five replacement 40ft diesel buses and purchase of twenty two replacement < 30ft medium duty buses .

to invest in public transit by purchasing twenty five replacement 40' low floor public transit buses .

these buses meet or exceed current clean air act ( caa ) standards and the american with disabilities act ( ada ) requirements and will have a service life of at least 12 years or 500,000 miles .

gdrta will also purchase twenty two replacement smaller transit buses ( less than 30' long ) for use with our project mobility service to the disabled community .

in additon gdrta is also using funds to perform preventive maintenance on existing buses , facilities and equipment to ensure that all assets are properly maintained .

both of these projects will improve customer comfort and operating efficiencies .

it is anticipated that both projects will also help retain jobs in the public transit / vehicle production industries .

since the award of funds gdrta has completed the preventitive maintenance project which has resulted in both the retention on jobs and the proper upkeep of federally funded assets .

this will lead to greater operational efficiencies and passenger comfort .

we have received the order of smaller buses being used for our project mobilty service and these buses are being placed in service .

in addtion we exercised an existing option from our vehicle manufacturer and the 40' replacement buses being funded with this grant are on order .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed oh - 96-x005 renovate two separate facilities in addition to the purchase of three replacement buses and vehicle gps / avl systems invest in public transportation by restoring and preserving a historic new york central train station to become the lorain county transportation center .

the transportation center will be a transportation hub for lorain county transit , greyhound and amtrak as well as housing lorain county transit administrative offices .

renovations of an existing building to be a maintenance facility , performing preventative maintenance on buses .

the maintenance facility will include office space , restrooms , parts storage and a mechanics shop .

purchase of 3- 30 ft. buses replacing vehicles that have met their useful life of seven years .

purchase / install intelligent transportation systems technology on vehicles .

this grant allowed the transit agency to renovate a historic train station and make it a transportation hub for lorain county transit , greyhound and amtrak as well as a community space available to the public for rent .

the transit agency was able to renovate a building as a maintenance facility to maintain lorain county transit's vehicles and will include office space , restrooms , parts storage and a mechanics shop , this project is about 95% complete .

the grant also gave the ability to purchase 3- 30-ft. buses , replacing an aging fleet , the purchase of the vehicles has been completed .

the vehicles were delivered the week of december 14 .

this grant will also give the ability to purchase / install intelligent transportation systems technology on vehicles .

as a result of these investments , the transit agency will be able to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , more environmentally friendly , and more accessible for people with disabilities .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed oh - 96-x023 salem area mass transit district 09 arra 5307 buses ( 8 ) ; rehab tran ctr salem area mass transit district is making an investment in public transportation through the following projects: purchase of three ( 3 ) 35-foot fixed route buses ( the transit district initially applied to purchase four ( 4 ) buses , but the number was decreased to three to allow funding for operational assistance ) , the purchase of four replacement buses and one bus for the expansion of the fleet to serve americans with disabilities ( ada ) , replacement fareboxes for fixed route buses , performance management software will be purchased to maximize the gathering of information about services provided , the surface of the transit center mall in downtown salem will be re - done to provide for greater pedestrian safety , work will take place for the installation of a transit center in keizer at the north - end of transit services provided in the community , and funds are designated in support of operational assistance to support tasks required to complete the above stated projects .

during the october - december 2009 quarter , salem area mass transit district paid for the shipping of fareboxes that were purchased in the preceding quarter .

the transit district received the delivery of four replacement buses and one bus to expand the fleet of buses that serve americans with disabilities ( ada ) .

the environmental study was completed on the site selected for the keizer transit center .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 555 court street ne , suite 5230 less than 50% completed this project uses a portion of the federal funds to finalize a bus driver break area and public rest room building at the new smart central at wilsonville station multi - modal facility located adjacent to the wes commuter rail station in wilsonville , oregon .

in addition the federal funds will allow smart to construct an artistic clock tower , passenger shelters and pedestrian safety enhancements located at smart central station .

finally , the funds will conduct preliminary engineering / design and site plan preparation for the construction of a new smart administrative building located adjacent to the smart central at wilsonville station multi - modal facility .

all projects have been designed to ensure increased access for all users of the multi - modal facility and the design has taken into consideration eco - friendly storm water management elements and building materials .

further each element is designed to deter crime and ensure public safety at the station through the placement of security cameras , lighting and the increase of smart personnel at the station .

this grant is funding the design and construction of an artistic clock tower , passenger shelters and pedestrian crosswalks as well as the site planning for an administrative and maintenance facility .

in addition , this grant will supplement grant x003 funds for the construction of the operator breakroom .

all of these projects are being completed at smart central at wilsonville station .

this quarter , activities included engineering and design of the clock tower and passenger amenities .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed berks area reading transportation authority purchase 11 buses , security equipment and facility improvements .

invest in public transportation by purchasing four new hybrid - electric buses , four new hybrid - electric paratransit vans , three new diesel paratransit vans , installation of surveillance and security equipment on 25 transit vehicles , and renovation of barta's intermodal transportation complex .

this grant has allowed barta to purchase four hybrid - electric 40ft transit buses , which will be delivered in june 2010 , in order to expand service on its fixed routes .

with this grant , barta is also purchasing seven paratransit vans ( four hybrid - electric and three diesel ) to replace paratransit vans that have met the minimum 5 year useful life requirement for this size vehicle as set forth in fta circular 9030.1c .

the three diesel paratransit vans will be delivered in november , 2009 .

also , these funds will allow barta to purchase and install security and surveillance cameras on 25 transit vehicles that are not equipped with safety and security cameras .

furthermore , this grant will also allow barta to upgrade and repair its intermodal transportation complex .

the maintaining of this facility is critical to the overall efficiency of the operations of barta .

bids for the upgrade of the transportation complex will be accepted on october 30 , 2009 .

moreover , as a result of these investments , barta will be able to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , more environmentally friendly , and more accessible for people with disabilities .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed arra - acquisition of 40 hybrid replacement units investment in public transportation by purchasing 40 replacement hybrid units , 40-foot length , heavy duty low floor buses for fixed route service in the san juan metropolitan area .

as a result of this investment , the metropolitan bus authority will be able to offer public transportation service that is safer , more reliable , more environmentally friendly and more accesible to people with disabilities .

contract was awarded to daimler buses north america on october 2009 .

advance payment was isssued by december 2009 for 41 ( 40 plus one spare ) cummins engines delivered to daimler buses north america as part of the purchase order to deliver 40 buses by summer 2010 .

this transaction was authorized as per fta letter of october 20 , 2009 .

jobs to be created will contribute to preserve and maintain jobs in the manufacturing industry and will be reported as units are delivered and invoices paid .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems #37 , ave de diego , san fransisco , monacillo ward san juan , pr 00919-0000 less than 50% completed pr - 96-x011-00 acquisition of two minibuses and maintenece improvements to public transportation terminals use of arra funds to purchase two minibuses , make deferred maintenance improvements to public transportation terminal and administration of grant program .

the project includes: 1 .

purchase of two cut - away small buses with a five year duty cycle , ada access complaint to provide demand response service to areas not currently served by the public system under ali 11.13.04 in the amount of $138,000 of arra funds .

2 .

renovation of the public transportation terminal to improve illumination , provide surveillance , repair roof and bathrooms , and install wheelstops under ali 11.34.01 in the amount of $56,000 of arra funds .

3 .

administration costs to comply with fta regulations such as publication of bids and submittal of quaterly reports , under ali 11.79.00 with $2,850 of arra funds .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

transportation , alabama dept of this is a fy 2009 american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) section 5307 application in the amount of $4,033,530.00 for the state of alabama .

this application incorporates arra governor apportioned section 5307 funds in the amount of $3,834,718.00 and columbus , ga mpo arra apportioned section 5307 funding in the amount of $198,812.00 .

this application includes the purchase of 33 replacement vehicles and 6 expansion vehicles ( $2,439,834 ) , bus facilities ( $25,000 ) , equipment ( $988,634 ) , signal and communications ( $4,900 ) , and additional capital program items ( $575,162 ) .

the funds will be used to fund small urban transportation programs for the following six ( 6 ) subrecipients: auburn - opelika , phenix city , anniston , florence , decatur , and dothan .

none for quarter ending 12 / 31 / 2009 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports transit improvements at six small urban public transit systems selected by the state of alabama .

these improvements include replacing old vehicles , expanding fleets , and installing bicycle racks and signal systems .

these activities assisted in keeping transit systems running at current levels and enhancing public transit .

capital assistance for transit projects pre - audit completed on bus order for eight replacement buses , four replacement paratransit vans received , bus parts , shop equipment ordered and received .

replaced surveillance system , purchased 75 bus and streetcar fare boxes , waiting delivery , a&e completed for trolley barn expansion , construction has begun , a&e contract in place for platform stop addition , work to begin shortly .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 901 maple street north little rock , ar 72114-4647 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will result in residents and visitors to central arkansas traveling more safely and easily through little rock and the surrounding areas .

highway and transportation , arkansas department of arra funds will be used to purchase 126 replacement buses for transit providers throughout the state of arkansas .

in addition , transit providers will receive funding for adp hardware and software ; support vehicles and equipment ; construction or rehabilitation of maintenance facilities , administrative facilities , and park and ride lots ; and for the performance of preventive maintenance .

our expectations are that the above mentioned expenditures will enhance public transportation , retain existing jobs for arkansas providers , enable contractors to retain and maybe create new jobs within their companies , in the state of arkansas .

to invest in transportation , environmental protection , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems little rock , ar 72209-4206 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports activities in several arkansas counties , including pulaski , randolph , carroll , benton , saline , boone , jefferson , and phillips counties .

fort smith , city of investment in public transportation by completing the transfer station facility at 200 wheeler avenue in fort smith , ar , purchase four demand response buses , purchase and install approximately 30 bus shelters , purchase and install security cameras / surveillance equpment for transit buildings and buses , purchase mobile data terminals and renovate the administrative and maintenance buildings .

completed projects within this arra grant include the purchase of 4 demand response buses , purchase of 4 automatic electronic defibrillators , replacement of 5 garage doors in the maintenance building , heaters for the maintenance shop and the purchase and installation of a bus hoist .

ongoing projects include the renovations of the administrative and maintenance facilities .

an architect has been selected for the renovations and coordination will begin soon .

specifications are being completed by our information technology service ( its ) department for the purchase and installation of security cameras for the facilities and buses .

bus shelter sites are currently being selected for the placement of passenger shelters .

the onboard computers to be used as mobile data terminals are being reviewed by the its department at this time .

the mobile data terminal software will be a one vendor source that will work in conjunction with the already existing scheduling software .

projects currently not underway at this time include the addition of the underground fuel tank and associated software as well as the fare counting equipment .

these two projects will begin once the renovations to the administrative and maintenance facilities are nearing completion .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 6821 jenny lind , po box 1908 fort smith , ar 72902-1908 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the activities funded by the award will improve safety and security for both passengers and staff , improve transit performance and communication , and provide cost savings .

arra - ( 10 ) replacement ; ( 2 ) expansion ; equipment replacement / expansion of rolling stock , acquisition of bus shelter and acquisition of radios .

replacement of 12 fixed route buses ; construction of bus shelter located in bienville square and purchase of a digital and analog 800 mhz radio system bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1224 w. i - 65 service road s. less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supported the replacement of old buses with 10 buses and 2 transit vans .

the award also constructed a bus shelter in downtown mobile to connect various bus routes .

the award also replaced the obsolete radio system for the buses with a new analog and digital radio system , which aids in mobile's emergency preparedness plans .

1. ) .

cop debt service , 2. ) .

capital cost of contracting , 3. ) .

preventive maintenance , 4. ) .

non fixed route ada paratransit service , 5. ) .

transit enhancements invest in public transportation by providing assistance to the following projects: cop debt service payment , capital cost of contracting , capitalized preventive maintenance , non - fixed ada paratransit service operations and transit enhancements .

1. ) .

semi - annual cop debt service payment processed in september 2009 for purchase of ( 55 ) 40-foot cng buses .

2. ) .

contracted transit operations and maintenance to support ongoing fixed route and demand response ( ada ) paratransit service .

3. ) .

preventive maintenance of the agency's vehicle fleet and facilities to support the ongoing operation .

4. ) .

contracted transit operations and maintenance to support ongoing demand response ( ada ) paratransit service .

arra 5307 funded portion of this service completed as of september 2009 .

5. ) .

transit enhancement project not started .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1825 third street less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports transit operations in riverside county through the purchase of items including benches , shelters , light poles and extensions , signs , and trash receptacles .

the award will result in enhanced safety and security of the bus stops and transit facilities .

transportation , colorado department of arra summit county - statewide rolling stock invest in public transportation by building a fleet maintenance facility , purchasing new buses , and providing some operating assistance this grant allowed the county to build a new 42,000 sq .

foot bus maintenance facility .

as a result of this project , the county will be more efficient in maintaining and servicing its fleet buses in a high altitude environment .

commercial and institutional building construction 0222 county road 1003 , po box 2179 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the construction of a fleet transit and vehicle maintenance garage facility as well as a 3,147 square foot stand - alone wash bay , a diesel / unleaded multi - use fuel island , and a bulk fuel storage area in the city of frisco , colorado .

services at the facility will be available for summit stage transit buses and other vehicles providing public transit services .

transportation , california department of 5311 transit improvements in non - urban areas .

the grant will fund a variety of transit capital projects in all 58 california counties .

projects include vehicles , bus and intermodal terminals , fare collection systems , security equipment , information signage , construction and renovation of maintenance and storage facilities , park - and - ride lots , bus shelters and signal and communications equipment , including radios .

the grant will also support preventive maintenance programs and provide a source of operating assistance for ada - required paratransit .

a grant to modernize transit fleets through vehicle replacement and expansion , to modernize and upgrade physical facillities , such as bus terminals , stops , maintenance and storage facilities and park - and - ride lot , to improve fare collection , security , information and communications systems and to support preventive maintenance programs and ada - required paratransit operation .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports transit upgrades in rural communities .

the award will be used to purchase 105 buses , 2 vans , 11 automobiles , 7 trolleys and 1 commuter vehicle .

the award also will be used to build and renovate facilities and bus station terminals , as well as to purchase and install bus fare collection systems , computer hardware and software , signal and communications equipment , bus route signs and bus shelters ; to upgrade safety and surveillance security equipment ; and to perform preventive maintenance .

the award will result in promoting and enhancing public transportation in rural areas through capital infrastructure investments and stimulate local economies .

san francisco bay area rapid transit district replacement of train auxiliary power equipment , cables on transbay tube , and coverboards , improve walkway safey at a station , car interior modifications , and wheel truing machine study .

the overall purpose of the grant is to invest in public transportation to improve the safety and reliablity of the transit system and to improve the passenger comfort in the modified revenue vehicles .

therefore , the bart passengers should have a safer and better riding experience .

activities include soliciting bids and awarding contracts to initiate work on the projects .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports capital improvements , including construction of a new walkway at the balboa park station ; installation of new auxiliary power supply equipment on 30 railcars ; new coverboards over the electric third rail ; replacement of cables in the transbay tube ; replacement of worn - out vehicle interiors and reconfiguration of interiors for improved passenger circulation ; installation of between - car safety barriers ; and preliminary work on a wheel truing machine .

information gao gathered to improve the description this award funds the purchase of nine buses .

santa rosa , city of transit operations , americans with disabilities act paratransit operations , preventative maintenance , transit enhancements invest in public transportation by providing funds for assistance to transit operating , preventative maintenance of buses , americans with disabilities act paratransit service operations , and transit enhancements , including solar bus shelters , benches and map display cases .

these funds will support transit operations for santa rosa citybus , which is housed in the city of santa rosa's transit department and is the municipal transit provider for the city of santa rosa .

in addition to providing fixed route bus service , the agency is responsible for the provision of complimentary paratransit services ( required by the federal americans with disabilities act ) , the management of the city's transportation demand management ( tdm ) program , as well as bicycle and pedestrian planning efforts .

citybus operates seventeen fixed routes within the city of santa rosa and roseland and carries approximately 2.8 million passengers annually .

for the provision of paratransit service , the agency contracts with mv transportation to provide approximately 50,000 trips annually for disabled patrons that are not able to take fixed route transit .

additionally , through the tdm program , citybus reduces approximately 100,000 car trips and an average of 200,000 car miles annually .

this grant funds fixed route transit operations ( with the completion of the first amendment to this grant , due in the second quarter of federal fiscal year 2010 ) , ada paratransit operations ( contract awarded november 17 , 2009 ) , preventative maintenance expenses ( $2,182,095.78 expended and drawn down through the end of federal fiscal year 2009 ) , and transit enhancements ( in the form of a bus stop amenity purchase order executed november 18,2009 ) .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 1101 college avenue , suite 200 santa rosa , ca 95404-3940 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the maintenance of all 500 bus stops and shelters , trash receptacles at all stops , and display cases .

maintenance includes power - washing .

the award also supports preventive maintenance and upkeep of the entire fleet of 35 buses and 11 paratransit buses to federal transit administration ( fta ) standards , paying driver salaries , and maintaining transit facilities .

the award does not support capital improvements or gains , only day - to - day operations .

san joaquin regional transit district rtd this grant , ca - 96-x045 , will provide funds for preventive maintenance for upkeep of san joaquin regional transit district's buses and paratransit vehicles .

funds will also be used for the following projects: construction of the mall transfer station ; design / engineering of the regional operations center ; associated capital maintenance items ; computer / communications equipment and software ; capital tire lease ; passenger amenities and transit enhancements ; development of the brt phase ii - airport way corridor that include environmental and preliminary eng / design ; and , safety and security equipment related to bus and bus facilities .

this grant has allowed the san joaquin regional transit district to conduct preventative maintenance on its 134 existing buses ; construction of the mall transfer station ; design / engineering of the regional operations center ; purchase associated capital maintenance items ; purchase computer / communications equipment and software ; contract for a capital tire lease ; purchase and install passenger amenities and transit enhancements ; development of the brt phase ii - airport way corridor that include environmental and preliminary eng / design ; and , purchase of safety and security equipment related to bus and bus facilities .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the channel st. amenities improvement project in the downtown area provides passenger amenities and transit enhancements such as adding benches for additional seating in the boarding area , new landscaping to provide shade , and trash receptacles .

construction of the mall transfer station will improve customer comfort and boarding area aesthetics at the station on pacific ave. near sherwood mall , which gives passengers easy access to the downtown area .

the improvements include: construction of bus shelters ; installation of passenger information kiosks , benches , and trash receptacles ; reinforcing the pavement ; and installation of crosswalks for increased safety of passengers .

development of the bus rapid transit system design will allow the transit agency to increase capacity by extending the current system to a new corridor .

the regional operations center will allow the transit agency to expand and house all the buses and maintenance activities in one facility .

currently , the transit agency has three facilities that are at maximum capacity and are no longer suitable for their operations .

the center will include a service station , bus wash , and fueling center for public transit buses as well as private buses .

the award also funds an extension of a transit hopper service in the stockton metropolitan area .

specifically , this includes activities such as branding the buses , installing bus stop signs , and rehabilitation of some buses .

the hopper service is designed for elderly and disabled passengers .

southern california regional rail authority track rehab , positive train control invest in public transportation for 1 ) track rehabilitation / renovation on san bernardino line ; 2 ) system communication improvements on scrra's metrolink commuter train system in riverside county ; 3 ) partial funding for positive train control system ( ptc ) on the southern california regional rail authority's ( scrra ) metrolink commuter train system , in los angeles , orange , riverside , san bernardino , and san diego counties .

1 / 14 / 10 update: 1 ) project #510046 track rehabilitation on san bernardino line contracts awarded is $1,864,144 .

rail frogs , plates , ties , and turnouts ordered 10 / 26 / 09 and delivery expected 2 / 2010 .

project completion expected 6 / 2010 .

arra funds received on this project $4,909 .

2 ) project #510095 system communication improvements contracts awarded is $0 .

a system - communication feasibility study to determine how to best link and integrate riverside county service will be completed first .

project completion expected 9 / 2015 .

arra funds received on this project $49 .

3 ) positive train control ( ptc ) contracts awarded is $1,187,000 ; arra grant #ca - 05-0007-00 also funds ptc .

ptc is 10% completed .

work is progressing on map & validate existing assets / rules ; validate existing locomotive cab systems ; validate new locomotive / cab systems ; validate passive braking algorithm ; initial evaluation for general electric transportation signals systems ( gets ) module upgrade ; map & validate signal assets on san gabriel sub , valley sub , ventura sub , olive sub , and orange sub ; relocate & reconfigure signals ; operational study ; validate system safety plans ; map & validate communications system ; validate network systems ; finalizing scope and requisition documents to our procurement dept ; disadvantaged business enterprise ( dbe ) consultant review ; agency project manager review of draft evaluation criteria ; prepare development plans ; prepare draft implementation plan ; prepare draft development plan ; prepare safety plan ; procure spectrum in 220 mhz band ; prepare interoperability agreement with the following railroads up , bnsf , and nc ; re - design main operation center ( moc ) backroom to accommodate for ptc .

tasks finished: validate train dispatch system ; nepa - compliant categorical exclusion .

substantial completion expected 12 / 31 / 12 .

we are using up funds first from grants that expire before the arra grants .

700 s flower st , suite 2600 los angeles , ca 90017-4104 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports safety and capacity upgrades and improvements such as the replacement of approximately 5,000 feet of rail on the san bernardino line as well as the rehabilitation of two grade crossings on the metrolink system in the los angeles area .

invest in public transportation by expansion of the commuter fleet with the purchase of three 57 passenger clean diesel buses .

awarded contract for the purchase of three 57 passenger commuter buses on november 3 , 2009 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems yuba - sutter transit authority , 2100 b street information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports fleet expansion for the yuba sutter transit authority , which provides transit services in and around yuba city , marysville , linda , and olivehurst .

the commuter bus fleet will be expanded from 14 to 16 and one bus from 1997 will be replaced .

the award will result in new buses which will help control air pollution .

capital equipment and security improvements purchase 1 replacement coach for clean air express , 2 ada vans , 4 replacement buses for local service , 6 particulate safety traps for existing buses , 6 replacement bike racks and bus security cameras for all rolling stock .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) $1,342,268.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the multiple activities under this award will improve security and safety equipment .

the purchase of vehicles allows the agency to replace the rolling stock of buses that have reached their lifespan .

the new americans with disabilities act ( ada ) compliant vans will have a higher ceiling and provide more head room .

security cameras for all buses will help with problems on buses , prevent problems , and respond to complaints .

bike racks are being replaced because the current racks are deteriorated due to increased use by residents .

safety traps will secure buses at night , and prevent vandalism or theft .

indian river , county of invest in public transportation by constructing a new transporatation administration / bus parking facility .

an rfp for architectural & engineering services for the design of the new transit administration facility has been issued .

upon completion of project design , a general contractor will be selected by a bidding process .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems vero beach , fl 32960-0000 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the new facility is approximately 5,000 square feet and approximately 2 acres of secured parking for the door - to - door and fixed - route transit vehicle fleet .

the new building and parking area will reduce non - revenue mileage by shortening the travel distance of the transit fleet from the old depot to refueling and maintenance areas , improve safety and security , improve office efficiency - - including dispatching , communications , and response times - - and improve disaster planning , since the new facilities will be built to exceed current hurricane standards .

transit vehicles , preventive maintenance , surveillance equipment to enhance the operations and functionality of transit property in ocala , fl , suntran .

no activities completed to date .

getting project underway .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports maintenance activities for the passenger bus fleet of the city of ocala .

activities include replacing transmissions and overhauling engines to keep all nine buses running properly .

the award also supports the purchase of surveillance equipment for the buses .

this equipment , which includes cameras and monitoring devices , will improve safety .

transportation , georgia department of georgia statewide rural transit grant: 182 vehicles , its , facilities , software invest in public transportation in rural areas of georgia by purchasing new vehicles , upgrading rural bus facilities , procuring scheduling software and installing intelligent transportations systems technology on vehicles .

this quarter contracts have been executed with sub - recipients ; however most sub - recipients will begin work in the next quarter .

this grant will allow georgia to assist rural transit agencies to purchase 182 vehicles , upgrade its equipment , upgrade transit facilities and purchase scheduling software .

regulation and administration of transportation programs 600 west peachtree street , nw less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds various transit activities in 30 counties throughout georgia .

activities include the following: installing intelligent transportations systems technology on vehicles in order to dispatch and schedule information from many transportation providers and allow the public to visit the transportation provider's web site to schedule necessary trips on line ; replacement of aged equipment in order to maintain georgia's rural paratransit fleet in a state of good repair ; purchasing scheduling and dispatching software that will allow for computer - based dispatch , integration with gps and gis mapping , and automated route planning , among other things ; and upgrading rural bus facilities or purchasing buildings that will serve as rural transit agencies that will also house equipment for the dispatching and scheduling of trips .

cat arra 7 replace bus / trans enhancement this grant is for fy 2009 arra economic stimulus funds .

the funds will be used to purchase seven ( 7 ) 30-foot replacement vehicles .

the buses will be hybrid electric / diesel buses .

these vehicles have a useful life of seven ( 7 ) years / 350,000 miles .

cat will acquire a security system for the facility , monitoring , security guard , and razor wire for fencing .

included in the project administration will be the rfp , advertising and procurement cost .

chatham area transit authority will follow all third party procurement policies as defined in c4220.1f .

chatham area transit authority will check the federal excluded parties list system ( epls ) , and dot regulations , 'non - procurement suspension and debarment' 2 cfr parts 180 and 1200 as one step in the process of determining only 'responsible' contractors that possesses the ability , willingness , and integrity to perform successfully under the terms and conditions ( see 49 u.s.c .

section 5325 ) are awarded contracts .

we understand and will follow the proper procurements procedures .

7 new buses have been ordered from the manufacturer .

manufacturing is expected to begin mid year 2010 .

new radios have been ordered and delivery is expected in january 2010 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the new buses replace those past their expected life and will increase energy efficiency for the agency .

the security system and cameras will cover the entire facility and increase safety measures .

honolulu , city & county of bus and handi - van acquisition program , pearl city bus transit facility parking expansion program , wahiawa transit center , middle - street inter - modal center,bus stop pad improvements rehabilitation / renovation , preliminary engineering for new starts honolulu - high capacity transit cooridor project .

stip #oc16 , amount budgeted this grant: $19,345,207 , bus and handi - van acquisition program - contract for purchase of 19 buses under review by city .

funds to be used with $254,793 from arra hi - 56-0001-00 .

stip #oc17 , amount budgeted this grant: $4,000,000 , honolulu - high capacity transit corridor project - consultant contract documents for planning and engineering work under review by city .

stip #oc19 , amount budgeted this grant: $3,104,793 , ( includes security and transit enhancement activities ) middle street inter - modal center - construction contract documents under review by city .

stip #oc31 , amount budgeted this grant: $2,000,000 , bus stop pad improvements rehabilitation / renovation - construction contract documents under review by city .

stip #oc32 , amount budgeted this grant: $7,899,148 , pearl city bus facility - bus parking expansion - construction contract documents under review by city .

stip #oc33 , amount budgeted this grant: $4,300,000 , wahiawa transit center - letter from mayor mufi hannemann to hawaii governor linda lingle was sent during the 3rd quarter of 2009 requesting release of state of hawaii funds budgeted for this joint development project .

no response from governor's office .

the city will continue its efforts to resolve the matter .

new radio communication units will be installed in the replacement buses .

1% transit enhancement requirement totaling $377,398 will be met through artwork at the wahiawa transit center ( $200,000 ) and at the middle street inter - modal center ( $200,000 ) .

the 1% transit security requirement of $406,491 will be met through security fencing elements at the middle street inter - modal center ( $400,000 ) and the wahiawa transit center ( $16,938 ) .

650 south king street ; 3rd floor information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds multiple transit activities including construction of an interim parking facility with 100 stalls at the middle street intermodal center and completing construction of the transit center and the park and ride facility at the wahiawa transit center .

activities funded by this award will result in reducing fuel usage by replacing old buses and purchasing hybrid buses , increasing capacity at the pearl city bus transit facility by increasing the number of parking spaces for buses , and allowing the city and county of honolulu to move forward with its bus stop pad improvements at a more rapid pace by installing 32 bus pads this year .

arra grant to purchase three medium duty buses purchase three medium duty buses and security cameras .

let rfp to purchase buses by 12-30-2009 .

we have negotiated bus purchase price with the sucessful bidder for rfp#bet2009 ( intermountain coach leasing inc. ) to build 3 m.d .

low flooor buses .

intermountain has offered their best and final price of $179,832 for each bus for a total of $539,467.00 for three buses .

the city is currently considering the bid and will make a decision to accept the offer , of to re - negotiate .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the replacement of old buses that have exceeded their lifespan according to federal transit administration ( fta ) standards .

buses will also be equipped with security cameras to monitor passengers , drivers , and any incidents inside or accidents outside the bus .

09 arra 5307 buses ( 8 ) and oper vendor has delivered 6 of the 8 buses that were award , and final 2 buses are in production .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will support the purchase of new buses for the transit service area that includes the cities of pocatello and chubbuck .

terre haute , city of replacement buses and remodeling of maintenance facility have started working on this project to improve and remodel the bus maintenance garage .

engineering cost and replacement estimate design work has been received and invoiced to the terre haute transit utility .

vendor has started estimating the replacement cost for several pieces of equipment that will be replace in bus maintenance garage .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems terre haute , in 47807-4923 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award funds the purchase of 5 30-foot replacement buses , 5 passenger shelters , 14 fare boxes , and 14 radios .

funds will also be used to renovate the transit maintenance and storage facility .

these activities will renew the fleet and modernize its system .

replace 6 35' buses , rehabilitate maintenance facility , provide transit enhancements invest in public transportation by purchasing replacement transit buses , rehabilitating a maintenance facility , installing a disaster recovery system , and providing various transit enhancements to system riders .

the main objective of gptc's service provision is to enhance the ability of lake county , indiana citizens to access shopping , education , recreation , public services , and employment by adequately developing , improving , and maintaining a regional passenger bus system .

this award will allow gptc the capacity to realize these objectives , which also include creating and maintaining jobs associated with funded projects .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the replacement of buses because the vehicles were beyond their useful life .

the new buses will allow the transit agency to provide better service to transit riders .

transit enhancements at the university park transit center , a transfer center for bus routes , near indiana university , include beautification of the center with trees and landscaping .

this transfer center will improve connectivity between bus routes and improve safety for transit users .

rehabilitation of the maintenance facility includes installing new garage doors and repaving the staging area due to deteriorating pavement .

this rehabilitation will extend the life of the maintenance facility .

these funds will be used to purchase replacement public transit vehicles which will invest in transportation , environmental protection , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits .

we are currently in the process of securing contract opportunities for the purchase of vehicles .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems po box 708 , 6 east 6th street information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the replacement of up to four 40-foot buses that comply with the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

lafayette city parish consolidated government pur .

1 bus,shelters,security,pm,signage invest in public transportation by completeing funding of the final phase of the multimodal center , complete funding for one additional bus , fund bus shelters , fund safety and security equipment , fund new bus stop signs , fund bus stop ada improvements and fund preventative maintence on the bus fleet .

1 .

lafayette multi - modal facility final phase: went to bid and bid awarded .

2 .

bus purchase: went to bid and bid awarded .

3 .

bus stop shelters: preliminary site selection .

4 .

safety and security equipment: developing specifications .

5 .

bus stop signs: selecting design and deciding on options .

6 .

ada bus stops: preliminary site selection .

7 .

preventive maintenance on buses: preparing for bid or option selection .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports public transportation improvements in the city of lafayette , louisiana .

these improvements include the purchase of one 35-foot bus , approximately 20 bus shelters , and bus stop signs .

the award also supports preventive maintenance , including oil changes and bus engine inspections , as well as renovations of a small number of bus stops to make them accessible , per the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

the improvements also include purchasing and installing video cameras on the new bus and replacing damaged cameras on the other buses so that all buses are connected to the security system .

the award also provides partial financing for the rosa parks transportation center .

the center is a two - story , 41,000 square foot building which will house a u.s. post office and traffic and transportation department offices , as well as lafayette's intelligent transportation system ( its ) center .

purchase of four replacement buses .

invest in public transportation by purchasing four new thirty - foot buses for replacement this grant allowed the transit agency to purchase four thirty foot replacement buses .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award replaces older buses with new buses that meet the standards of the clean air act and the americans with disabilities act .

notification was received from fta on july 10 , 2009 that the city of charlotte's arra grant had been approved by fta's regional office , the department of labor , and washington's special committee .

the city of charlotte was , therefore , given official approval to execute the grant application in fta's team system .

relocation activities are in progress .

construction contract was awarded to clancy & theys construction company and a notice - to - proceed was issued november 25 , 2009 .

procurement activities include the selection process for inspection services and safety & security certification .

expenditures include project administration , plans review fee , construction management services toward 3rd party contracts , advertisements , and relocation expenses along with pre - award expenditures eligible within the grant .

 ( information not reported ) $20,766,306.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds improvements for the north davidson bus facility .

activities include updating facility conditions ; upgrading mechanical , electrical , and plumbing systems ; replacing original bus maintenance equipment ; and constructing a new parking garage .

these improvements will delay the need for a third bus facility , allow special transportation services to relocate to the north davidson bus facility , and provide sufficient space and support for up to 200 buses .

rocky mount , ( inc ) city of arra 2 bus , pm , equip , re , shelters purchase of new buses to expand existing urban transit routes ; purchase of equipment to upgrade vehicles and maintenance operations ; and facility improvements to operational facilities utilized by riders , including transfer stations and shelters .

activity in the 4th quarter of 2009 comprised of purchasing an existing building for relocation of trt driver opearations , along with the preparation of bids for the purchase of vehicles , equipment , and services to be funded with additional grant funds .

tar river transit ( trt ) , the urban public transportation provider for the city of rocky mount , will utilize arra transit urban capital assistance funds to expand and improve transit operations through the purchase of vehicles and equipment , along with improvements to distribution and maintenance facilities .

100 coastline st. rocky mount , nc 27804-5849 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the purchase of two 25-foot light transit vehicles ; seven replacement engines ; and equipment , real estate , and shelters for tar river transit .

work on the transfer and administrative facility includes purchasing the facility and landscaping the transit center .

the transit garage improvements include work on the paint , lights , heaters , and transmission stand .

other activities include painting the bus station and renovating the taxi shelter .

rutgers , the state university fta project and construction management training to provide training for transit systems through the delivery of 34 project management for transit professionals and 6 management of transit construction projects sessions .

planning course deliveries began in september and courses will commence in the next quarter .

all other support activities for transportation ( information not reported ) new brunswick , nj 08901-8559 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description federal transit laws require a grant applicant for a major capital investment project to prepare and carry out a project management plan ( pmp ) approved by the federal transit administration ( fta ) .

the award supports project and construction management training for transit management professionals so that they can prepare and carry out a pmp .

the training teaches good project management skills to transit management professional and builds capacity at transit organizations .

the training also includes specific emphasis on the requirements that are presented in the report project and construction management guidelines 2003 update .

portage area regional transportation authority arra maint .

facility rehab. / preventative maintenance invest in public transportation by replacing the roof of a bus storage / maintenance facility , performing preventative maintenance on existing buses , and completing preliminary engineering and design for facility projects on parta's property located at 2000 summit road , kent , oh 44240 .

during the cy 4th quarter , parta continued to perform preventative maintenance on its 73 vehicles .

the labor for the roof renovation is substantially complete and we are now in the contract close out period .

parta has continued to complete preliminary engineering and design for facility projects on parta's property located at 2000 summit road , kent , oh 44240 .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 2000 summit road more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports preventive maintenance activities to extend the life of the buses , including safety inspection , oil change , fluid change , brakes , labor for mechanics , and replacement parts if needed .

the award also supports replacement of the facility's roof .

the roof was deteriorating and leaking water , which caused damage to equipment inside the building .

the new roof is expected to last for 15 years .

transportation , oklahoma department of purchase of 241 replacement buses and five over - the - road intercity buses .

invest in public transportation by replacing the nonurbanized and rural transit provider's aging fleet with efficient and reliable vehicles .

a total of 246 vehicles will be purchased .

the purchase will include 241 replacement buses of which 17 will be configured with compressed natural gas .

also , five over - the - road buses are programmed for purchase .

awarded 19 contracts to subrecipients .

request for bids for nine vehicle types were solicited .

awards were made for eight types of vehicles .

one vehicle type was canceled due to ambiguous bid specifications .

a total of 37 purchase orders were awarded during this report period .

interurban and rural bus transportation ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award serves 18 counties throughout the state .

tri - county metropolitan transportation district or street maint improve ; milwaukie park&ride ; foster road layover concrete bus pads ; lighting along multi - use path adjacent to i - 205 light rail tracks ; morrison / yamhill intersect repairs ; portland streetcar signals ; rail preventive maintenance .

invest in public transportation by initiating bus priority street maintenance improvements ; milwaukie park & ride ; foster road layover concrete bus pads ; lighting along multi - use path adjacent to the i - 205 light rail tracks ; morrison / yamhill intersection repairs ; portland streetcar signals , ramps , its ; and performing rail preventive maintenance on existing light rail vehicles .

bus priority street maintenance improvements ; milwaukie park & ride ; foster road layover concrete bus pads ; lighting along multi - use path adjacent to the i - 205 light rail tracks ; morrison / yamhill intersection repairs ; preventive maintenance .

more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports various improvement activities including ( 1 ) repaving two deteriorating major bus transit streets and adding concrete bus pads at stops in order to reduce ongoing preventive maintenance at these locations and improve the rider experience ; ( 2 ) replacing the shoulder on foster rd .

with a concrete pad and base to accommodate buses , minimize future maintenance costs , and address the degradation of the standard roadway surface and base ; ( 3 ) replacing infrastructure beneath the light rail tracks at 10 corridor intersections in the morrison and yamhill corridors to maintain safe and reliable service ; ( 4 ) extending lighting along the i - 205 multi - use path from the lents town center station to gladstone to enhance safety along the corridor and encourage more people to ride bikes and walk to transit ; ( 5 ) constructing a new 315-space milwaukie park & ride facility at the intersection of se milport rd .

and se main st. for the heavily traveled mcloughlin corridor , enabling more commuters to use bus lines .

west florida regional planning council invest in public transportation by constructing new transit facility and security fencing , performing preventive maintenance on existing revenue fleet , installing automatic passenger counters on existing revenue vehicles , installing automated fareboxes on existing revenue vehicles , installing stop annunciators on existing revenue vehicles , purchasing and installing passenger shelters , purchasing a service vehicle , for a total of $2,377,250 .

received and installed automatic stop announcement ( annunciator ) systems in all ( 17 ) buses , received and installed automatic passenger counting system ( apc ) in 8 buses , received ( have not installed ) automated fare boxes for all ( 17 ) buses .

performed preventive maintenance for fleet vehciles .

annunciators and apcs will be configured in january .

automated fareboxes will be installed in february .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems panama city , fl 32401-3485 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the new transit facility being constructed will house the administrative functions of the transit agency , maintenance facilities , and response system , as well as store buses .

the new facility will be located in unincorporated bay county , outside of panama city limits on sherman ln .

and douglas rd .

the current transit facility in panama city is no longer big enough to house buses , and has inadequate office and maintenance space .

invest in public transportation .

cherokee county will use the 2009 arra funds to purchase a 5307 fixed route expansion vehicle .

the 30' passenger vehicle will provide the opportunity to increase ridership and expand fixed route service to cherokee county residents .

preventive maintenance vehicle surveillance , and other communications and fleet maintenance miscellaneous support equipment , and bus shelters , will be purchased .

transit enhancements , including transit technology , mdcs and avls , will also be purchased .

we plan to add one ( 1 ) expansion vehicle with a useful life of 6-8 years .

the bus will meet caa and ada requirements .

the fleet status section of team has been updated to reflect this fleet addition .

we are able to operate and maintain the vehicle expansion .

the county is aware of fta c 4220.1f regarding third - party procurement and will follow federal , state and local procurement policies .

county will ensure that contractors are not on the debarment and suspension list .

will adhere to any / all special conditions of this award .

 ( 4th quarter ) the project description has not changed , however , the activities this quarter have .

expenditures for the 4th quarter include $188,705.06 for miscellaneous support equipment ( 11.42.20 ) ; $12,123.80 for landscaping under scenic beautification ( 119.00 transit enhancements ; $11,533.00 for preventive maintenance ( 117-00 other capital items ) .

___________________________________________ ( 3rd quarter ) the cherokee county board of commissioners has received 15 bids relevant to the arra capital expenditure to date .

$20,037 for communications equipment ( 11.62.02 ) ; $20,642 for control / signal equipment ( 11.62.01 ) and $151,975.59 obligated to misc .

support equipment ( 11.42.20 ) , as well as $12,000 obligated to scenic beautification adn property security ( 11.92.03 - 11.42.09 ) bus and other motor vehicle transit systems less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the purchase of 14 technology units ( automatic vehicle locators and mobile data computers ) , 3 bus shelters in the city of canton , and 1 set of 4 portable lifts to help perform bus maintenance .

the intelligence technology system software and hardware will help map and coordinate routes and ultimately save money by providing for more efficient pick - up / delivery .

the new equipment is expected to save on tire wear and outsourcing costs .

arra aug 3 repl bus / 1 van / 1 truck / misc expense invest in public transportation by purchasing additional buses including a hybrid and replacing a totally depreciated bus .

also fund maintenance costs including mechanics salaries and additional training .

also fund ada expenses,salaries,training , fuel maintenance costs .

invest in public transportation by purchasing additional buses including a hybrid and replacing a totally depreciated bus .

also fund maintenance costs including mechanics salaries and additional training .

also fund ada expenses,salaries,training , fuel maintenance costs .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems 530 greene street , room 207 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the transit department of the county of augusta - richmond in replacing buses that were scheduled to be replaced and upgrading their fleet , funding salaries and maintenance work on vehicles , and replacing an old supervisor van and maintenance truck .

the award allows the transit department to maintain service levels .

renewable energy / retrofit - solar lgt&sec invest in public transportation by replacing conventional petroleum dependent energy / security lighting system with a photovoltaic solar system in fta funded vehicle maintenance and storage facilities .

bus and other motor vehicle transit systems pr - 172 , 2nd floor public transportation terminal $1,000,000.00 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the conversion of the cidro public transportation center from a gas - powered to a solar - powered facility .

the solar system will rely on inverters for power rather than batteries .

the energy backup will be the electric company .

the award will lower pollution by producing clean energy .

the recovery act appropriated $5.55 billion for the federal buildings fund , which provides money for measures necessary to convert federal buildings into high - performance green buildings , renovate and construct federal buildings and courthouses , and renovate and construct land ports of entry .

this fund is administered by the general services administration ( gsa ) , which selects projects for funding ( such as the construction of a new building ) , and contracts with construction and engineering professionals to complete the project .

generally , gsa issues a number of contracts for each project .

nature and type of projects gsa had obligated just over $4 billion as of april 23 , 2010 .

of this amount , gsa has spent about $315 million .

this spending represents the total value of payments made to contractors for work they have already completed .

of the $5.55 billion in recovery act funds , about $4.3 billion was made available for measures necessary to convert gsa facilities to high - performance green buildings , $750 million was made available for federal buildings and u.s. courthouses , and $300 million was made available for border stations and land ports of entry .

overall , gsa selected 263 projects in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and two u.s. territories .

as shown in table 10 , gsa's recovery act projects fall into four main categories: ( 1 ) new federal construction , ( 2 ) full and partial building modernizations , ( 3 ) limited scope projects , and ( 4 ) small projects .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for federal building fund awards available on recovery.gov , as described in the report .

we found that an estimated 29 percent met our transparency criteria , 64 percent partially met our criteria , and 7 percent did not meet our criteria .

for the descriptions that did not fully meet our transparency criteria , we collected additional information necessary to make the descriptions meet our criteria .

the descriptions of awards , whether they met our criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions are provided at the end of this appendix .

gsa has provided additional guidance to federal buildings fund contract recipients , established an outreach call center to help recipients fulfill reporting requirements , and reviewed the recipient reports before the reports were made public on recovery.gov .

according to gsa officials , these efforts were designed to ensure that recipients followed reporting requirements and provided information on awards that the public can understand .

gsa provided technical assistance to recipients that was designed to augment the office of management and budget's ( omb ) guidance on recipient reporting .

gsa made this guidance available on its web site and also mailed a copy of the guidance to each recipient .

this guidance , first issued in september 2009 and updated in october 2009 , december 2009 , and march 2010 , describes the time frames for reporting and specific data element instructions , among other things .

gsa's guidance did not supply any information that supplemented omb's guidance on describing projects , including how funds are being used and expected outcomes .

according to gsa officials , this guidance was meant to be a synopsis of omb's guidance ; they did not think supplemental guidance was needed to describe how funds are being used and what outcomes are expected because they considered omb's guidance sufficient .

gsa's outreach call center has provided both outreach and support to contract recipients .

specifically , prior to each reporting quarter , staff at the center have contacted recipients to update contact information and remind recipients of the reporting deadlines .

in addition , staff at the center are available to answer questions from recipients and provide technical support to recipients as they complete their reporting requirements .

for the second round of recipient reporting , gsa staff also developed data quality reviews that compared the financial data in recipient reports with financial data in gsa's financial management systems .

gsa staff contacted the recipients and clarified any information that was not consistent with gsa data .

in addition , gsa staff reviewed the narrative information in the “award description” and “project description” fields to ensure that the information was accurate and to clarify any technical jargon or acronyms .

according to gsa officials , gsa staff did not attempt to provide additional information ; instead , gsa officials clarified the information that was already in the description .

gsa officials have worked with members of the media to inform the public about gsa's work under the recovery act .

in addition , gsa issues press releases on major project milestones and informs national and local media when gsa awards a project .

however , according to gsa officials , gsa cannot communicate all of its available information to the public because of the large volume of information available on gsa projects .

in addition , some information is procurement - sensitive and cannot be released to the public .

in addition to information on recovery.gov , gsa has published information on its recovery act program on its own recovery act web site .

this information includes the following: a federal buildings fund program plan .

this plan contains a summary of the objectives and activities that gsa's public buildings service plans to implement with the $5.55 billion in recovery act funds .

the plan also includes information on the projects' selection , delivery schedule , and performance measures .

additionally , the plan contains information on how gsa will address issues such as monitoring and evaluation , transparency , and accountability for its recovery act program .

a public building service project plan .

this plan details how gsa will spend its $5.55 billion in recovery act funds ; lists all the gsa building projects that will receive recovery act funds ; and , for each project , includes the name , location ( city and state ) , and estimated cost of the project .

a federal buildings fund investments map .

this interactive map shows where gsa is spending its recovery act funds and provides information on spending to date , measured in obligations and outlays , for individual projects or states .

according to gsa officials , they have received positive comments about gsa's role in helping to revive the construction sector in numerous communities .

gsa has also received negative comments about the pace of its spending .

according to gsa officials , the pace of spending lags behind the amount of work and number of jobs that gsa projects are generating because gsa pays for work on a reimbursable basis after the work has been completed .

as a result , work can be ongoing at a gsa project , even though gsa has not spent any money on the project .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

gruzen samton architects planners & interior designers llp this contract is a for a / e services for the design of a federal employee parking garage and a master plan for the san juan , pr fbi field office consolidation project .

the project as a whole will result in the design and construction of a new approx .

240,000 gsf federal building , on existing government property ( a 27 acre site ) for the hato rey area , san juan fbi field offices .

design and construction of the fbi facility wil be procured under a separate contract .

delivered final master plan and final concept design for the garage .

 ( information not reported ) san juan , pr 00918-1700 more than 50% completed gs - 02p - 06-dtd - 0054 westlake , reed , leskosky , ltd .

the objective of this work order is to achieve the re - commissioning and retro - commissioning goals set forth in the arra for the howard m. metzenbaum usch by creating bid and construction documents that describe all construction phase project work required by the nrpc identified projects and support the nrpc with project identification and definition .

the design shall consist of but is not limited to the following: mechanical systems upgrade / replacement: chillers , cooling towers , air conditioning units , boilers , hot water converters , steam pressure reducing stations , condensate return systems , primary and secondary pumping systems , domestic hot water heaters , heat exchangers , air handling units , terminal or variable air volume ( vav ) boxes , heat recovery units , motors , steam traps , dampers , pumps and air ducts .

energy conservation and renewable energy projects ? .

water quarterly activities / project description: during the final quarter of 2009 , wrl held an on - site kick off meeting with the gsa project manager , at the metzenbaum federal courthouse .

field investigation was performed , and base drawings of the building were developed .

wrl participated in reviews of the commissioning agent ? s reports prior to producing documents based on their recommisioning recommendations .

wrl produced 30% and 75% documents which were used to solicit proposals from a construction manager .

wrl participated in pre - proposal conferences with gsa and the potential offerors for the role of construction manager .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed pdg , inc. wind tunnel testing structural study for the micky leland fob ( tx0298zz located at 1919 smith street , houston , tx 77002 ) .

provide engineering testing and analysis services for the site , as well as , to determine building cladding design loads .

attended meeting with leland fob building manager and cotr to verify existing conditions & establish working schedule .

reviewed existing architectural and engineering plans & technical reports .

verify bldg .

site climatology & develop wind speeds .

perform wind tunnel testing for the fob that simulates the natural wind environment for the building site .

document all findings , conclusions & recommendations into a report .

messer construction co .

the project award includes $35,500,000 for construction phase services for the gs - 05p - 08- gbc - 0005 fire / life safety and hvac modernization for the minton capehart federal building in indianapolis , in .

it also includes estimated additional scope items of $4,304,513 ; and gsa contingency of $2,805,739.21 ; m&i services of $500,000 .

the base project scope ( fire / life safety and hvac modernization ) includes replacement of: air handlers , fiberglass branch distribution ductwork , stair pressurization fans , temperature controls , fire alarm system , fire pump and jockey pump , fire protection system , ceilings and lighting .

electrical systems and emergency generator system are to also be upgraded as necessary to support the project scope of work .

the project scope should also include leed silver certification .

we are working to complete preconstruction services funded prior to the arra funding .

preconstruction services are proceeding as scheduled .

we anticipate major subcontract awards to take place in first quarter of calendar year 2010 .

we are also working on m&i services , including forensic testing to verify condition of building piping systems prior to completion of design .

commercial and institutional building construction less than 50% completed gs - 05p - 08-gbc - 0005 heery international , inc .

provide engineering and commissioning expertise to conduct recommissioning / retro - commissioning planning , identify energy conservation measures , scoping , testing , investigation , evaluation , analysis , calculations , recommendations , and report writing services for the following gsa federal buildings: ( 1 ) tx , houston , bob casey us courthouse , ( 2 ) tx , houston , alliance tower , ( 3 ) tx , houston , labranch federal building , ( 4 ) tx , corpus christi , us courthouse and ( 5 ) tx , victoria , ml king , jr. federal building .

responsed to government's comments on the draft report ( submitted last quarter ) and completed final report for submission by end of the year .

 ( information not reported ) fort worth , tx 76102-6105 more than 50% completed goshow architects , l.l.p .

a / e services for bridging documents for the high - performance , green , building modernization and other alteration work clement ruiz nazario courthouse and federico degetau federal office building in hato rey , puerto rico .

review and evaluate site conditions , existing studies , surveys , analyses and reports , and identify additional services and tests that are required to fully document the project .

included in this phase were courthouse / fob tours ; systems upgrade analysis ; fire protection / life safety analysis ; enviromental hazards report ; conveyance system study , structural analysis study ; accessibility study ; thermographic imaging study ; energy model and existing building analysis .

hato rey , pr 00918-0000 more than 50% completed purpose is to investigate and provide recommendations for optimizing building performance through identifying energy improvements and demand reduction strategies .

a feasibility study is being generated to include the following information: 1 ) the integration of geothermal heat pumps in the facility to offset the cost of cooling and heating the building .

2 ) determine the feasibility of installing pv panels on the roof .

3 ) provide suggestions for the most methods of retrofitting the roof to accept pv panels where existing roof can not supoort pv panel installation .

4 ) provide conceptual renderings and drawings depicting vehicle canopies and covered walkways that use pv panels as protection from weather .

5 ) provide any other suggestions for reducing the electrical load of the building .

6 ) provide a fully developed lifecycle costing , pay back period , and energy savings .

the architect / engineer are to develop a design - build scope of work to implement the findings of the retro - commissioning study that can be executed within the available funding .

the architects and engineers took the findings from the retro - commissioning study and began preparing a design - build scope of work specification report .

a draft copy of the report was submitted to the agency for review and comments .

more than 50% completed gs - 03p - 03-cdd - 0028 heery international , inc .

initial scope is for pre - design services for the design and construction of new office space for the army corp of engineers on the federal center south campus in seattle , wa .

design and construction will be procured under a design - build procurement methodology using a two - step best value competitive award .

the deliverables include an update program of requirements , a design - build performance specification , a comprehensive bidding procurement document .

the design - build contractor is expected to be under contract in early march 2010 .

developed and refined concept estimate for the db scope of work.completed owner project requirements ( opr ) document .

completed development of the db competition bid document .

participated in db q&a meetings with gsa and usace .

 ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed jacobs facilities inc. construction management services for judges' swing space at samuel m. gibbons federal courthouse the purpose of this scope of work is to provide gsa guidance and direction as the construction manager as advisor ( cma ) contractor who will be the government's on - site manager responsible for the successful renovation of space alterations at the samuel m. gibbons federal courthousethe goal of the project is to construct the project on schedule and within budget while addressing minimum criteria for integrated design , energy and water usage , indoor environmental quality and materials usage.major deliverables include cost estimating , communications plan , detailed project schedule development and maintenance , project progress meetings and presentations , meeting minutes and correspondence , general progress reports , record keeping , construction submittal and rfi processing , project photography , inspections and testing reports , punch - list and final inspection , and closeout documentation .

interior buildout wall framing completed , wall rough - in of electrical completed , walls insulated and drywall has been installed and finished complete .

overhead electrical rough - in nearly complete and hvac rough is nearly complete .

all walls are painted and ceiling grid installation started.project is ahead of schedule and going well .

commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed the restoration project will replace the waterproofing membrane and increase the insulation of the plaza , replace the lighting systems in the below grade post office workroom levels with more energy efficient lighting , repair damages caused by water leaks and upgrade sidewalk access ramps to meet current ada requirements .

further , the granite pavers will be cleaned , restored and reset at the federal plaza .

the mnain goals are as follows: ? ? .

replace the waterproofing system .

 ? ? .

increase insulation of the plaza .

 ? ? .

replace the lighting and / or lighting controls in the below grade post office workroom levels with more energy efficient lighting .

 ? ? .

repair structural damage .

 ? ? .

repair damages to interior structural elements and finishes caused by water leaks .

 ? ? .

ensure ease and efficiency of long term operation and cost effective maintenance .

 ? ? .

complete the design and construction per gsa p - 100 .

 ? ? .

develop 3d building information model ( bim ) for the post office space and plaza .

 ? ? .

complete a project that satisfies the requirements of the existing building tenants and gsa .

 ? ? .

maintain the visual integrity and historic nature of the plaza and all its elements after the project is complete .

 ? ? .

complete the design and construction within established schedules .

 ? ? .

complete the project within the budget by maintaining fiscal responsibility , communicating that responsibility to all parties involved , and by constantly updating and tracking project cost estimates .

 ? ? .

develop a high performance green complex .

 ? ? .

adhere to all elements and guiding principles of the leed program where practical .

 ? ? .

per the energy policy act of 2005 , gsa's targeted maximum annual energy consumption level for this project is 87,571 btu's per gross square foot .

 ? ? .

promote and demand excellence in design and construction to produce a final project / building that reflects the dignity and significance of the united states government .

pre - construction phase services: 1 ) review of the architects design 2 ) review of the architects schedule .

3 ) conduct a design review charette 4 ) conduct bi - weekly meetings for the project team and maintain meeting minutes / project directory and the distribution list .

5 ) track progress via monthly report .

230 south dearborn less than 50% completed owner's construction representative services for the modernization of the 10w .

jackson , 18 w. jackson , and 230 s. state street project , located in chicago , il .

the contract award is for the base services - design / pre - construction phase , construction year one of option 1 , and options 2 and 3: cost estimating and project scheduling .

the purpose of this project is to modernize and renovate the three buildings to create a safe and functional environement for the federal government and the public that will use the building .

owner's construction representative , project kick - off , run and organize weekly meetings , meeting minute documentation , review of existing and new documents , review drawings , site visits , project organization , tenant meetings attendnace , notes , review of plans , peer reviews , hvac report review , schedule review , design review , final concept design review , scheduling , gmp cost estimating reconciliation , conduct value engineering work shops .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed gs - 05p - 08-gbd - 0023 the award is for architectural / engineering briding design services including , but not limited to , pre - design services , design concepts , briding design - build services , and contract close our services for th eban buren land port of entry .

the project is a new land port of entry ( lpoe ) for the town of van buren , maine , located on the st. john river approximately 320 miles north of portland , 40 miles north of presque isle , and 25 miles southeast of madawaska .

the existing border station was damaged when the st. john river flooded in late april and early may of 2008 .

rather than merely repair the undersized and outdated 40- year old facility , the gsa and the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp ) felt that this would be an excellent opportunity to build a new port that would meet cbp's needs for the future .

this new port will be a gateway to our country and will replace a flood - damaged and obsolete border facility with a state - of - the - art commercial port of entry .

it should make a distinct architectural statement that is responsive to the local community , the efficient movement of trade and commerce , the security requirements of law enforcement agencies , and the welcoming of visitors and citizens to the united states of america .

design concepts services , including: space planning , space efficiency reporting , model building , systems life cycle assessments , design , review , and presentation of three conceptual project alternatives , cost estimating .

2400 rand tower , 527 marquette avenue less than 50% completed ch2m hill , inc .

the denver federal center has antiquated utilities in need of repair or rehabilitation .

ch2m hill has been working with the gsa over the past three years to design a new water distribution system to replace the antiquated one , design rehabilitation and replacement of the sewer system that has been in place since the 1940's , and upgrades to the existing stormwater and electrical systems .

the arra funding allowed this much needed project to be constructed and also allows for further design and construction to improve the gulch that runs through the dfc to provide channel stabilization , replace the main electrical conductors , repair parking lots and provide a sewer upgrade .

provided engineering construction services for the construction of phases i through iii of the utilities infrastructure project at the denver federal center .

completed 30% design of phase iv and began 60% design of phase iv .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed jacobs facilities inc .

the new custom house in denver , co , is an 8-story office building containing 172,502 usable square feet with 47 outdoor parking spaces on a 2.4 acre site .

this 8-story stone building was constructed in 1931 and has 5 floors above grade plus a basement , sub - basement , and a partial floor below the sub - basement .

in 1979 , the building as listed on the national register of historic places and is now designated as a level 2 historic asset .

the building is primarily used as office space , the building also contains a child care center , as food service area , and provides space for us bankruptcy court proceedings .

tenants include: the small business administration , the us bankruptcy courts , the military entrance processing station , department of the army , department of justice , department of labor , department of the treasury , the railroad retirement board , and the department of homeland security.the proposed capital project will protect this 78-year old historic asset and improve the energy efficiency by upgrading air handling units , updating / replacing .

induction units and condensate piping , updating lighting and controls , updating mechanical controls , air intakes , installing isolation valves , updating / replacing domestic and mechanical plumbing , replacing ceilings and flooring , site work and new dock , updating restrooms , upgrading life safety system , and updating interior and exterior finishes .

the project will also include replacement of all the windows with blast resistant construction .

the amount of swing space is estimated at approximately 10,000 square feet .

construction is anticipated to begin in the summer of 2010 and the project duration is estimated at 24 - 30 months .

the project is required to meet all american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) regulations and applicable environmental and energy requirements.the contract scope of services includes pre design phase services to assist , review and provide technical support during the procurement process .

specifically , the construction manager will compile and / or develop the design / build criteria package and review offeror proposals for adequacy and completeness .

after award , during the design / build design phase , services include review of the design / builders design submittals to confirm that the design meets the solicitation for offers , budget , and special requirements .

the construction management team will also perform code compliance reviews ; constructability reviews ; conduct / participate in value engineering workshops ; analyze value engineering proposals ; prepare independent cost estimates , scheduling and design problem resolution .

project construction phase services include monitoring / observation services and attending onsite construction coordination meetings that occur among the government , general contractor , and architect .

pre - design services have initiated with review and analysis of existing documentation .

the first deliverable for the cm team is in progress .

the deliverable is augmentation of the db study , the db specifications , the bid form , consultation on the technical proposal and db sow .

products from this analysis will be included in the db rfp which will be issued to the shortlisted offerors in mid - december .

subcontracting and scheduling of geotech subconsultant is in progress .

commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed this project is to study options and make recommendations for a photovoltaic system to be located at the terry sanford federal building in raleigh , nc .

the complex consists of a courtroom tower and a large postal annex .

the proposed pv system will be mounted on the roof of the annex , which is estimated to have 116,140 square feet of useable roof area .

the project is initiated to use solar energy to generate power and reduce dependency on grid power .

the overall goal of the project is to provide an alternative energy source that will provide supplemental power to the terry sanford federal building .

the goal for this award is to provide a pre - project study and to develop a requirements package for construction .

project management , structural engineering , architecural services , & electrical engineering raleigh , nc 27601-1483 more than 50% completed enviroservices & training centers llc ensure safe work conditions and prevent release of asbestos and lead during renovation activities at the federal building and us post office , 154 waianuenue ave , hilo , hawaii .

mobilized to the island of hawaii .

provided oversight of asbestos related work for the 3rd floor , rooms 302 to 305 , including air monitoring and asbestos clearance testing .

asbestos clearance testing failed criteria and additional follow - up cleaning and testing is expected .

performed sampling and analysis of soil and thermal system insulation debris on bare soil to determine asbestos content .

debris contained regulated levels of asbestos .

soil in 2 of 4 sections contained detectable levels of asbestos less than 1 percent which is considered contaminated by hawaii dept of health .

will provide design specifications for asbestos abatement if required .

further oversight activites are expected for lead related work and in different areas of the site .

mobilized to the island of hawaii .

provided oversight of asbestos and lead related work for the 3rd floor , rooms 302 to 305 , including air monitoring and asbestos clearance testing .

asbestos clearance testing failed criteria and additional follow - up cleaning and testing is expected .

performed sampling and analysis of soil and thermal system insulation debris on bare soil to determine asbestos content .

debris contained regulated levels of asbestos .

soil in 2 of 4 sections contained detectable levels of asbestos less than 1 percent which is considered contaminated by hawaii dept of health .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed gs10f0173u key engineering group , ltd .

overall purpose of this study was to comply with the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

nepa study for the chicago federal plaza restoration project .

project deliverables included preparation of an agenda ( complete ) , meeting minutes and action items ( complete ) , roster of team members ( complete ) , class i cultural resource review - section 106 compliance ( complete ) , preparation of a draft documented categorical exclusion ( catex ) checklist ( complete ) , final checklist ( complete ) .

significant services performed included agenda ( complete ) , meeting minutes and action items ( complete ) , roster of team members ( complete ) , class i cultural resource review - section 106 compliance ( complete ) , preparation of a draft documented categorical exclusion ( catex ) checklist ( complete ) , final checklist ( complete ) .

in accordance with the scope of work , this project has been invoiced to 90% of completion .

the remaining 10% will be invoiced after gsa public notice is completed .

chicago heights , il 60411-1001 more than 50% completed cornerstone architectural group , ps provide a study to determine the condition of the federal center south building's roof structural system and address potential roofing material alternatives while meeting the arra requirements , initial capital , sustainability , life cycle costs , good stewardship , historic preservation and performance .

a cool roof , a vegetative roof , a building integrated photovoltaic or photovoltaic ballasted roof were to be considered and a recommendation provided .

the study will be used to provide guidance for a future roofing construction project .

the entire work under this award was completed in this quarter .

site visits , inspections , meetings , draft reports , reviews and the final report was submitted and approved .

6161 ne 175th street jacobs technology inc. data collection services to determine the feasibility of project labor agreements in two areas and the risk associated with each ( san francisco , ca and honolulu , hi ) .

the report will look at the utilization of project labor agreements in high union density states ( such as california and hawaii ) and will determine if large - scale construction projects to be built in predominantly unionized areas would benefit from the use of a project labor agreement .

the report will look at the utilization of project labor agreements in high union density states ( such as california and hawaii ) and will determine if large - scale construction projects to be built in predominantly unionized areas would benefit from the use of a project labor agreement .

research and study continued for honolulu and san francisco .

contract modification forthcoming to perform similar project labor agreement studies on additional cities .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed gs03p09dxa0025 heery international , inc. heery international is providing construction manager as agent ( cma ) services for the san juan fbi consolidation project for the master plan & garage design .

the services include ; attending design meetings and preparing agendas and minutes .

heery is also providing design reviews and estimates at each phase of the design .

all of these services are being performed to provide quality assurance and project management oversight .

also , include in the scope of services are the design phase commissioning services required to obtain leed silver certification .

the expected outcome of these services is to provide a project that is completed on time , within budget , and in accordance with the contract requirements .

october - attended the kick - off meeting and prepared the 35% dd estimate and performed the 35% dd design review .

november - attended periodic design meetings and prepared the 50% cd estimate and performed the 50% cd design review .

december - attended periodic design meetings and prepared the 95% cd estimate and performed the 95% cd design review .

 ( information not reported ) san juan , pr 00918-1700 less than 50% completed jacobs technology inc. cm services for clemente ruiz nazario courthouse and federico degetau federal office building the project is a high performance green building modernization .

the scope of the work for the building includes the following: redesign and replacement of hvac system ; upgrade of electrical panels and distribution system ; implementation of energy conservation program ; installation of photovoltaic panels ; improve interior finishes ; renovation of restrooms ; compliance to ada requirements ; upgrade of fire protection and life safety system and partial site improvement .

this quarter 100% bridging documents were submitted by the architect and have been reviewed and construction cost estimates prepared by jacobs for reconciliation prior to bid .

the initial phase of a two phase solicitation for a design build contractor has been completed .

jacobs was issued a modification on dec 28 , 2009 to provide design phase services in connection with the buildout of a new courtroom and ancillary space in the jose toledo courthouse , old san juan,pr to be used as swing space during the modernization project in hato rey .

 ( information not reported ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our assessment: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases , only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

stl architects , inc. study to investigate three existing 300 ton chillers with one that will be more fuel efficient .

preparation and presentation of a pre - design report determining methods of altering existing chiller systems in order to increase energy efficiency .

 ( information not reported ) $17,821.76 information gao gathered to improve the description the study of energy - efficient chiller options is part of a planning and designing effort for the recommissioning and retro - commissioning of the existing metcalfe federal building in order to improve the energy efficiency and minimize the environmental impact of the existing building .

the study will lead to preparation and presentation of a pre - design report highlighting areas of the subject property that may be altered or added to in order to increase energy efficiency .

this particular report will focus on the chiller system .

a / e desgin services for land port of entry at columbus , new mexico corpus christi , tx 78401-3025 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award was originally for expansion of the facility in its current location , but recent flooding along the border requires relocation of the facility away from the flood zone .

this award will allow completion of design to incorporate flood protection and compliance with new statutory energy requirements .

the facility will replace the existing , functionally obsolete facility with a new , energy - efficient facility that will meet the customs and border protection ( cbp ) mission requirements .

parsons infrastructure & technology group inc. construction management ( cm ) services for the mondernization & expansion of the otay mesa land port of enty ( lpoe ) in san diego california .

this delivery order covers services a - b as indicated in the contractor's proposal date 7 / 17 / 2009 .

parsons has not yet received a notice to proceed from the government concerning this task order .

commercial and institutional building construction contracts otay mesa land port of entry san diego , ca 92101-2058 information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides the funding required to complete the design , provide construction management and inspection services , and acquire the site necessary to expand the port .

the port is a multi - modal ( commercial , non - commercial , and pedestrian ) port of entry and is one of the 10 busiest land ports in the country .

the current facility is obsolete , inefficient , and causes severe traffic congestion .

the proposed project will reconfigure and expand the existing port through the purchase of adjacent properties to meet customs and border protection's ( cbp ) mission needs while meeting general services administration's ( gsa ) energy reduction and green building requirements .

cotter federal building located at 135 high street hartford ct , roofing and pv project: will consist of a intergraded pv & tpo roofing system: tpo will be a fully adhered cool roof with the photo voltaic panels intergraded in the field sheet .

the tpo roof will be heat welded using robotic field sheet welders and lyister - triack hand - held welders for detail and penetration welds .

all electrical components will also be intergraded into the tpo roofing system and insulation .

the project includes ongoing monitoring and support.. asphalt shingle and coating materials manufacturing information gao gathered to improve the description the award modernizes the cotter federal building and makes it more energy efficient by improving roofing and adding photovoltaic ( pv ) panels .

the scope of work is focused on building systems affecting energy use and indoor environment , including shell infiltration and heat loss for the moakley federal courthouse loacted in boston , ma .

site survey ; system review ; design review ; energy modeling ; functional performance tests , energy conservation measures , life cycle cost calculations , construction estimates .

153 milk street , suite 200 information gao gathered to improve the description the award will result in a study that includes information on energy conservation measures .

the thurgood marshall courthouse infrastructure upgrade .

during the period of october 1 , 2009 thru december 31 , 2009 cauldwell wingate has continued to work on the shop drawing and coordination of the meps systems through out the project .

in addition to this we have fabricated and installed the ductwork , sprinkler piping and electrical distribution on 7 tower floors and 2 base floors .

the main electrical distribution switchboards have been fabricated and set in place with the installation of the conduit and wire throughout the electrical closets .

the basement underground plumbing was installed in the parking garage was completed .

commercial and institutional building construction new york , ny 10007-1502 $64,000,000.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award upgrades the infrastructure and addresses life safety and accessibility issues of the building and will extend the useful life of the building .

the award includes coordination of mechanical , electrical , and plumbing ( mep ) systems throughout the project .

jacobs engineering group inc .

provide pre - design and design review servicesfor the building system modifications to meet nara 2009 requirements for the va file storage space located in building 104 of goodfellow federal complex .

arra va at bldg .

104 , 4300 goodfellow , st. louis , mo no project activities from jacobs , waiting on design .

 ( information not reported ) st. louis , mo 63120-1703 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides pre - design and design services for the building system modifications to meet national archives and records administration ( nara ) 2009 requirements for the va file storage space .

the va file storage space does not currently have any hvac or humidification , which is a requirement from the nara 2009 standards for file storage .

these activities will include new high efficiency chillers , new high efficiency chilled water , condenser water and hot water pumps , new high efficiency cooling tower ( s ) , new high efficiency air - handling units and distribution ductwork , chilled and heating hot water pipe , and a humidification system for approximately 130,000 square feet of file storage .

construction management services for the design phase include , but are not limited to the following: ( 1 ) attend the 35 percent , 65 percent , and 95 percent design review meetings ; ( 2 ) review drawings and specifications at 35 percent , 65 percent , and 95 percent ; ( 3 ) attend design kick - off meeting ; ( 4 ) attend three additional design development meetings ; and ( 5 ) evaluate construction cost estimate and attend three reconciliation meetings .

parsons infrastructure & technology group inc .

prepare an environmental impact statment to determine whether the proposed action warrant a finding of no significant impact or the preparation of the record of decision to improve , through modernization and new construction , the functionality , operational capacity and security of the otay mesa ( otm ) land port of entry ( lpoe ) .

conducted project kick - off meetings and site inspections , provided environmental impact statement ( eis ) notice of intent ( noi ) ,provided draft and final versions of public scoping eis fact sheet,provided draft and final versions of public scoping meeting display and project information posters , conducted public scoping meeting , provided draft and final versions of scoping report , completed a phase i environmental site assessment ( esa ) of the lpoe and submitted both draft and final versions of the phase i , completed internal draft threatened and dangered species biological assessment ( ba ) for the lpoe site and surrounding area , completed cultural resources evaluation for the lpoe site and surrounding area and submitted draft and final versions of the cultural resources report , with the final version submitted , provided draft endangered and threatened species consultation letters to gsa for submittal to us fish and wildlife service and california department of fish and game .

otay mesa land port of entry san diego , ca 92101-4433 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the environmental impact statement prepared from this award will allow the agency to determine if the proposed action would significantly affect the environment .

garland company inc , the remove and replace approximately 4,950 square feet of bituminous built - up roofing , add new insulation to create an r - 50 insulation value when complete , and install architectural metal at all parapet and coping locations .

the project shall include all low slope or flat levels of the roof since the project has not started , since the last report , manufacturing had manufactured and shipped roofing materials to the site .

contracts ( information not reported ) fergus falls , mn 56537-2576 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award replaces the roof of the united states postal service building and courthouse located at 118 s. mill street in fergus falls , minnesota .

replacing the roof will reduce the repair and alteration liability of the building and help reduce energy consumption .

smithgroup , inc .

window replacement - faáade thermal performance improvement for the john f kenedy federal building in boston , massachusetts .

the work to be performed under the contract includes updating the existing window and curtain wall replacement documents for code compliance and energy efficiency .

typical window design was revised as an additional bidding option .

the revised design is to be installed from the exterior as opposed to the interior .

additional bidding options were added for sealant joint replacement and concrete repair .

500 griswold street , suite 1700 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports design services for window and curtain wall replacement for the entire john f. kennedy federal building in boston , massachusetts .

hof construction , inc .

the robert a .

young building is a high rise historic brick strucutre approximately 1 million square foot in size , housing 3000 tenants .

the existing cafeteria kitchen , dish room , servery , and dining area have become outdated , and much of the equipment is aging with high energy consumption .

this work is being performed under the 'building tune - up , lighting replacement , building hvac systems and energy saving' categories as defined in the arra descriptions of high performance building improvements .

this field is not applicable yet since we haven't started work yet and no funds have been received .

commercial and institutional building construction 1222 spruce st. st. louis , mo 63102 saint louis , mo 63103-2818 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports construction to upgrade the cafeteria at the robert a .

young federal building .

the nature of the activities is renovations to the cafeteria , including coordination and phasing to minimize disruptions to cafeteria service , building operations , and tenants .

the activities under this award include construction of a new dish room with an accumulating conveyor ; reconfiguring the servery with new food service equipment and all associated rough - ins ; renovating the servery with new finishes on the walls , floors , and ceilings with down lighting and accent lighting ; replacing the existing equipment and hoods in the kitchen with higher efficiency equipment ; constructing two conference rooms at the north end in the dining room ; and installing new pendant lighting , diffusers , and finishes throughout the dining room , including ceiling , wall and floor finishes .

billings , mt federal courthouse: alta / acsm survey with boundary amendments ; amended subdivision plats ; topographic survey ; exhibit preparation 4th quarter: topographic survey other activities related to real estate 26th street west more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds an american land title association ( alta ) survey of property to be acquired in billings , montana for the construction of a new federal courthouse .

in addition to the alta survey , additional site survey work includes adjacent parking lots , land , and streets , and a topographic and power pole survey .

this work is intended to survey the property and provide data for the next steps in the construction of the courthouse .

stanger industries inc .

this award was for the arra - wichita air handler replacement - u.s .

courthouse - replacement of air handling units in the wichita courthouse.install new high - efficiency hot water boilers , new off - hours chiller , vav's and direct digital control upgrades .

* air handling unit replacement ; * variable frequency drive installation ; * new hot water piping and mechancial insulation ; * new sheet metal,distribution ductwork and grilles ; * accoustical ceilling removal / replacement ; * building automation upgrades .

* removal and replacement of three ( 3 ) air handling units ; * misc .

electrical power for the air handling units ; * minor lighting modifications ; * general project clean - up ; * building automation engineering ; * pre - construction services and drawing coordination ; * value engineering ; * quality control ; & solicit sub - contracting pricing .

commercial and institutional building construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will result in decreased energy consumption and operational costs .

constructors hawaii inc. repair , alteration , and seismic upgrade to the federal building and u.s. post office at 154 waianuenue avenue , hilo , hawaii .

the work includes asbestos removal work , installation of new concrete shear walls in the two wings , reconstruction of architectural concrete elements , renovations of existing toilet rooms , custom doors , windows and millwork , installation of fire sprinkler and other fire protection systems , plumbing , new electrical systems , natural stone , quarry tile , ceramic tile , and other finishes .

first quarter: furnished payment and performance bond , mobilized on site , started erecting temporary barriers , started demolition work .

second quarter: constructed new concrete shear wall at west wing from basement thru the third floor , new stairs at loading dock , new stairs and curbs at courtyard , new ramp at basement .

work is ongoing at the west wing first floor restroom and the finishes in the west wing first , second , and third floors .

commercial and institutional building construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the activities funded by the award will modernize the buildings and are part of general services administration's ( gsa ) overall effort to improve federal buildings .

install vfd on chiller # 3 at the federal bldg install new vfd or the chiller for energy efficiency commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) los angeles , ca 90024-3602 $72,807.65 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the installation of a variable frequency driver for a chiller at the federal building in los angeles , california .

jacobs technology inc .

requirements and estimating sevices for facilities in gsa region 10 prepare performance based requirements packages for solicitation of design / build contracts for various projects .

this is to include high performance green buildings .

the intent is to gather project data and performancerequirmentstoprepareperformance based statement of objectives .

deliverables include budget estimating , initial schedule development and solicitation phase services .

prepare performance based requirements packages for solicitation of design / build contracts for various projects .

this is to include high performance green buildings .

the intent is to gather project data and performancerequirmentstoprepareperformance based statement of objectives .

deliverables include budget estimating , initial schedule development and solicitation phase services .

prepare performance based requirements packages for solicitation of design / build contracts for various projects - completed 3 of 4 locations .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides plans for energy - efficient buildings at several sites in general services adminstration ( gsa ) region 10 , including the gsa region 10 headquarters in auburn , washington ; the federal building in baker city , oregon ; a historical building project in spokane , washington ; and the federal building in anchorage , alaska .

this contractor's place of performance will be at the jacobs office in bellevue , washington .

urs group , inc. tas::47 4543::tas - recovery - construction management services in support of jackson federal building modernization project .

services include pre - design and design phase .

construction management assist services for the jackson federal building modernization project from inception through june 20 , 2011 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the construction management services provided by this award are in support of an effort that will improve the building shell and repair or replace the building's hvac / electrical systems .

the modernization of the building will result in the facility being an economically and operationally efficient high - performance green building .

the services also include additional energy conservation measures in support of leed existing building designation .

bovis lend lease lmb , inc. moderization and facade reclad of peter w. rodino federal building in newark , nj 100% bridging design and final report commercial and institutional building construction $542,023.00 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award is part of a larger modernization project of the building consisting of exterior cladding for the entire building , upgrading fire egress for entire building , asbestos abatement and build out of 6 floors , upgrading hvac for 9 floors , replacing 32 ahu's , and a new cafeteria .

this award includes repair / replacement of the hvac system , domestic water distribution system , fire protection system , lighting and electrical systems , interior restoration , infrastructure work , exterior façade repairs , and hazardous materials remediation .

telephone , data networks , and security systems will also be upgraded and the restrooms will be modernized in compliance with americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and uniform federal accessibility standards ( ufas ) regulations .

the modernization will improve the building's façade , which , due to the age of the building , is showing signs of significant deterioration , and replace or modernize various aging original systems .

nicholson & galloway , inc façade repair and slate roof replacement at the u.s. post office and courthouse located at 271 cadman plaza east , brooklyn , ny 11201 continuation of security clearance with the department of homeland security / mobilization of job site / installation of pipe scaffold / installation of sidewalk bridge / temporary electric installed commercial and institutional building construction 271 cadman plaza , east less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award updates the original structure built in 1892 and the expansion built in 1933 , including replacement of nearly all of the existing deteriorated terra cotta cladding ; retention , repair , restoration , re - pointing , and cleaning of existing terra cotta and granite cladding on the facades of both structures ; replacement of the entire slate roofing system on both structures , to match the appearance and character of the existing slate roof ; installation of an access and fall protection / prevention system in compliance with all applicable occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) regulations at the slate mansard roof on both structures to facilitate periodic maintenance of perimeter gutters and drains ; and hazardous materials investigation and abatement associated with the above work items .

these activities will correct the deficiencies in the exterior envelope of the building and preclude further façade deterioration and damage to the structure and the recently renovated historic interior .

northern management services , inc. northern management services inc shall supply and install four cartons of polardam form in the data center .

based on the revised scope of work , northern management has received a credit for not using the special order brushed grommets .

thus adjusting the original project from $20,383.00 to $16,228.00 .

sub contractor has completed approximately 100% of the work .

the airflow panels have been relocated , the installation of the 126lf of plenum divider is finished and the floor work has been completed .

none of the completed work has been invoiced in this quarter .

gsa requirement of payment after 100% completion with inspection of work and release for payment documented .

commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides repair work at the data center of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms ( atf ) facility in martinsburg , west virginia .

the air flow handlers in the data center - - which houses many computers - - were not distributing air properly .

the handlers were moved to the racks at the front of the room and now work properly .

the contract was reduced from $20,383 to $16,000 because they did not need to use special order grommets that were originally thought needed for installation .

the award will result in air flow handlers that cool the data center to appropriate temperatures needed for computer functionality .

northern management services , inc .

perform testing of the ems systems at the giaimo building in new haven , ct and the mcmahon ch / fb in bridgeport , ct , in support of the energy audits at these locations .

the subcontractor had been contracted and the ems systems testings have been completed at both buildings as per the notice to proceed by general services administration .

northern management services' project manager and chief engineer oversaw the work by the subcontractor was completed in a timely manner .

this project is 100% completed.the general services administration has been billed in the amount of $6,437.52 .

contracts information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports testing of the energy management systems ( ems ) to improve energy efficiency .

wissahickon building in philadelphia , pa - pv roof , cm services task#1-design & shop drawings / submittal reviews / meetings commercial and institutional building construction 1120 connecticut ave nw , suite 310 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports electrical inspection services for the roof replacement and photovoltaic ( pv ) array installation project at the veteran's affairs center at 5000 wissahickon ave. in philadelphia , pennsylvania .

the design and construction of a new modified built - up roofing system is intended to replace the existing roof , which is 10 years old and currently in poor condition , with some portions of the roof leaking .

additionally , the pv array will reduce the environmental impact of the building .

square d company ( inc ) energy retrofit of the atf facility in martinsburg , wv .

provide and install two utility meters and all associated hardware .

provide associated monitoring services .

no activity - project not started yet commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the installation of two utility meters in support of a larger effort to retrofit the alcohol , tobacco and firearms ( atf ) facility with a ground source heat pump system , a photovoltaic ( pv ) solar array and replacement of the building's chillers and adjustments to the hvac system in the building .

the retrofit effort will provide heating and cooling and reduce the amount of energy consumed by the building .

w. g. yates & sons construction company the purpose of this award was to incorporate field changes and add ve option back into the scope work .

the major options added back were the blue fins , pavers at the rotunda and granite steps at the entrance the work performed during this calendar quarter included reworking the sprinkler heads at holding cells , update walls and doors with the revised life safety drawings , revising the dimming board locations , adding blue fins on the performance mockup , changing the floor framing plan @ elevator 5 , 6 & 11 ; adjustments to the steel framing in the field , relocating masonry walls for the judges mantrap and elevator , relocation of the floodgate and pneumatic tube system , adding additional security conduit , revising the courtroom millwork and revising the locations of the sally port sprinklers commercial and institutional building construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award allowed the contractor to incorporate value engineering ( ve ) into the construction of a new federal courthouse at 555 south president street in jackson , mississippi .

ve is an organized effort to analyze the functions of systems , equipment , facilities , services , and supplies to achieve essential functions at the lowest lifecycle cost , consistent with the required performance , reliability , quality , and safety .

community services agency of the metropolitan washington council , afl - cio pre - apprenticeship training job and placement services all staff hired , 6-week training completed for 20 individuals , job placement activities underway , recruitment for next adult and youth classes underway 888 16th street nw , suite 520 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award provides pre - apprenticeship training and placement services to low - income area residents through september 2010 .

graduates of the program will be placed at registered apprenticeship programs at construction sites to gain on - the - job experience and industry - recognized credentials .

the award is expected to result in 150 individuals trained and placed in jobs by september 2010 .

platinum one contracting , inc. design and install roof replacements and improvements of the wilke d ferguson federal building .

design and install roof replacements and improvements of the brickell plaza federal office building mobilization : design in process , submittals , bonding , insurance wilkie d ferguson federal ch , brickell plaza federal office building $1,377,500.00 information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the evaluation and installation of new rooftops at both federal buildings .

the evaluation phase of this project will test whether the current roof structures can sustain the weight associated with green roofs .

after testing , the construction phase of the project will be subcontracted to local builders .

the expected outcome is greater energy efficiency at both buildings .

national building contractors , inc. arra - funded replacement of penthouse and stair enclosure roofs with vegetated roofs .

the field survey of the roof replacement project has been completed , the asbestos testing has been performed , the 35% design submittal has been prepared and submitted , the project staging has been completed , and the demolition phase has begun .

401 west peachtree st. less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award funds the design and installation of roof replacement and improvements at the peachtree summit federal office building at 401 west peachtree st. in atlanta , georgia .

architect - engineer services , milwaukee , wisconsin high performance green building at the federal building & u.s .

courthouse 517 e. wisconsin avenue less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides architect - engineering design services in support of high performance green building work at the milwaukee united states courthouse and federal building in milwaukee , wisconsin .

these services will create scopes of work for building system improvements based on the findings of a recovery act - funded retro - commissioning study and support the implementation of building features to increase energy efficiency .

allied building service company of detroit , inc .

installing light sensors through out the building .

installing an a / c unit on the roof for computer room haven't started .

no detais yet commercial and institutional building construction 333 mt .

elliot avenue , rosa parks federal building information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports energy conservation activities at the rosa parks federal building in detroit , michigan .

these activities include replacing water - cooled air conditioning unit with air - cooled air conditioning unit , replacing weather stripping at the front entrance , and installing occupancy lighting sensors throughout the facility .

the award will result in reduced energy consumption .

frederick construction , inc .

modernization project at the federal building & us courthouse .

this project is in a design phase as a construction manager project .

no subcontracts have been awarded as of 12-31- 09 .

bids for subcontracted work will be reviewed and contracts awarded at a future date .

no services have been performed in this quarter .

commercial and institutional building construction ann arbor , mi 48104-2129 information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides upgrades to the lighting and building automation systems at the federal building and u.s .

courthouse in ann arbor , michigan .

the upgrades to the hvac and lighting controls will increase cost efficiency and energy conservation .

frederick construction , inc .

this project was awarded to conduct building automation system upgrades at the theodore levin us courthouse .

this project is in a design phase as a construction manager project .

no subcontracts have been awarded as of 12-31-09 .

bids for subcontracted work will be reviewed and contracts awarded at a future date .

this project is in the final design phase and the pre - bid phase no work has been performed on site in this quarter .

commercial and institutional building construction $801,980.18 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds activities to modernize the building automation systems at the theodore levin courthouse in detroit , michigan in order to make the building more energy efficient .

saint louis , mo 63103-2818 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds design services for the renovation and upgrade of the cafeteria at the robert a .

young federal building in st. louis , missouri .

the work being done under this award includes: design services for the cafeteria project , completing necessary technical updates , revising the project numbers and titles on all drawings , revising the specifications to require energy star equipment ( where available ) , and updating projected construction schedules .

the larger renovation and upgrade project includes an upgrade to air handlers , exhaust hoods , replacement of existing water - cooled appliances , and replacing existing kitchen equipment with energy star or leed certified equipment .

garland company inc , the 1 .

test for asbestos in or under roof ( current roof may have been laid over an older roofing system ) .

due: two weeks after award of contract .

2 .

specifications and schematic design for roof replacement .

documents must be sufficient to fully describe requirements for a design - build contractor , to include the design - build contractor's requirements for design completion , but need not be stamped by a pe ( although work must be by competent professional engineers as applicable ) .

due: 30 calendar days after award of contract .

3 .

recommendations for a pv system to be coordinated with roof replacement .

due: two weeks after award of contract .

4 .

upon gsa approval of recommended pv system , provide specifications and schematic design for the pv system .

the schematic design should be flexible enough to permit competition among pv equipment manufacturers .

the design must carefully avoid compromising historic aspects of the building , and must consider any other tenant impacts ( eg , glare reflected into windows ) .

documents must be sufficient to fully describe requirements for a design - build contractor , to include the design - build contractors requirements for design completion , but with the exception of the structural calculations need not be stamped by a pe ( although work must be by competent professional engineers as applicable ) .

due: two weeks after gsa approval of pv system recommendations .

5 .

provide structural calculations with the specifications and schematic design for the pv system .

structural calculations must be stamped by a pe .

since the project has not started , their have not been any significant service performed or supplies delivered .

to date , project set - up service and security badging administration has been delivered .

 ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports an engineering assessment and plans for roof replacement and photovoltaic ( pv ) system installation to be performed at the united states courthouse in pasadena , california .

samuel engineering , inc. compile exisitng as - built drawings and site plans to display the ground areas being proposed for ground mounted pv panels .

also display the parking areas being proposed for ground mounted pv panels .

also display the parking areas of buildings 25 , 53 , and 810 for the installation of carport pv s. indicate existing electrical system on - lines at both the building 480v and / or 13.8 kv for pv tie - in .

this information will be utilized to effectively portray the level of effort and existing conditions for a design - build contractor .

greenwood village , co 80111-2816 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the development of preliminary design build documents , including one - line diagrams , plan drawings , tie - in locations , and general design notes for potential new construction projects of photovoltaic ( pv ) panel systems at the denver federal center in lakewood , colorado .

the award recipient also developed cost estimates for electrical tie in at each proposed pv panel system location .

the award will result in increased solar power capacity through new ground - mounted and carport pv panel systems .

parking lot lighting .

completed site survey and 90 percent of design $48,284.00 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides a design draft for led parking lot lighting installation at the laguna niguel federal building .

the new lighting will provide energy - efficient lighting and reduce energy costs at the federal building .

this is a design build project which requires general contractor to furnish and install two ( 2 ) new centrifugal chiller variable frequency drives at the phillip barton federal buiding and court house located in san francisco , california .

no services have been performed as of yet , as the project has not started .

we attended a pre - construction meeting on thursday , january 14 , 2009 .

we are now awaiting a notice to proceed letter from gsa , as to when we will physically be able to start the project .

electrical contractors and other wiring installation contractors san francisco , ca 94102-3434 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports activities to improve the energy efficiency of the phillip burton federal building and united states courthouse .

these activities include installing variable frequency drives , which control electronic motor speeds to modulate the power being delivered to a motor to reduce energy costs and equipment maintenance .

design and construction services as required for design build construction of a new us federal courthouse selection of winning was made and under contract commercial and institutional building construction contracts ( information not reported ) san jose , ca 95110-1347 information gao gathered to improve the description the award is part of a larger effort to construct a new u.s. federal courthouse in bakersfield , california , which will meet the 10-year requirements of the courts and will satisfy federal energy standards .

bpa call is for project management services associated with gsa's public building services .

building enevelope , including curtain wall , windows and roofing , lighting - day lighting and energy efficient electric with sophisticated controls , hvac energy retrofit and replacement , including boilers , chillers , cooling towers , piping , pumps and air distribution , building systems controls , including hvac and lighting and acoustics , renewable energy generation , including photovoltaic .

administrative management and general management consulting services ( information not reported ) fort worth , tx 76102-0181 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports 2 people in the operations branch to provide project management support services for general services administration ( gsa ) recovery act construction projects .

the individuals will provide project management support for all phases of ongoing construction projects from conception to commission .

the location is the gsa office at 819 taylor st. , fort worth , texas .

the award will enable gsa to complete its recovery act - related construction workload .

cornerstone architectural group , ps provide lighting requirements as part of a future relighting project at two federal facilities .

information gao gathered to improve the description the award will result in professional engineering and lighting services for the federal building in fairbanks , alaska and the general services administration ( gsa ) region 10 headquarters in auburn , washington .

the award will result in increased energy efficiency and cost savings .

design and construction services to include all labor , installation , tools , equipment and design - build services for new boiler system for eugene federal building , eugene , oregon and replacement boiler system for james a. redden courthouse in medford , oregon .

administrative co - ordination activities .

commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the new boiler system for the eugene federal building is an energy - efficient system .

the boiler system for the james a. redden courthouse is being replaced because it is old and the replacement system is energy - efficient .

tishman / aecom , a joint venture construction management services for the daycare facility , central utility plant , phase 1 b adaptive reuse .

construction management services for security and it upgrades design review , meetings , construction review / coordination 2700 martin luther king jr , se washington , dc , dc 20032-0000 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award will support construction management services for the renovation of multiple buildings on st. elizabeth's west campus .

these services include design and cost estimate review , schedule control , construction progress reporting , safety and inspecting reporting , claims prevention , and close - out services .

in addition , the award will ensure that the renovation project complies with the recovery act and historical and environmental considerations .

the award will result in renovations to the st. elizabeth's west campus buildings for use by the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

provide procurement analyst support services in support of dhs consolidation program at st elizabeths , se , washington , dc performed procurement analyst in support of the dhs consolidation at st. elizabeths .

services included monitoring , managing , planning , organizing , and documenting all procurement of services / construction / ae contracts , including administrative duties .

commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) $175,400.00 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award is part of a larger three - phase department of homeland security ( dhs ) project to consolidate and develop st. elizabeths campus in washington , dc .

the phase of this project that is funded with recovery act funds incorporates the design and construction costs of: 1 ) u.s. coast guard command ; 2 ) u.s. coast guard parking structure ; and 3 ) amenity spaces for u.s. coast guard .

the award will also fund the remaining design work ( which was not completed in a previous project phase ) : 1 ) the new dhs and federal emergency management agency ( fema ) headquarters ; 2 ) historical preservation of st elizabeths buildings ; 3 ) design of dhs national operations center ( noc ) , and 4 ) dhs parking structures .

procon consulting , llc will be involved in design and construction management support services .

the project will help move dhs closer to completing its effort to consolidate and develop its headquarters in the national capital region , though it will not complete the project .

the remaining work will cost an estimated $1 billion .

jacobs technology inc .

provide intergrated planning sessions with gsa staff managing the 17 high - efficiency limited scope projects in the new england region ( 1 ) .

identify key objectives , critical scheduling requirements , opportunities and constraints posed by the region's 17 limited scope projects .

lead interactive planning sessions that will yield defined schedules and management plans for each limited scope project .

interactive planning sessions held with gsa regional staff managing the 17 limited scope projects .

all significant project details and activities reviewed and scheduled through completion .

management plans for each project prepared and distributed to regional leadership .

administrative management and general management consulting services ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports integrated planning sessions with representatives from each of the general services administration's ( gsa ) 11 regions as well as representatives from the office of chief architect and other related program offices .

these limited - scope projects are system upgrades - - such as upgrades to lighting or cooling systems - - that are discrete and do not require major space re - design or architectural changes .

jacobs technology inc. construction management ( agency ) services for modernization ofu.s .

department of interior headquarters arra - doi moderization cm svs arra - doi moderization cm svs project has not started .

plan to start the first quarter of 2010 .

 ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the renovation of the department of interior building in washington , dc to make the building more energy efficient .

project support services , inc. project management support to the office of portfolio management division facilities management & services program division ; providing operational , technical , and management support to the region in areas such as safety and health , concessions , childcare facilities , maintenance , energy efficiency , and accessibility .

provided project management to the gsa budget program , arra budget team for support of gsa manager p. johnson , portfolio management division .

 ( information not reported ) $216,617.84 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award provides one subject matter expert to support the office of portfolio management division , facilities management & services program division for the general services administration's ( gsa ) national capital region in washington dc .

specifically , the individual provides consultation for resolving americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and architectural barriers act ( aba ) cases at gsa facilities and review of ada / aba construction drawings submitted by third - party architects .

the award will result in assistance for gsa in approving ada / aba - related facility changes and reviewing specification drawings .

the project information portal ( pip ) tracks / reports on prospectus level projects for project managers , customers and pbs executives .

in an effort to support the arra , a host of enhancement will need to be made to the pip .

these ehancements will provide transparency and accountability over the recovery dollars applied to gsa capital projects .

these enhancements will also provide pbs managers access to real time reporting tools to provide validity and consistency to the data reported to bother internal and external stakeholders .

develop field level and form anhancements for recovery tracking to expand what has already been produced in pip .

update integrations and connections with bi to support omb reporting requirments .

1800 west street , nw less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the project information portal ( pip ) is a web - based tool created for project teams to share information on prospectus and non - prospectus level projects with stakeholders .

general services administration ( gsa ) uses the centralized system for tracking the more than 5,000 projects throughout its 11 regions for over 14,000 users .

the award will develop field level and form enhancements to allow gsa to track recovery act spending .

the following award descriptions contained little or no information that allowed readers to understand the general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken .

directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

gastinger and walker architects inc construction management , site visits commercial and institutional building construction more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides construction management services for roof replacement at the roman l. hruska , united states federal building / courthouse in omaha , nebraska .

despite being a relatively new building , the condition of the roof was poor .

this roof replacement is part of a larger project to replace the roof , upgrade energy controls so that energy use can be reported back to general services administration ( gsa ) , and then install photovoltaic cells ( pv ) .

a contractor will perform all construction management services from construction to commissioning .

the award will result in a more energy - efficient facility and facility sustainability .

assist with functional perforance testing at the rosa parks federal bulding .

other services to buildings and dwellings ann arbor , mi 48104-2129 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the testing of a cooling system at the rosa parks federal building in detroit , michigan , in order to ensure that the system is working efficiently .

kph construction , corp. recovery - light court roof replacement recovery - light court roof replacement ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports installation of a high performance green building light court roof located in the south building of the united states courthouse and federal building in milwaukee , wisconsin .

the activities under this award include all management , supervision , labor , materials , supplies , and equipment necessary to replace the light court roof .

the work will consist of removing and replacing approximately 10,000 square feet of roofing covering a first floor space at the base of the light court .

the award is in the amount of $997,358.00 .

saint louis , mo 63108-2208 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds design services for the mechanical upgrade to the building automation system , hvac upgrades , energy - efficient lighting , and new occupancy sensors at the robert a .

young federal building in st. louis , missouri .

northstar project management , llc administrative management and general management consulting services information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports design - build consulting services for renovation of the byron rogers federal office building in denver , colorado .

the proposed renovation capital project will address all major building components including the following: structural , mechanical , electrical , plumbing , fire protection , and elevators .

in addition , hazardous materials such as asbestos and pcbs will be abated .

the recovery act provides $4.6 billion to the u.s. army corps of engineers' ( corps ) civil works program to accomplish the goals of the act through the development and restoration of the nation's water and related resources .

funding is also provided to support the corps' permitting activities for protection of the nation's regulated waters and wetlands and cleanup of sites contaminated as a result of the nation's early efforts to develop atomic weapons .

the corps is an executive branch agency within the department of defense ( defense ) and a direct reporting unit within the u.s. army .

headquartered in washington , d.c. , the corps has eight regional divisions and 38 districts that carry out its domestic civil works responsibilities .

corps headquarters primarily develops policies , based on administration guidance , and plans the direction of the organization ; divisions coordinate the districts' projects ; and the districts plan and implement the projects .

the corps is the world's largest public engineering , design , and construction management agency and leverages its expertise primarily through contracts with civilian companies for all construction work and much of its design work .

civil works projects are generally authorized by various water resources development acts and funded by annual appropriations for energy and water development .

the civil works program includes efforts to provide safe and reliable waterways ; reduce risk to people , homes and communities from flooding and coastal storms ; restore and protect the environment ; provide hydroelectric power to homes and communities ; provide educational and recreational opportunities ; prepare for natural disasters and act when disaster strikes ; and address water resource challenges .

the operations and maintenance account focuses on preserving , operating , and maintaining river and harbor projects that have already been constructed .

the construction account funds construction and major rehabilitation projects related to navigation , flood control , water supply , hydroelectric power , and environmental restoration .

the mississippi river and tributaries account funds planning , construction , and operation and maintenance activities associated with projects on the mississippi river and its tributaries that reduce flood damage .

the formerly utilized sites remedial action program account is for cleanup of contaminated sites throughout the united states where work was performed as part of the nation's early atomic energy program .

the investigations account funds studies to determine the necessity , feasibility , and returns to the nation for potential solutions to water resource problems , as well as design , engineering , and other work .

the regulatory account funds efforts to protect the aquatic environment by regulating dredge and fill materials and other construction - related activities in jurisdictional waters of the united states .

through april 23 , 2010 , $3.5 billion ( about 76 percent ) of the $4.6 billion in recovery act civil works program funds had been obligated by the corps .

 ( see table 11. ) .

of the $3.5 billion in obligated funds , the corps had outlayed about $1.3 billion .

of the obligated funds , the corps obligated about 49 percent ( $1.7 billion ) for operations and maintenance and 37 percent ( $1.3 billion ) for construction .

as of april 23 , 2010 , the corps had identified 830 civil works projects to receive recovery act funding .

these included 533 operations and maintenance projects , 175 construction projects , 45 mississippi river and tributaries projects , 10 remedial action program projects , 66 investigations projects , and funding for the regulatory program .

contracts and not for projects .

according to corps headquarters officials , and as discussed later in this appendix , it is not easy to associate individual contracts with recovery act projects .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for civil works awards available on recovery.gov , as described in this report .

we found that an estimated 14 percent met our transparency criteria , 70 percent partially met our criteria , and 16 percent did not meet our criteria .

for descriptions that partially met or did not meet our transparency criteria , we collected additional information to complete the award descriptions for the elements of transparency that we believed were missing .

the descriptions of awards in our sample , whether they met our criteria , and additional information that we found to complete the narrative descriptions , are provided at the end of this appendix .

in order to assist the public in better understanding how a particular contract fits into a larger project context , the corps issued supplementary material to its district offices , directing them to instruct recipients to include the project name — information that districts would need to provide to recipients — in the award description .

according to corps headquarters officials , the corps districts were to provide this information to recipients in a quick reference sheet that contained key award information , including the project name , which recipients were to use to report contract information .

the corps headquarters instructed the districts to provide this information to the recipients .

we identified three factors that may have affected the transparency of reported information .

first , because the corps awarded multiple contracts to support its projects , depending on the nature of a contract , a recipient may not know which corps project the contract supports .

for example , a corps district awarded a contract to purchase a boat that will be used to perform maintenance at a dam and reservoir project ; however , the recipient was not aware of the intended use of the boat sold under the contract .

moreover , according to corps headquarters officials , without receiving information from the corps , a recipient may not know which corps project the recipient's contract supports and would not be able to report this information .

in addition , even if the project name associated with each contract was provided to the recipient , the nature of corps contracts may make it difficult for the recipient to report information , particularly with regard to location .

for example , engineering services provided for a construction project in texas may be provided by a recipient located in another state .

second , according to corps headquarters officials , the corps awarded about three - fourths of its recovery act contracts to small businesses that may not have experience with this type of reporting and may have limited administrative capacity .

finally , corps headquarters officials told us that the recovery.gov system was designed for reporting on grants and loans and was adapted for contracts ; therefore , it may have been difficult for recipients to report certain information .

for example , certain contract actions such as modifications to existing contracts or task orders — which can include multiple activities across multiple locations — are reported in the system as a single award , and recipients may have been unsure how to indicate this information when reporting .

as a result , a single award description may appear in recovery.gov for work involving multiple activities and locations and this information may not be explained in the award description .

projects and identify some descriptive information about the projects .

the information available on the web site is specifically related to recovery act projects ; however , detailed information about individual contracts that support these projects is not available through the web site .

prior to awarding recovery act contracts , the corps also provides information about contracts through solicitations it posts on the federal business opportunities web site .

according to corps headquarters officials , the comments they have received on the corps' recovery act awards were mainly from recipients requesting technical assistance and from reporters requesting information about a specific contract they were researching .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

appendix xi civil works program tetra tech , inc .

contractor must review as - built information and collect supplemental data to meet the certification requirements outlines in 44 cfr 65.10 and detailed in national flood insurance program for the massillon levee , located in massillon , stark county , ohio .

the contractor will be responsible for determining that interaction among the companents will not result in possible failure .

responsible for producing these supporting engineering analyses and reporting the component condition and certification recommendation .

contractor will be responsible for performing the certification determination .

certification engineering analysis shall consist of hydrology and hydraulics , geotechnical , structural , electrical , and mechanical evaluation .

major factors to be considered in the technical evaluation include: o&m plans , levee certification field inspection , characterizing the flood hazard , capacity exceedence / failure criteria , freeboard , closure devices , embankment protection , seepage analysis , embankment and foundation stability , settlement , construction records and control testing , performance records , major maintenance and rehabilitation , interior drainage , and residual risk and public safety .

a levee certification report shall be prepared to document and describe the basis for the certification recommendation of the massillon levee system .

the lcr shall be sufficient to support the execution of the independent technical review process described in paragraph 10.c of nfip etl ( draft ) _1110-2-570 .

five copies of the draft submittals shall be submitted .

upon completion five ( 5 ) copies of the final report shall be submitted and properly bound .

the report shall include all text tables , figures , and exhibits to support the findings , results , and recommendations .

in addition to hardcopies , all computer files generated shall be submitted on cd rom formatted in microsoft word .

to insure all work submitted is technically accurate the contractor shall develop and execute an independent technical review plan .

this plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the government .

the contractor is responsible for quality control .

the contractor is responsible for the formulation and preparation of all work required in this statement of work .

all final reports , figures , drawings , calculation , and report cover letters will be sealed or stamped by the responsible engineer .

the intermediate reports and final report will be submitted for quality assurance review and shall be complete and free of spelling , typographic , and grammatical errors .

the 50% and 90% drafts reports will be submitted for qa review and comments by corps of engineers personnel .

the 50% draft report shall be submitted within 5 month of the notice to proceed and the 90% draft report shall be submitted within 7 month of the notice to proceed .

task 1 - data collection and review .

completed data collection and review .

reviewed readily available materials and identified additional resources referenced task 2 - topographic mapping .

obtained topographic mapping in gis format .

task 3 - site reconnaissance visit .

performed post - processing of gps data .

prepared draft inspection log / report .

task 4 - geotechnical assessment .

performed review of past design data and geotechnical information .

prepared drilling plan .

performed field exploration .

task 5 - engineering assessment .

performed hydrologic evaluation .

performed hydraulic evaluation .

performed initial scour / aggradation analysis ( pending internal review ) task 7 - levee certification report .

prepared hydrologic section of the levee system report .

performed hydraulic section of the levee system report .

task 8 - independent technical review .

performed review of hydrologic section of the levee system report .

performed review of hydraulic section of the levee system report .

task 9 - meetings and coordination .

coordination with city of massillon and usace .

task 10 - project management .

invoicing and reporting .

engineering services appendix xi civil works program ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed david ford consulting engineers inc the accelerated cwms deployment campaign ( hereinafter referred to as the project ) is a component of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 .

the objectives of the project are as follows: 1 .

to enhance the capability of the corps of engineers offices nationwide to make well informed decisions for managing reservoirs and water control systems .

this will be achieved by expanding , at an accelerated pace , the availability of advanced information technology resources for hydrometeorological data management , display , and dissemination ; watershed runoff forecasting ; flood stage prediction ; reservoir operation analysis ; and flood impact analysis .

2 .

to create and maintain jobs for us citizens , in keeping with the goal of the arra .

this will be achieved by using hec ? s bpa contractors to undertake the work and manage its successful completion .

those contractors , in turn , may use local consulting resources if appropriate and useful to the project .

the intended deliverable of the overall project is , for critical corps of engineers watersheds , a fully functional cwms decision support system that will enhance water management .

the cwms decision support system includes hec - hms , hec - ras , hecressim , and hec - fia .

for each watershed , software will be installed as needed and configured by a contractor , with cooperation of hec and division or district staff .

contractors will configure and calibrate the models , using data and information collected from district and division staff .

contractors will test the software under simulated real time high flow conditions , demonstrating the deployment under a stress test .

contractors will document actions taken to deploy the decision support system .

finally , contractors will transfer the technology to corps staff in the appropriate district or division offices .

this task order is for a ? lead contractor ? .

 ( lc ) to assist hec in managing rapid deployment of cwms at corps districts and coordinate the day - to - day activities of the blanket purchase agreement ( bpa ) contractors contributing to this effort .

this role includes working with hec on selecting watersheds to be implemented , identifying what models and tasks are necessary for each implementation , developing management plans , and performance work statements .

the lc will recommend assignments of tasks to other bpa contractors through the corps pm .

the lc will facilitate the work of the bpa contractors , clarifying statements of work , deliverables , and schedules with the pm .

the lc will monitor the progress of the bpa contractors , reporting to the pm and supply the weekly reporting information to meet arra requirements .

the lc will take all necessary actions to ensure the project objective is met .

appendix xi civil works program task 1: worked with hec project manager ( pm ) to identify priority basins and locations for accelerated cwms deployment , and prepare list of candidate sites for deployment .

contacted technical representative ( tr ) at each candidate site to confirm selection and to gather relevant information about sites .

coordinated with pm to develop a detailed project management plan ( pmp ) .

obtained buy - in and signatures from relevant bpa contractors , corps district staff , and hec .

task 2: coordinated with pm to develop detailed work plan and work statement for each deployment site ( 8 ) for initial effort by bpa contractors .

task 3: reviewed initial site assessment reports submitted to hec from bpa contractors .

advised pm on any technical or administrative issues .

wrote a summary report of the site assessments with lc recommendations .

coordinated with pm on selecting additional candidate watersheds for the second round or on deleting candidate watersheds from first round if funding is not available for all sites .

task 4: prepared performance work statements ( pws ) for each of the 8 candidate watersheds .

task 5: reviewed work plans and schedules submitted by bpa contractors .

wrote a summary report of the work plans with lc recommendations .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed furnish all drawings , labor , materials and equipment necessary to fabricate , deliver and install one ( 1 ) complete new boat dock system with three ( 3 ) 8-foot wide x 20-foot long aluminum dock sectopms and one ( 1 ) 4-foot wide x 20-foot long aluminum tapered gangway .

dock system must be able to use existing anchoring system .

fabrication , delivery and installation has been completed .

accounting completed billing and office assistant is completing federal reporting .

smartsville , ca 95977-0006 appendix xi civil works program furnish all equipment , labor , layouts of work features , and supervision necessary to obtain sufficient subsurface information , perform analysis , and provide the government recommendations to help alleviate seepage at left abutment of winfield locks and dam , red house , wv .

drilling , lab evaluations , and initiated study more than 50% completed original contract was awarded august 30 , 2007: contract was for the completion of foundation drilling and grouting at the clearwater dam in piedmont , missouri .

this work is a continuation of phase i which was completed oct 15 , 2007 .

the scope of this contract was to complete the foundation rock treatment down to elevation 325 , 250 ft below the working platform , prior to the installation of the proposed cutoff wall .

the lower 50 ft of the grout curtain is to be grouted to a value of 3 lugeons or less and the upper rock mass to a value of 10 lugeons or less .

this type of work is highly technical in nature and will provide enormous amounts of valuable data to be used in the design and construction of the proposed cutoff wall ( phase ii ) .

beginning with modification p00012 executed may 6 , 2009 , arra funds were incorporated into the contract in order to provide for adjustments in quantity and scope of work required in order to meet the project objectives .

the project was successfully completed , final reports have been submitted and the contractor is demobilized .

in excess of 25,000 lf of drilling ; over 500,000 cf of grout materials placed ; over 1117 lf of borehole stage imaging ; relocation of water lines in preparation of phase ii work .

appendix xi civil works program poured concrete foundation and structure contractors jacobs / seh , a joint venture main lock culvert valve machinery study phase i , melvin price locks and dam , mississippi river , preliminary engineering report , per attached scope of work and proposal dated 18- jun - 09 .

dj04 - mel price main lock culvert this task involves static and kinematic measurement , disassembly , material inspection and testing , evaluation and reporting as part of an investigation of failures that have occurred in the culvert valve machinery components of the main lock , illinois - side emptying valve at mel price locks and dam on the mississippi river .

all field activities are complete .

the draft report was submitted this quarter .

we are awaiting comments before submission of the final report .

 ( information not reported ) st. louis , mo 63102-2131 more than 50% completed w912ek - 09-d - 0006 appendix xi civil works program in support of fish studies , perform adult coho salmon and steelhead radio telemetry monitoring , green river seattle , washington .

the contractor must: analyze and report on radio telemetry monitoring of adult coho salmon released above howard hanson dam , wa , ( hhd ) into the upper green river in fall 2008 ; monitor the movement and distribution of adult coho released above hhd into the upper green river in fall 2009 ; analyze and report on 2009 results incorporating information from 2008 study .

work for this project has not begun .

 ( information not reported ) regulatory document imaging and digital conversion to search able format .

approximately 800,000 documents .

grace hill ( prime ) has converted approximately 50% of the microfiche to digital format .

we are now in the process of converting the documents to a searchable ( ocr ) format .

we expect to be 50% complete by end of january 2010 .

data processing , hosting , and related services less than 50% completed w912es - 10-p - 0015 appendix xi civil works program provide all transportation , parts , materials , equipment and laborer to provide and install a complete security camera monitoring system ( scms ) designed for marine environment on board the us army dredge ship wheeler .

removed antiqated security system and installed three ptx ( pan , tilt , zoom ) cameras and 11 fixed cameras at various locations throughout the ship .

all work was completed ; however , two of the fixed cameras are working intermittantly during the first cruise and will be replaced as soon as the ship returns to port .

electrical contractors and other wiring installation contractors new orleans , la 70118-3651 more than 50% completed diaz consultants , inc. project synopses: conduct field and laboratory investigations to characterize the nature and level of contamination of sediments deposited behind three dams ( carbon canyon dam , lopez dam , and prado dam ) and prepare a report and logs summarizing those investigations .

carbon canyon has been awarded as the base contract ; lopez and prado may be awarded as options to be executed at a later date .

completed field invetigation and laboratory testing .

completed and submitted draft report for review .

 ( information not reported ) santa ana , ca 92701-0810 more than 50% completed w912pl06d0004 appendix xi civil works program security construction services , inc .

replace roofs at knightville gatehouse , littleville gatehouse and intake tower and birch hill dam gatehouse .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and / or expected outcomes .

in some cases only a small amount of additional information was needed , while in other cases , many pieces of information were needed to make the description more transparent .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

appendix xi civil works program manson construction co. capital ( deepening ) dredging at the port of anchorage other heavy and civil engineering construction less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds dredging , which will support the port's ongoing intermodal expansion project , planned to allow larger ships to call and offer more room for commercial cargo handling , a cruise ship terminal , and to support rapid deployment from alaska's military bases .

romero general construction corp. repair badly deteriorated roads , success lake ca highway , street , and bridge construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds road repair to multiple areas including the entryway to success lake , the south tule recreation area , and the south tule parking lot .

the repairs included replacement and repaving of roads , which involved digging up the asphalt , cement treating , and paving .

success lake is located just east of porterville in tulare county , california .

appendix xi civil works program ross laboratories , inc. mfg and delivered sidescan sonar system ( model 4900 ) incl sub bottom , profiling system mfg and delivered sidescan sonar system ( model 4900 ) including a sub bottom , profiling system .

also delivered a vessel motion sensing sys and hydrographic survey software .

search , detection , navigation , guidance , aeronautical , and nautical system and instrument manufacturing information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the manufacture and delivery of a sidescan sonar system ( model 4900 ) including a sub bottom profiling system .

this award also includes the delivery of a vessel motion sensing system and hydrographic survey software .

this equipment and software is for maintaining shipping / navigation channels in the new york harbor area .

biohabitats , inc. schukylkill river , wissahickon creek feasibility study field assessment , analysis , and report preparation for restoration actions .

other scientific and technical consulting services more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the completion of feasibility study scoping documentation for ecosystem restoration within the wissahickon watershed .

based on a previous study , it was determined that the primary problems within the wissahickon watershed include stream flow variability , poor quality aquatic habitat , aquatic habitat degradation , flooding , and overall ecosystem imbalances .

various solutions exist to address these problems and will be considered in depth during feasibility investigations .

this documentation will include definition of the existing conditions , the "without project" conditions , and the site selection screening process to continue the feasibility study of this critical urban watershed for ecosystem quality improvements .

complete the rehabilitation of the ada campsites at south abutment , dub patton , and hernando point recreation areas at arkabutla lake in accordance with the attached scope of work - ( project #1 ) completed installation of concrete pads , grading of disturbed areas and installing of latern hangers , picnic tables and service tables .

facilities support services appendix xi civil works program more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the rehabilitation of campground sites to make them americans with disabilities act ( ada ) accessible , allowing persons with disabilities to safely utilize the campground areas .

rehabilitation included procurement and installation of ada - compliant items including tables , lantern holders , and grill services tables .

work also included installation of concrete pads and grading of areas to make them ada compliant .

the award provided rehabilitation of 56 campground sites at 3 recreation areas , including 18 sites at south abutment , 14 sites at dub patton , and 24 sites at hernando point .

t & c mobile home & construction services , llc remove and replace furnaces and fuel tanks in the gate house at whitney point lake , ny .

the sub - contractor provided all labor , equipment , tools , and materials necessary for removing and replacing two furnaces and two 275 gallon fuel oil tanks in the gate house at whitney point lake , ny .

plumbing , heating , and air - conditioning contractors whitney point , ny 13862-0706 information gao gathered to improve the description replacing the furnaces will permit a much more efficient use of energy and replacing the fuel tanks will permit operation of flood control gates during a power outage .

wilson & company , inc. , engineers & architects cepd compliance surveys .

appendix xi civil works program land surveying , geodetic .

surveying and mapping ( except geophysical ) services less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports surveys for comprehensive evaluation of vertical datums that will establish new vertical control , based on the north american vertical datum of 1988 ( navd 88 ) , for each of 70 projects located in new mexico , colorado , and texas , within the u.s. army corps of engineers albuquerque district .

this work will ensure that all of the flood control projects within the albuquerque district are referenced to at least three vertical control benchmarks .

this will take the district one step further in ensuring that all of its flood control projects are referenced to navd 88 .

this effort is needed to meet requirements of an executive order that calls for the standardization of the use of the most current vertical datum , which is navd 88 .

vertical datums are used to reference protection elevations on flood control structures or excavated depths in navigation projects .

tas::96 3134::tas design and construct land port of entry at sherwood north dakota for customs and border protection commercial and institutional building construction ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports construction of a new land port of entry ( lpoe ) building in renville county , north dakota for use by customs and border patrol ( cbp ) personnel .

the award also supports interim repair and alterations activities to address immediate and emerging needs of the existing lpoe until new construction is completed .

appendix xi civil works program lower willamette river ecosystem restoration general investigation feasibilty study / draft peis we completed the field surveys for htrw , topography , cultural resources , and utilities .

we also completed the hydraulic modeling , cross sections , and refined the preliminary drawings .

at the beginning of october .

we submitted the draft notice of intent .

we got about haflway through the geotechnical section , and completed the writeup for soils and geology .

less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds a study that will assess the feasibility of ecosystem restoration , including remediation of contaminated sediments over a portion of a 25-mile reach of the willamette river in portland , oregon .

the feasibility study will be used to examine and prioritize ecosystem restoration opportunities in the study area .

the purpose of the study is ( 1 ) to identify and evaluate substantial ecosystem degradation problems in the lower willamette river basin ; ( 2 ) to formulate , evaluate , and screen potential solutions to these problems ; and ( 3 ) to recommend solutions that are in the federal interest and are supported by a local entity willing to provide the items of local cooperation ( i.e. , a cost - sharing sponsor ) .

the recommended plan will contribute to the identified restoration objectives of restoring fish and wildlife habitat and natural processes of the basin .

the lower willamette river ecosystem restoration project is from willamette falls to its confluence with the columbia river .

atlantic marine construction company , inc. furinsh all labor , material , equipment , incidentals , supervision and transportation for work necessary to provide security , road , and parking improvements .

job duration is 90 days from ntp .

project is in design at this time ? ..billed for bond cost of $18,770.00 commercial and institutional building construction elberton , ga 30635-5420 appendix xi civil works program less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides security , road and parking improvements to the access road at the richard b. russell dam and lake project in elberton , georgia .

tidal datum determinations for small boat harbors in southeast alaska .

the scope of work is to do a tidal determination to establish a new vertical datum and tie existing control of each harbor to its new vertical datum at hoonah small boat harbor , hoonah , alaska , the kake small boat harbor , kake , alaska , the metlakatla new harbor & metlakatla old harbor ( one station ) , metlakatla , alaska , and the pelican small boat harbor , pelican , alaska and re - establish the horizontal control at hoonah small boat harbor for the us army corps of engineers , alaska district .

field work is complete .

installed tide gauges at the villages of hoonah , kake , pelican , and metlakatla in southeast alaska .

gauges collected water level information for a period of 35 days , then removed from the water .

installed new tidal bench marks at each location .

determined bench mark positions with gps and updated positions for other historical bench marks and survey monuments at each harbor .

determined bench mark elevations by differential leveling and updated elevations for other historical bench marks and survey monuments at each harbor .

iniated data processing .

surveying and mapping ( except geophysical ) services more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the collection of tidal data published by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) at specific locations known as tide stations .

commercial and private boats use these data to safely navigate waters and in the long run , these tidal data will help establish four tide stations at these harbors as well as inform harbor improvements .

appendix xi civil works program david ford consulting engineers inc this project is for hec - ras steady and unsteady model development for the red river of the north ( rrn ) from the canadian border to halstad , mn .

scope tasks include review of the existing hec - ras steady models , consolidation to one model , cross section expansion and refinement , and calibration to the flood of record .

both steady flow hec - ras and unsteady flow hec - ras models will be completed .

the completed unsteady flow model is intended to be used by the national weather service ( nws ) north central river forecast center .

a brief report should also be prepared to discuss model construction and simulation results .

quarterly activities: task 1 .

completed kickoff phone conference call and began meeting coordination .

task 2 .

began to review existing hec - ras models and data and began to complete a memorandum for the record ( mfr ) .

task 9 .

provided required monthly status reports .

 ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the development of a hydrologic engineering centers river analysis system ( hec - ras ) hydraulic model for the entire red river .

the model will be used for project planning and flood forecasting .

provide labor , equipment and materials required to perform the work at the lake washington ship canal spalling concrete repairs , including placement of concrete / epoxy repair system .

erection of scaffolding , cleaning of application area , application of epoxy based concrete patch material , final cleanup and gridning of finished areas , disassembly of scaffolding .

appendix xi civil works program more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the repair of spalling concrete on the sides of lock chambers .

spalling is the minor failure of the concrete lock sidewalls that occurs due to age .

the spalling concrete is a safety issue because it could fall on boats and / or presents a hazard for boaters and employees .

gustin , cothern , & tucker , inc. survey #09-079 , perform all a_e services for topographic , geodetic , property / boundary , and construction surveys for eden ( wcs ) benchmark monumentation ; counties of broward , miami - dade , monroe and palm beach gps sessions for completion of required benchmark monumentation surveying and mapping ( except geophysical ) services ( information not reported ) west palm beach , fl 33401-0001 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports benchmark documentation activities in florida's water conservation areas as part of the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , adaptive assessment , and management program .

these activities will provide necessary data for scientists and engineers to restore america's everglades .

black & veatch special projects corp black & veatch is performing structural engineer anlaysis and design of mass concrete structures for the new upstream monoliths for kentucky lock .

we are producing construction plans and specifications .

the work has required structural , civil and electrical engineering , as well as , construction cost estimating and scheduling .

cadd technicians put together the construction plans .

completed final plans and specifications for new upstream lock monoliths .

included foundation design and other miscellaneous features .

appendix xi civil works program ( information not reported ) grand rivers , ky 42045-0001 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this design work supported by the award is part of the kentucky lock addition project to construct nine partial height monoliths - - the 60- foot wide by 60-foot deep by 100-foot tall concrete blocks that hold back the water - - for the upstream one - third of the new lock ; this will create a more stable configuration for the existing lock .

mike hooks , inc. cin - 007: disposal area maintenance & cin - 008: new spill boxes - calcasieu parish , louisiana cin - 007: disposal area maintenance work consists of ditching in the disposal areas .

the depth and width of the ditching will be site specific .

the linear footages for each disposal area are: d / a 2 = 2,300 ft. , d / a = 25,450 ft. , d / a 9 = 22,900 ft. , d / a 10 = 16,050 ft. , & d / a 11 = 16,800 ft. cin - 008: install new spill box weirs in disposal areas #2 , #8 , #9 , #10 , & #11 .

the existing spill boxes in each disposal area shall be removed from the site .

surveys of the disposal areas to determine the location of the new spill boxes .

other heavy and civil engineering construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the work performed under this award will extend the life of the levees in calcasieu parish .

appendix xi civil works program urs group , inc. tas::96 3135::tas - master planning services for alum creek lake , lewis center , oh .

prepared urs project execution plan ( pxp ) , performed project administrative start - up activities .

master plan ( mp ) task 1- project start - up: prepared and submitted draft plan of study ( pos ) .

mp task 1- project start - up: participated in kick - off meeting .

mp task 2 - develop geographic database: began gis setup and data acquisition .

all other professional , scientific , and technical services ( information not reported ) .

great lakes dredge & dock company , llc this project entails dredging of 1.2 million cubic yards of maintenance material in the oregon inlet spit channel and the ocean bar .

dredging is to be to - 15 feet .

dredged material is to be placed on the beach at pea island .

the only non - arra funding is a portion of the mobilization and demobilization ( $2.5 million out of $3.6 million ) .

approximately 268,000 cubic yards of material were placed at the disposal site during the fourth quarter of 2009 by the hydraulic cutter suction dredge alaska .

equipment was demobilized in the fourth quarter .

other heavy and civil engineering construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds maintenance dredging operations to provide a safe , reliable navigable channel .

the dredging material was then used to re - nourish the beach .

w. m. smith & associates , inc .

cleaning and janitorial services for alum creek lake , ohio cleaning and janitorial services for alum creek lake , ohio ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports additional janitorial services for alum creek .

these services include cleaning the recreation office at alum creek as well as grounds pick - up for half the facility , including the picnic area .

the award will result in a clean recreation office and clean grounds .

jentree forest products , inc. landscaping services appendix xi civil works program ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports maintenance work being done at sutton lake recreational facilities .

the award is a task order for mowing services for hillside areas 1 and 2 .

hillside area 1 covers 25 acres and includes the downstream , bee run , and bug ridge recreation areas .

hillside area 2 covers 4 acres and includes office access and dam abutments .

jentree forest products , inc. ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports maintenance work at sutton lake recreational facilities .

the award is a task order for mowing services at several areas at sutton lake ; specifically , mowing services were provided at lower gerald r. freeman campground covering 18 acres ; upper gerald r. freeman campground covering 12 acres ; middle gerald r. freeman campground covering 9 acres ; the downstream day use area covering 10 acres ; and the south abutment day use area covering 5 acres .

maintenance services at deer creek lake , mt sterling , oh appendix xi civil works program restroom and recreation area cleaning ( information not reported ) mt sterling , oh 43143-9505 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports trash pick - up along the river , cleaning of public restrooms below the dam , and cleaning the picnic shelters in the recreational area .

the award also provides cleaning and janitorial supplies .

the award will result in clean areas along the river , a clean recreational area , and a clean picnic area .

w - p construction services , inc .

maintenance services for j.w .

flanagan dam recreation area , haysi , virginia maintenance services for j.w .

flanagan dam recreation area , haysi , virginia 105 centennial heights road , po box 105 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the removal of pea gravel and timber over 10 acres at the crane's nest playground in the j.w .

flannagan dam recreation area .

the award also includes installation of pipe in the mulch to improve drainage in the area .

these activities will help maintain the recreational facilities .

appendix xi civil works program w - p construction services , inc .

maintenance services for j.w .

flanagan dam recreation area , haysi , virginia maintenance services for j.w .

flanagan dam recreation area , haysi , virginia 105 centennial heights road , po box 105 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports work at north fork pound lake , which is a u.s. army corps of engineers - operated big sandy flood protection system project .

award activities include mowing at the dam access road , overlook area , and office , which covered 2.5 acres .

construction 96-3135 tas demolish and rebuild summersville lake battle run restrooms located at the campground , beach and boat launch areas .

other heavy and civil engineering construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the new restroom facility provides a healthier and safer environment for the visiting public .

appendix xi civil works program allen , j. f. company ( inc ) as part of u.s. army corps of engineers - civil program financing only - operation and maintenance , recovery act on bulltown campground project delivered stone to bulltown campground project brick , stone , and related construction material merchant wholesalers ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award funds 1717.72 tons of 3 / 4-inch crush - and - run limestone to burnsville lake to resurface a gravel parking area .

united procurement , l.p. can style buoys delivered to east lynn lake part description: 45101 buoy rb 962 w / lettering & symbol 6-model b961rc h.d .

red nun buoy 6- model b961gc h.d .

green channel marker 5-model b961r h.d .

buoy 'slow no wake' w / control symbol 3-model b961r h.d .

buoy 'rocks' w / hazard sysmbol 2-model 96r1r h.d .

buoy 'boats keep out' w / restricted symbol delivered to east lynn lake , east lynn wv .

the job has been completed and all payments have been recieved .

all other plastics product manufacturing east lynn , wv 25512-9746 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the procurement of 22 buoys to the u.s. army corps of engineers in order to enhance water safety for boaters and swimmers at east lynn lake in west virginia .

appendix xi civil works program ready to haul - columbus , llc supply of bulk engineered wood fiber for use at sutton lake playground .

delivery of engineered wood fiber for playground at sutton lake .

engineered wood member ( except truss ) manufacturing information gao gathered to improve the description the wood supplied through this award supports the overall maintenance , including the purchase and installation of playground equipment to meet playground safety standards and provide americans with disabilities act ( ada ) accessibility at gerald r. freeman campground .

kingsborough atlas tree surgery , inc ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports trimming hazardous trees and tree limbs in recreation areas near new melones lake , california ( downstream channel ) and new hogan lake , california .

appendix xi civil works program paragon industrial applications , inc. design build boat storage building information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the design and construction of a boat storage building that will replace the inadequate boat storage building at the piney woods regional office .

this is part of a larger project to improve the health and safety of the public at ferrells bridge dam , lake o' the pines , texas .

wiss , janney , elstner associates , inc. rip rap - embankment repair recovery aggregate testing including loas angeles abrasion , magnesium soundness,unit weight , specific gravity , absorption and petrographic analysis of rip rap materials 13581 pond springs road , suite 107 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the testing of rip rap materials from miller springs quarry in belton , texas to be used for embankment repair at navarro mills , belton and granger lakes .

appendix xi civil works program engineering design technologies , inc. as part of construction on the atlanta environmental infrastructure projects - mark ave stormwater structure in cobb county , ga ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports engineering design services .

this structure is part of a priority storm water sewer capacity relief project in this region .

mitchell industrial contractors , inc. millers ferry renovation hvac system air - conditioning and warm air heating equipment and commercial and industrial refrigeration equipment manufacturing ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports replacement and renovation of the hvac system at millers ferry powerhouse , which houses hydroelectric generators for the production of electricity .

the powerhouse is located in wilcox county , alabama near camden lake .

award activities will include renovating the hvac system by replacing air handlers , chillers , and ductwork , and performing electrical upgrades .

the award will result in a more efficient and maintenance - friendly hvac system .

appendix xi civil works program advanced crane technologies , llc rehabilitation of the overhead powerhouse bridge cranes at the usace powerhouses , located in west point , ga , cartersville , ga & basset , va rehab powerhouse cranes , various locations overhead traveling crane , hoist , and monorail system manufacturing ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description rehabilitation activities under the award include modernizing crane controls ; replacing wiring ; and replacing the operators' cabs .

the rehabilitation will restore full capacity to the cranes , including critical lift capabilities ; allow for safer operations ; and reduce future maintenance costs .

the state - of - the - art - controls will improve how the cranes operate .

an overhead powerhouse bridge crane runs along the ceiling of the powerhouse and is used to set and maintain equipment in the powerhouse .

manufacture of four gearboxes .

manufacture of the gearboxes .

speed changer , industrial high - speed drive , and gear manufacturing ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the purchase of secondary gearboxes at dardanelle lock & dam in russellville , arkansas , to replace the existing gearboxes that power gates in the powerhouse .

a failed gearbox renders the gate inoperable and replacement of the gearboxes reduces the risk of failure .

appendix xi civil works program adh technical services , inc. as a part of the maintenance for the installation of a strong motion seismic instrument on the cottonwood springs dam project .

none yet .

project will begin in 2010 .

geophysical surveying and mapping services ( information not reported ) cottonwood springs , sd 57747-0664 information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the installation of a new seismic instrument to monitor the area for the magnitude of earthquake activity , which will allow for the assessment of potential impacts to the dam and foundation .

this work will ensure that dam safety instruments are installed and operating satisfactorily , thus increasing the safety of the dam and downstream residents .

brunswick commercial & government products , inc. small craft ( 17' guardian boat ) cb9039- shipment date oct 28 , 2009 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the purchase of a boat for beltzville lake to maintain project grounds and facilities at this 4,200-foot long dam and reservoir project .

the boat replaced a 30-year - old vessel , and can be used for , among other things , conducting sampling for water quality , video surveillance of the dam , bridge inspections , debris removal , and reservoir inspection to determine erosion of the rim of the reservoir .

appendix xi civil works program installed motion gate at milford project office all other specialty trade contractors junction city , ks 66441-8342 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports installation of one motion gate at the milford lake project office in junction city , kansas .

the installation activities will include removing the existing gate and fence , installing a 24-foot motion gate with accompanying accessories such as a photo eye , gate edge for safety , and additional fencing .

the award will result in enhanced security at the office's equipment lot .

prudent technologies , inc .

removal of underground staorage tanks and installation of above ground storage tanks at hillsdale lake and clinton lake sites in kansas the underground tanks were removed and disposed .

the above ground tanks were installed .

other heavy and civil engineering construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the removal of four underground tanks ( two from clinton lake and two from hillsdale ) and the addition of six above ground tanks ( four in clinton lake and two in hillsdale ) .

the award will result in tanks which are easier to access and obtain gas for government vehicles , and easier to maintain .

appendix xi civil works program utilities forestry services , inc .

provide all labor,material , supplies and equipment to remove all trees and stumps from penn st to college ave along top of embankment at indian rock dam , york county , york , pa .

operations and maintenance - army , the removal of all trees and stumps from the area between college ave to penn st .

along the top of an embankment at indian rock dam , york county , york , pa was awarded utilizing arra funds .

information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the removal of trees from the york levee .

the trees' rooting system was beginning to degrade the structural integrity of the cordours river levee .

the award will ensure compliance with new u.s. army corps of engineers levee safety criteria .

geo - technology associates , inc. preventative maintenance of 34 relief wells no work performed - releif well inspection and rehabilitation services .

support activities for oil and gas operations ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides funds for preventive maintenance and well inspections at curwensville dam in curwensville , pennsylvania .

there are 34 relief wells located along the downstream toe of curwensville dam for the purpose of relieving hydrostatic pressures within the dam .

preventive maintenance of the wells will assure the project continues to operate in a safe manner .

appendix xi civil works program anderson perry & associates , inc. no activity this period .

job completed .

walla walla , wa 99362-1876 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the attendance of two anderson - perry employees to attend levee inspection training in portland , oregon , for 3-4 days .

the u.s. army corps of engineers requires completion of this course , which includes software training , for all levee inspectors .

upon completion of the workshop , attendees acquired certification to inspect levees managed by the corps .

seals unlimited , inc. moorehaven lock & dam lower sector gate seal sets gasket , packing , and sealing device manufacturing 525 ridgelawn rd .

information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the purchase of rubber fabricated lock and dam gate seals for use at moore haven lock and dam .

moore haven lock is located in clewiston , florida and is part of the okeechobee waterway project .

purchase of these seals is part of a larger project to complete major maintenance of all four sector gates at moore haven lock .

the larger project provides for the continuation of operations significantly reducing the likelihood of failure for this highly utilized recreation site .

appendix xi civil works program periodic inspection of levees per list in the statement of work conducted levee inspections and submitted activity reports 1210 pemier drive , suite 200- less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award is for the inspection of two levee systems in the memphis district to determine their condition and assess if repairs or additional maintenance is required .

one levee system encompasses 67 miles , 6 segments , and 3 drainage structures and the other one encompasses 34 miles , 5 segments , and 5 drainage structures .

both the east bank st. francis floodway system and the big lake floodway west levee system are located in arkansas and missouri near rivervale , arkansas .

scipar , inc .

deliver powerplant protective relays per specifications .

inspected , packaged , and delivered all relays per the contract requirements .

a pending modification is needed for shipment of last required relay .

electrical apparatus and equipment , wiring supplies , and related equipment merchant wholesalers $185,265.00 appendix xi civil works program more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the purchase of new protective relays , which are digital electronic equipment used to support transmission of electrical power .

the u.s. army corps of engineers fort randall project office , in pickstown , south dakota , purchased 65 protective relays of various types as well as related components and two communication processors and software .

new relays are needed to support the operational system for transmitting electrical power to the customer , which enables the hydroelectric plant to continue to produce electrical power .

bowen engineering & survey inc hydrographic surveys , mile 28.0 to 35.5 , kaskaskia river , illinois project is 100% complete surveying and mapping ( except geophysical ) services 1078 wolverine lane , suite j cape girardeau , mo 63701-9002 information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the verification of older surveys and existing depths .

these efforts were a precursor to the st. louis army corps of engineers performing dredging and other related work on the kaskaskia river .

elite roofing co. - general contractor to install shoreline power at six lock sites along the tennessee river including guntersvills , al , chickamauga , tn , nickajack , tn , watts bar , tn , fort loudon , tn and grand rivers kentucky lock , ky. we have completed the guntersville project and the chickamauga project .

as of 12 / 29 / 09 we were 82% complete with the nickajack project .

appendix xi civil works program ( information not reported ) less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the electrical wiring for the installation of shoreline power at six locks , which comprise a heavily used lock system along the tennessee river .

power was not accessible along the shoreline of the lock system prior to this shoreline installation .

installation of electrical wiring is needed along the lock system for a variety of reasons , including powering tools needed to perform routine maintenance along the lock system .

recover - to provide labor , supplies and materials to furnish 76 pieces hollaender 2' hd base flange mill finish fittings , 48 pieces 2' hollaender #5-9 tees , 36 pieces 2' hollaender #7-9 cross , 24 pieces #11-9 hollaender side outlet tees , 20 pieces hollaender #9-9 side outlet 90 ells , 40 pieces #3-9 hollaender 90 ells , 408 pieces 4' toeplate bevels , 100 pieces tb brackets 3x2 angle hardware , 8 pieces hollaender gate 2' hinge assm & pin latch hardware , and 1152 pieces 2' s40 pipe .

recover - to provide labor , supplies and materials to furnish 76 pieces hollaender 2' hd base flange mill finish fittings , 48 pieces 2' hollaender #5-9 tees , 36 pieces 2' hollaender #7-9 cross , 24 pieces #11-9 hollaender side outlet tees , 20 pieces hollaender #9-9 side outlet 90 ells , 40 pieces #3-9 hollaender 90 ells , 408 pieces 4' toeplate bevels , 100 pieces tb brackets 3x2 angle hardware , 8 pieces hollaender gate 2' hinge assm & pin latch hardware , and 1152 pieces 2' s40 pipe .

plumbing and heating equipment and supplies ( hydronics ) merchant wholesalers 1850 gravers road , #100 plymouth meeting , pa 19462-2837 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds the purchase of handrail components ( 2-inch aluminum handrails and various 2-inch aluminum handrail fittings to be placed around valve and gate pits ) for guntersville lock , alabama , located at tennessee river mile 349 in grant , alabama .

these purchases will allow the nashville district's tennessee river project to address a backlog of infrastructure maintenance .

appendix xi civil works program newland entities , inc. construct and install new waste water lift station awarded but ntp was not issued until january 2010 other heavy and civil engineering construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports wastewater facility upgrades at lake mendocino's coyote valley dam in ukiah , california .

the upgrades include positioning a new wastewater lift station , repairing wastewater plant tanks , and replacing leach fields .

the award upgrades lake mendocino's 50-year - old recreational facilities for visitor health and safety .

rental of equipment to be used at the carlyle lake / kaskaskia nav project iaw the contract specs , clauses,and provisions .

cti and associates , inc. st. louis flood protection reach 3 pilot holes for new relief wells geotechnical investigations , soil / laboratory soil sampling , monitoring well design , installation and documentation ( information not reported ) st. louis , mo 63108-2833 less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description this award is for drill machine borings at 13 locations landside of the st. louis flood protection district in reach 3 and 20 locations landside of the st. louis flood protection district in reach 4 .

these activities are part of a larger flood protection project that protects approximately 3,160 acres of industrial and commercial development from mississippi river flooding .

the flood protection system was constructed with inadequate closure structures and underseepage protection .

these design deficiencies are being corrected to ensure that the system provides its authorized level of service .

appendix xi civil works program howard w. pence , inc .

provide all labor , materials and equipment for port oliver phase ii project , including ; 0017 , weigh in shelter ; 0018 , weigh in area ; 0019 , amphitheater ; 0020 , amphitheater restroom ; 0021 , ada sidewalk ; 0022 , boat ramp extension ; 0023 , western boardwalk ; 0024 , picnic areas ; 0025 , ada sidewalk ; 0026 , eastern boardwalk .

project was started in november as of 12 / 31 / 09 the following progress is reported: primary electric is 67% complete , boat ramp restrooms are 66% complete , western boardwalk is 51% complete , boat ramp extension is 37% complete , eastern boardwalk is 31% complete , picnic area restroom is 25% complete , amphitheater ada sidewalk is 22% complete , picnic area is 20% complete , amphitheater restroom is 18% complete , gravel overflow parking lot is 17% complete , weigh - in shelter is 15% complete , overlook is 15% complete , picnic loop road is 14% complete , weigh in area is 12% complete , boat ramp ada loading ramp is 10% complete , picnic loop road parking lot is 10% complete , amphitheater is 8% complete , sewage treatment plant is 7% complete , water line ( main ) is 7% complete , picnic area playground is 6% complete , ada sidewalk is 5% complete,picnic area shelter is 5% complete , port oliver road paving is 3% complete , boat ramp parking lot paving is 1% complete , courtesy dock 1 & 2 are unstarted .

appendix xi civil works program north springfield , vt 05150-0001 information gao gathered to improve the description the stairs being repaired include 3 flights and 2 landings .

the work was needed to replace a 30-year - old set of stairs that were rotting and unsafe to use .

the stairs allow safe access to the swimming beach and picnic area from the recreation parking lot .

the stoughton pond recreation area is part of the north springfield lake project .

north springfield lake is part of the system of reservoirs and local protection works for the control of floodwaters in the connecticut river basin .

sewer connection from cape cod canal field office to town , buzzards bay , ma commercial and institutional building construction 42 academy dr. more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award connects the project office to the town sewer system in order to improve office environmental conditions and reduce future maintenance costs .

the following award descriptions contained little or no information that allowed readers to understand the general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

appendix xi civil works program this modification is issued to add clin 7001 in the funded amount of $5,000 .

subsequently , the total amount of this order is increased from $40,441.18 to $45,441.18 .

senior project schedule services .

st. louis , mo 63103-2833 more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports an existing contract for one employee to provide database maintenance and project status reporting services for several corps projects .

the employee will provide these services for a base period with the option of a 12-month extension .

the employee will work at the u.s. army corps of engineers office at 1222 spruce drive , st. louis , missouri .

urs group , inc. tas::96 3134::tas non - time critical removal action - elizabeth mines superfund site , descope task 3.1 - tp - 1 topographic survey , exercise optional tasks 1.1 - project mgmt .

3.1 - survey jossler properties , 9.6 - lysimeter sampling as well as amend sow .

property boundary / survey delineation environmental site monitoring engineering evaluations ( hydraulics and hydrology ) material testing ( information not reported ) more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award is part of a larger contract for hazardous toxic radioactive waste ( htrw ) cleanup at the elizabeth mines superfund site .

the award is for the collection of analytical data that will support the environmental engineering design for cleanup of the site .

the superfund site includes 35 acres of waste and the property boundary survey will determine how much private property is involved on a portion of the site .

the work includes conducting a property boundary survey which will provide data to supplement the design report .

the design will support the larger project goal of cleaning up the superfund site and restoring the west branch of the ompompanoosuc river which discharges into the connecticut river north of white river junction , vermont .

rehibilitation fence burnsville lake appendix xi civil works program ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides fencing related materials to the corps at burnsville lake .

materials included 52,800 rolls of wire fence , 400 acq treated posts , 5,000 t fence posts , 10 lbs .

of 1.25 inch galvanized fence staples , 15 steel tubular farm gates , and 56 bags of 60 lbs ready - mix concrete .

hdb construction , inc. big hill , marion , fall river , elk city and john redmond lakes , kansas other heavy and civil engineering construction ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports maintenance and upgrades of recreation areas at fall river , marion , big hill , elk city , and john redmond lakes in kansas .

the activities under this award include paving road and recreation vehicle sites , improvement or repairs of electric pedestals , and sewer and water service to a number of storm - damaged recreation sites .

the award also provides for modification of a boat launching ramp at john redmond lake .

much of the activities are related to repairing of damage suffered during severe storms over the past 2 years .

appendix xi civil works program kansas city , ks 66105-1200 information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides a 40-horsepower boat motor to be used for water safety purposes at smithville lake , missouri .

shannon & wilson , inc. time histories for dworshak dam information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides electronic time histories for the dworshak dam site in idaho .

time histories , or seismological records , provide pictures of the ground and its movements .

these time histories will assist the u.s. army corps of engineers in modeling and evaluating the dam's ability to withstand earthquakes .

appendix xi civil works program more than 50 % complete all other professional , scientific , and technical services more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports oversight and inspection of a contractor installing a riser pipe in the yalobusha river watershed .

the project office is in sardis , mississippi , but the installation project covers three counties in the state .

the installation of a riser pipe will help control the discharge of water so flooding does not occur in the area surrounding the river .

appendix xi civil works program less than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award provides funds to hire an engineering technician vi for the levee inspection program .

this technician will conduct inspections in various locations across the u.s. army corps of engineers st. louis district .

as part of the levee safety / inspection program , inspections will examine and confirm the operations of elements of a levee system , such as pumps , relief wells and closures .

inspections include the creation of condition reports using a tool called the levee inspection system ( lis ) .

the award will result in improved public safety by providing a better understanding of levee systems performance , including how to better evaluate levee systems and their predicted performance before they are tested by a flood .

the award will also help ensure a nationwide standard for evaluating levees , which ultimately should provide information that will help prioritize fixes and rehabilitation , where necessary .

geokon , inc. geotechnical instrumentation - load cells other measuring and controlling device manufacturing ( information not reported ) east alton , il 62024-2406 information gao gathered to improve the description the award funds pressure temperature humidity instruments for work being done to the upstream lift gate at melvin price lock and dam , specifically five strain gauge load cells .

these were provided in support of the overall project at melvin price lock and dam and are typically used during repairs or refurbishments , when a dam may have shown leaks or needs upgrading for seismic evaluations , for example .

the strain gauge load cells provided will ultimately allow the project to continue in a safe manner by measuring loads and holding the dam in place during repairs .

appendix xi civil works program lake contracting , inc. rip rap placement complet 50% or more other heavy and civil engineering construction rend lake , 12220 rend city road more than 50% completed information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports the provision of vegetative management services at rend lake .

the contractor is to furnish all labor , equipment , and material necessary to prepare sites and place rip rap .

the work includes the repair of east and west side flood - damaged shoreline revetment and breakwaters .

repair of flood damaged shoreline revetment and breakwaters will stabilize the shoreline and breakwaters , increasing public safety and reliability of the features to protect valuable resources .

water and sewer line and related structures construction information gao gathered to improve the description the award supports installation of individual sewer hookups for camp sites at the littcarr campground at carr creek lake , 843 sassafras road , sassafras , kentucky .

some of these hookups will be connected to a main sewage line that in turn is connected to the sewage lift station .

the hookups provide campers a means of disposing of waste material from recreational vehicles and trailers without having a negative impact on the local environment .

the waste is carried to the lift station and from there to the treatment plant .

this work improves the environment and also provides better services for visitors .

appendix xi civil works program install entrance gate and barriers install entrance gate and barriers all other specialty trade contractors ( information not reported ) information gao gathered to improve the description this award supports the installation of force protection measures at northfield brook lake in thomaston , connecticut .

specifically , a single - arm heavy duty gate was installed to replace an older style chain - link access gate at the entrance to the lake providing access to the u.s. army corps of engineers' flood control protection project .

work also included the placement of concrete jersey barriers on the dam at brook lake .

this appendix describes federal agencies' actions to review recovery.gov information for accuracy .

in addition , to supplement our findings on the information that describes awards ( as discussed in the body of this report ) , we performed certain computer edit checks to test certain recovery.gov information for apparent errors .

prime recipients , as owners of the recipient reporting data , have the principal responsibility for the quality of the data submitted , and subrecipients delegated to report on behalf of prime recipients share in this responsibility .

omb's guidance does not explicitly mandate a methodology for conducting data quality reviews at the prime and delegated subrecipient level .

in its june 22 , 2009 , guidance , omb says that , at a minimum , recipients and subrecipients should establish internal controls to ensure data quality , completeness , accuracy , and timely reporting of all amounts funded by the recovery act .

review told us they did not typically review the information provided in narrative fields , and of the three programs that do , none had a systematic process in place to evaluate the accuracy or transparency of the information .

in light of the importance of the quality of the recovery act data , the recovery accountability and transparency board ( recovery board ) has worked with federal inspectors general to establish a multiphased review process to look at the quality of the data submitted by recovery act recipients .

all but one of the agencies covered in our review were included in the first phase of the inspectors general review process — to determine if agencies had developed data quality reviews in anticipation of the data to be submitted .

the first phase report revealed that all of the federal agencies in our review had designed processes to perform limited data - quality reviews intended to identify material omissions and significant reporting errors in information reported by recipients of recovery act funds .

the second phase review included only seven agencies , three of which have programs covered in our review — departments of defense and transportation and gsa .

the second phase report identified data errors and omissions in recipients' first cycle reports and factors that may have contributed to them and the actions taken by agencies , omb , and the recovery board to improve the quality of the data that recipients will submit in future reporting cycles .

however , the report did not comment on the quality of the data in the narrative fields .

according to the recovery board , future reports will focus on the effectiveness of the agency data quality review processes .

error message if the entry exceeds this limit .

in addition to these completeness checks , federalreporting.gov includes over 30 data quality checks that primarily focus on the numerical fields , such as the award amount and congressional district .

one such edit returns an error message if the submitted place of performance congressional district does not correspond with the place of performance zip code .

a senior omb official told us that such edits were added after the first reporting round to help ensure that congressional districts are correctly entered .

we conducted a number of electronic edit checks on all of the 467 prime recipient awards , and any associated subrecipients , in our probability sample , to determine whether there were anomalies that may have affected the transparency of the award information .

there were 950 subrecipients associated with the 467 awards in our sample , but not all awards had subrecipients .

we found that 109 awards had subrecipients , and the number of subrecipients among these 109 awards ranged from 1 to 79 .

at the low end of the range , 53 awards had just 1 subrecipient each , and 12 awards had 2 subrecipients .

at the high end , 14 awards had 20 or more subrecipients .

the 4 awards with the highest number of subrecipients per award had from 60 to 79 subrecipients .

most of the awards with 20 or more subrecipients were within the weatherization program .

in total , we performed edit checks on all 1,417 prime recipient and subrecipient reports .

for both prime recipient and subrecipient reports , the electronic edit checks resulted in no missing information for the following fields: award number , award date , award amount , fiscal year , fiscal quarter , status , recipient name , recipient congressional district , and recipient data universal numbering system ( or duns ) number .

for prime recipients only , we also checked the funding agency code , funding agency name , awarding agency code , awarding agency name , project status , and final report .

there was no information missing in these fields either .

950 missing the second .

however , neither prime recipients nor subrecipients were missing information on the country , state , city , or zip code .

for prime recipient and subrecipient reports , we checked to see if any award dates were on or before february 17 , 2009 ( before the recovery act was enacted ) and after december 31 , 2009 ( the end of the quarter for round two reporting ) .

we found three cases in which the award date was on or before february 17 , 2009 ( one prime recipient , and two subrecipients ) .

six cases had award dates after december 31 , 2009 ( one prime recipient and five subrecipients ) .

these nine cases amount to only about one - half of 1 percent of all prime recipient and subrecipient reports in our sample and are not material to our findings or conclusions .

we also performed additional electronic checks to determine if total recovery act funds received exceeded the award amount , as well as whether total funds expended exceeded the award amount .

there were no cases in our probability sample of prime recipients or any identified subrecipients for whom the total funds received exceeded the award amount .

to identify the information that is required to be included as part of the descriptions of awards funded by the recovery act , we reviewed the reporting requirements contained in the act , omb's guidance , recovery.gov reporting instructions , and supplemental agency reporting guidance that were applicable for the quarter ending december 31 , 2009 .

we discussed the reporting requirements , guidance , and reporting instructions with officials from omb , the recovery board , and the federal program agencies for the programs included in our review .

we also discussed with federal , state , and local officials and recipients their experiences in providing descriptions of awards funded by the act , including any positive reactions to or concerns they had about the requirements and guidance .

the state and local officials that we contacted were those that were part of a judgmental sample of 52 awards we selected from those that we had previously contacted as part of our work to report bimonthly on how the recovery act is being implemented and from our search of media stories about recovery act awards .

we contacted officials in 15 states and the district of columbia regarding the following programs — grants - in - aid for airports , highway infrastructure investment , transit capital assistance , broadband technology opportunities program , and weatherization assistance program — because these were the programs that we were already reviewing as part of our bimonthly recovery act efforts .

because we selected these awards judgmentally , we do not assert that the experiences related by state and local officials about these awards are necessarily representative of all awards in a particular program .

required for recipient reporting that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including the 3 narrative fields previously discussed .

in table 12 , we reproduced omb's recipient reporting model instructions , specifically the definitions and examples , for these fields .

cost ( amount awarded ) , status ( percentage complete ) , and outcome ( what is expected to be achieved ; eg , increased safety or reduced congestion as a result of a redesigned highway intersection or increased energy efficiency from installation of a new heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning system ) .

to these six specific attributes we used our professional judgment to add a seventh that seemed to be a reasonable adjunct to omb's attributes: scope ( i.e. , information on the magnitude or extent of an award ) .

for example , scope could be the number of homes to be weatherized statewide or the number of miles ( or lane miles ) to be repaved .

finally , using these seven attributes and our professional judgment , we assessed the clarity and understandability of the narrative text , together with the completeness of the descriptions in their entirety .

those that were clear , understandable , and complete we considered to be “transparent.” in conducting the transparency assessment , we reviewed information reported by prime recipients on recovery.gov for the quarter ending december 31 , 2009 , and available to the public on february 10 , 2010 .

while more recent information became available in april 2010 ( for the quarter ending march 31 ) , we could not have analyzed this information in the time that we had for our study .

we chose to use recipient - reported data from recovery.gov because the administration considers it to be the official information on recovery act spending .

to try and identify recipient reports with incorrect program codes .

our population size for each of the nine programs represents the number of correctly recorded recipient reports in recovery.gov , as of the date on which we downloaded the records .

we treated the samples within each of the programs as a stratified design when producing the estimate for overall award transparency .

because we followed a probability sampling procedure , based on random selection , our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn .

since each sample could have provided different estimates , we express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample's results as a 90 percent confidence interval .

this is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 90 percent of the samples we could have drawn .

as a result we are 90 percent confident that each of the confidence intervals in this report will include the true values in the study population .

reviewed the award information without regard to the original determinations , compared his or her determination with the results of the two analysts , and made a deciding assessment .

the practical difficulties of making sometimes subjective decisions about whether awards meet our transparency criteria may introduce errors , commonly called nonsampling errors .

we took steps to minimize these errors , such as by developing instructions for analysts to guide assessing the transparency of award information ; conducting a calibration exercise on an initial selection of 70 awards ( before drawing the probability sample ) to assess the transparency criteria and to ensure that all analysts were interpreting the criteria consistently ; having two analysts independently review each award and reach agreement ; and , after all results had been entered , reviewing all results within a program for consistency of interpretation .

for descriptions that partially met or did not meet our transparency criteria , we visited publicly available federal , state , and recipient web sites , and reviewed publicly available documents ( eg , state weatherization plans ) to attempt to obtain insight into the aspects of the award information that we considered missing , nonspecific , or unclear .

while we were often able to “complete” the descriptions using this approach , for some of the awards we had to call award officials to get the needed information .

in all these cases , we were able to get this information .

we did not attempt to quantify the proportion of awards for which we called award officials .

information was missing in any address fields , particularly for the city , state , zip code , and country , but also for the award number , award date , award amount , fiscal year , fiscal quarter , status , recipient name , recipient data universal numbering system ( or duns ) number , funding agency code , funding agency name , awarding agency code , awarding agency name , project status , or final report .

our second sample was a certainty sample of larger dollar awards .

we drew this sample because our probability sample did not consider the size of awards .

as a result , it is possible that the sample we drew contained a disproportionate number of smaller awards compared with the entire population of awards ; therefore , we could not accurately determine the amount of total award dollars for each of our three levels of transparency ( i.e .

met , partially met , did not meet ) , and any association of dollars would be misleading .

in drawing our large dollar sample , we selected between 2 and 28 of the largest awards in each program , for a total of 70 awards .

overall , the transparency results of this sample are consistent with those of the probability sample ( 31 percent met , 63 percent partially met , and 6 percent did not meet ) .

this gives us a reasonable level of confidence that that the dollar amount of awards is not necessarily related to the level of transparency of the description .

our third sample was a judgmental sample of 52 awards described at the beginning of this appendix .

much as we did for our probability sample , we reviewed award information reported on recovery.gov and used publicly available information from state and federal agency recovery act web sites to complete the information , where needed .

in addition , we gathered source documentation , such as grant documents , to gain a sense of the accuracy of the information being reported on recovery.gov .

we also discussed with award officials the feedback that they have received from the public and press .

finally , we contacted state and local auditors about issues raised about these awards , if any .

activities ( such as a transit agency's purchasing buses and building transit maintenance facilities ) that are part of a self - contained recovery act award .

other awards may be part of a larger project .

for example , one award may be to install a higher - efficiency heating , ventilation , and air - conditioning system and another award may be to install a new roof , both for the same federal building under the federal buildings fund program .

the corps' civil works program awards have the similar attribute of being part of a larger whole .

we assessed descriptions for these two programs against the activities in the award .

because individual awards under these two programs are not tied together to an overall project in any way on recovery.gov , we did not rate an award lower if it did not make reference to the larger goal of which the award was a part .

for example , we did not mark down an award to install a seawall for the outcome of controlling erosion if the description did not state that the award was part of an overall effort by the corps to make a waterway more navigable .

as another aspect of our work to review transparency of award information , for the 11 programs we covered , we discussed with federal agency officials and reviewed efforts by federal inspectors general to assess the reliability and usefulness of the data reported by recipients .

finally , as discussed in appendixes i through xi , we determined the nature and scope of recovery act funding , obligations , and expenditures for the 11 programs covered by our review .

regarding the nature and scope of funding , for each program , we reviewed the act to determine the overall level of funding .

we obtained data from the program agencies on the obligations , expenditures , and general purposes of funded awards ( eg , pavement improvements for highways ) .

we chose to analyze information from the federal agencies' databases because it offers greater ability to parse program activities than do recipient - reported data on recovery.gov .

relatedly , because the federal agencies keep information on these awards in different levels of detail , our ability to categorize it extends only as far as the detail in the agencies' databases .

the federal agencies update their data at different frequencies .

as a result , data for the 11 programs covered by our review are as of different dates , although they all are recent .

the earliest data that we report are as of march 31 , 2010 , for the weatherization assistance program , the latest data are as of may 12 , 2010 , for the broadband technology opportunities program .

this appendix presents the estimated error rates associated with the results of our transparency assessment , on the extent to which awards from our representative sample were transparent , presented in table 2 of this report .

for example , if we had taken 100 samples of weatherization assistance program awards , we would expect that in 90 of the samples , between 6.4 percent and 19.3 percent of the awards would have met our transparency criteria , established elsewhere in this report .

katherine siggerud ( 202 ) 512-2834 or siggerudk@gao.gov for buildings , telecommunications , and transportation issues .

patricia dalton ( 202 ) 512-3841 or daltonp@gao.gov for energy and army corps of engineers issues .

james ashley , carl barden , jonathan carver , a. nicole clowers , daniel cain , janice ceperich , michael clements , maria edelstein , elizabeth eisenstadt , susan fleming , mark gaffigan , joy gambino , kimberly gianopoulos , diana goody , h. brandon haller , daniel hoy , vondalee hunt , bert japikse , anar ladhani , hannah laufe , joanie lofgren , grant mallie , kristen massey , david maurer , anu mittal , sara ann moessbauer , joshua ormond , james ratzenberger , amy rosewarne , beverly ross , john shumann , larry thomas , and susan zimmerman made significant contributions to this report .

in addition , laura acosta , silvia arbelaez - ellis , paul begnaud , sarah jane brady , laurel breedon , myra watts butler , waylon catrett , sunny chang , richard cheston , chase cook , james cooksey , john h. davis , bonnie derby , kathleen drennan , daniel egan , james elgas , nagla'a el - hodiri , k. eric essig , mattias fenton , christine frye , kathy hale , john hansen , kay harnish - ladd , barbara haynes , adam hoffman , sabur ibrahim , richard jorgenson , emily larson , alexander lawrence , jennifer leone , nancy lueke , richard mayfield , gail marnik , cory marzullo , ronald maxon , marietta mayfield , daniel newman , loren obler , keith o'brien , kathryn o'dea , carol patey , leslie pollock , gloria proa , frank putallaz , nadine garrick raidbard , nitin rao , sanford reigle , matthew rosenberg , mark ryan , connie sawyer jr. , paul schmidt , ryan scott , david shoemaker , a. paige smith , ray smith , ronald stouffer , rosemary torres - lerma , robyn trotter , and stephen ulrich contributed by conducting audit work at state and local governments .

moreover , jennifer andreone , shea bader , steven banovac , deyanna beeler , amanda cherrin , mackenzie cooper , abbie david , george erhart , janida grima , michael hanson , paul hobart , dana hopings , william king , claire li , angela miles , justin monroe , meredith moore , michael pahr , chhandasi pandya , jonathan stehle , april van cleef , richard winsor , and katherine wunderink contributed by conducting research that allowed us to complete descriptions for hundreds of recovery act awards .

finally , joyce evans , jena sinkfield , and cynthia taylor provided technical assistance .

