the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) was enacted in response to the economic crisis facing the nation .

one area of particular need was the nation's public schools , which faced the potential of significant teacher layoffs and substantially reduced resources .

to help relieve some of the fiscal strain on public schools , the act provided nearly $100 billion in fiscal year 2009 for elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education programs .

the administration has stated that the short - term influx of additional funding is an historic opportunity to improve american education .

given the sizable amount of funding provided , it is anticipated that the act will be carried out with an unprecedented level of transparency to allow the public to understand how the funds are being spent and what is being achieved .

congress has emphasized the need for accountability and transparency in the expenditure of recovery act funds and has made it a central principle of the act .

accordingly , the act contains numerous provisions to increase transparency and accountability over spending .

section 1512 of the act requires recipients of recovery act funded grants , contracts , or loans to provide quarterly reports containing certain information .

for example , recipients are required to report information on each project or activity , including descriptive information on the uses of recovery act awards .

the act also required a web site to be created and maintained where the public could see information reported by recovery act recipients as well as agency - reported information on recovery act spending .

this official government web site , recovery.gov , allows users to search the site for information about individual recovery act awards in their neighborhood and throughout the country .

the web site contains information on each reported award , such as award amount , location , and description of activities funded .

in response to your request , we assessed the extent to which the descriptions of the uses of funds published on recovery.gov transparently describe how funds are being spent and what outcomes are expected .

more specifically , we ( 1 ) described what the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the department of education ( education ) did to facilitate the implementation of recovery act requirements for recipients to describe the use of funds and ( 2 ) assessed the extent to which the descriptive information made available on recovery.gov meets gao's transparency criteria .

our review covers three programs administered by education — the state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) ( $48.6 billion ) ; title i , part a of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 , as amended ( esea ) ( $10 billion ) ; and the individuals with disabilities education act , as amended ( idea ) part b ( $11.7 billion ) .

collectively , funding for these programs accounts for approximately $70.3 billion of the $275 billion in recovery act funding distributed through contracts , grants , and loans .

to understand how omb and education are implementing recovery act requirements concerning recipient reporting , we reviewed the act's reporting requirements as well as related guidance established by omb , the recovery accountability and transparency board ( recovery board ) , and education .

we also met with omb , education , and recovery board officials .

to assess the extent to which descriptions were transparent , we reviewed all prime recipient award records on recovery.gov as of april 30 , 2010 , for sfsf education stabilization funds , esea title i , part a , and idea part b for school aged children .

similar to the transparency review we conducted in may 2010 , we reviewed key required fields on recovery.gov that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including project name , award description , quarterly activities / project description , place of performance , award amount , and project status ( extent to which the project was completed ) .

we also reviewed an additional field on recovery.gov — description of jobs created — in which prime recipients were advised by education to briefly describe the types of jobs created or retained .

in addition , because the education programs in our review provide states with formula grants that the states then distribute to their local educational agencies ( lea ) or institutions of higher education ( ihe ) , we also reviewed the number , amount , and location of subawards cited on recovery.gov in order to ascertain the overall scope or magnitude of each grant award .

overall , we reviewed all fields to determine if the reported information collectively contained information on the general purpose , nature , location , amount awarded , status , outcome , and scope of the project necessary to make the use of funds transparent to the public .

we also considered the extent to which information in the fields was clear and understandable .

we also gathered local - level information about grant award fund use from a nongeneralizable subsample of 150 leas ( or 50 leas per education program included in our review ) from a national survey we administered during march – april 2010 .

 ( for our national survey , we selected a stratified random sample of 575 leas from the population of 16,065 leas. ) .

in addition , we met with state and selected local officials responsible for recipient reporting in 15 states and the district of columbia .

we discussed with these officials the procedures for compiling and reporting information on the use of recovery act funds and how information on these awards is made available to the public .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2010 through july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

see appendix vii for additional information on our methodology .

given the large influx of recovery act funds that leas and ihes are receiving , the administration has stated its intention to ensure that federal agencies provide information to the public that is transparent and useful .

further , the act contains numerous provisions to increase transparency and accountability .

for example , under section 1512 of the act , recipients of funds are required to report certain information quarterly .

in addition , the act created the recovery board and required it to establish and maintain a user - friendly , publicly available web site ( recovery.gov ) to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of recovery act funds .

the act directs that the web site function as a gateway to key information relating to the recovery act and provide links to other government web sites with related information .

the information that is provided by recipients in accordance with the reporting requirements under section 1512 is made available to the public on recovery.gov .

the act created broad requirements for recipient reporting .

specifically , the act requires , among other types of information , that recipients report the total amount of recovery act funds received , associated obligations and expenditures , and a detailed list of the projects or activities supported by recovery act funds .

for each project or activity , the detailed list must include the name and description of the project or activity , an evaluation of its completion status , and an estimate of the number of jobs created and the number of jobs retained through that project or activity .

the prime recipient , which for these education programs is the state , is responsible for the reporting of all data required by section 1512 of the recovery act .

to implement recipient reporting requirements , omb worked with the recovery board to deploy a nationwide system for collecting data submitted by the recipients of funds .

one of the functions of the recovery board was to establish a web site and to publish a variety of data , including recipient data once it has been reviewed by the relevant federal agencies .

these data , collected through www.federalreporting.gov , are made available to the public for viewing and downloading on www.recovery.gov .

the recovery act set a demanding schedule for implementing recovery.gov , requiring the recovery board to establish the web site within 30 days of the law's enactment .

the recovery board's goals for this web site are to promote accountability by providing a platform to analyze recovery act data and to serve as a means of detecting fraud , waste , and abuse by providing the public with accurate , user - friendly information .

recipients are required to submit their section 1512 reports within 10 days of the end of each quarter .

federal agencies then review the reports for significant errors and missing information , and as required by law , make them available on recovery.gov within 30 days of the end of each quarter .

for the programs discussed in this report , information was submitted by recipients for the quarter ending march 31 , 2010 and posted on recovery.gov on april 30 , 2010 .

omb provided recipients guidance through memorandums , supplemental materials , and reporting instructions .

specifically , starting for the period ending september 30 , 2009 ( and repeated for the quarters ending december 31 , and march 31 ) , omb's reporting instructions specified that recipients must provide , among other things , the project name , which should be brief and descriptive ; a project description that captures the overall purpose of the award , quarterly activities , and expected outputs and outcomes or results ; an award description that describes the overall purpose , expected outputs , and outcomes or results of the award , including significant deliverables and , if appropriate , units of measure ; a jobs created description that captures the types of jobs created or the project status , which was specified as not started , less than 50 percent complete , completed 50 percent or more , or complete ; an activity description , which categorizes projects and activities ; the amount of the award ; and the primary place of performance , which is the physical location of award activities .

four of these fields — project name , description of jobs created , quarterly activities / project description , and award description — are narrative fields .

in its december 2009 guidance to heads of executive departments and agencies , omb stated that the narrative information must be sufficiently clear to facilitate the general public's understanding of how recovery act funds are being used .

as we reported in our may 2010 transparency report , omb provided guidance that required general information that could be applied broadly across a wide range of recipients .

omb defined narrative fields to solicit high - level information that is not specific to a single program .

omb officials also told us the agency created generic reporting guidance that would provide basic guidance for recipient reporting and that individual agencies could provide supplemental guidance — that was more specific to their program characteristics — if the agency considered additional guidance necessary .

detailed information on how subrecipients are spending their recovery act funds is limited , in part because data collection for recovery.gov , through federalreporting.gov , does not provide specific narrative fields for collecting information on how each subrecipient is using its funds .

because omb and education guidance instructs prime recipients to include information about subrecipients in the information they report on federalreporting.gov , a state is required to report information that captures the overall purpose of the award , including how subrecipients have used the funds .

information required about each subrecipient is limited to basic information , such as award amounts and place of performance .

our may 2010 report notes that this practice is not consistent with the requirement in the act to report a detailed list of all projects and activities , each having its own name , description , completion status , and potential outcomes .

in addition , we reported that requiring information on status , outcomes , or other items without information on subrecipient activities may convey an incomplete impression of how funds are being used .

furthermore , federalreporting.gov restricts the amount of information prime recipients can report .

prime recipients are allowed to input up to 4,000 characters for each narrative field .

while this limitation may not affect grants that provide funds for limited projects and activities , some states have thousands of subrecipients for each of these three education grants .

for example , california's sfsf grant has over 1,500 subrecipients .

providing detailed information on how each subrecipient is using the funds within the character limitation would be extremely challenging , if not impossible for some states .

because of these complexities , omb officials allowed individual federal agencies to provide program - specific guidance that was tailored to the awards made under their programs , if the agency determined such guidance was necessary .

they noted , however , that while information on subrecipient activities and fund uses may not be specifically included on recovery.gov , the information included in the prime recipient reports should , as a whole , represent the entire grant , including subrecipient information .

they told us that they will continue to evaluate and update guidance on recovery act reporting requirements , but that they do not have plans to require more information on subrecipients .

the officials emphasized the need to balance transparency with the burden of recipient reporting .

education developed guidance and tip sheets with suggested text for recipients to use when reporting on recovery act funds .

education officials reported they provided this information to recipients to ease the burden of recovery act reporting .

for example , each prime recipient is required to submit information each quarter for over 60 data elements for each recovery act grant it receives .

since the act funded multiple formula grants to states , many were required to submit as many as nine reports totaling up to approximately 540 required data elements .

several state officials told us that including subrecipient information in their reporting required additional resources and time .

for example , colorado officials told us that summarizing information from nearly 300 separate subrecipient reports was their biggest challenge in compiling and reporting on the data required by section 1512 .

in its tip sheets , education provided suggested standard language that recipients could use when reporting on three of the four narrative fields .

education officials told us they provided the language for the project name , award description , and quarterly activities / project description fields in order to balance the reporting burden with transparency by providing information on the grants without requiring each recipient to develop its own information .

the only narrative field without this language was the description of jobs created .

officials told us that information in the description of jobs created field needed to be individualized for each grant and therefore standard language would not be appropriate for that field .

education's guidance and tip sheets — including the suggested standard language — were reviewed and approved by omb .

for each of the three programs we reviewed , the standard language for two of the narrative fields in the recipient reports — award description and quarterly activities / project description — is worded almost exactly the same .

by using the suggested text for both the award description and quarterly activities / project description narrative fields , recipients duplicate the generic information and lose an opportunity to provide information on how they are using their grant funds .

for example , education's tip sheet for idea part b instructs recipients to enter “assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea.” while this information does provide the public with a general description of whom the program serves ( children with disabilities ) , and its purpose ( providing special education and related services ) , it does not provide information on what specific activities or programs are being funded by the grant .

therefore when states use the standard language , the public cannot discern if the grant is paying for additional teachers , textbooks , installation of wheelchair accessible ramps , creating a tutoring program , providing professional development , purchasing technology , or any of the activities allowed by idea part b .

 ( see table 1 below for standard language. ) .

we found that 9 percent of the awards for the three programs we reviewed were transparent — that is , they had sufficiently clear and understandable information on the award's purpose , scope , location , award amount , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work .

we determined that 13 percent contained most , but not all , of this information .

however , the majority ( 78 percent ) of descriptions for all three programs we reviewed had limited information — that reduced the public's ability to understand how the funds were being used — because they primarily relied on education's standard language to describe how they spent their recovery act funds .

we also found that many states and leas made information on their grants available to the public through mechanisms other than recovery.gov .

a few of the descriptions ( 9 percent ) fully met our transparency criteria because their project descriptions included information on subrecipient use of funds .

to assess the extent to which descriptions of awards transparently described how funds were being used , we developed a transparency assessment based on the recovery act ; omb's guidance , including omb's recipient reporting data model ; the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ; and professional judgment .

 ( see app .

vii for additional information on how we developed our transparency assessment. ) .

similar to our may 2010 transparency review , we identified key fields on recovery.gov that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including project name , award description , and quarterly activities / project description .

in addition to these fields , we reviewed the description of jobs created field , in which prime recipients were advised by education to briefly describe the types of jobs created or retained .

in december 2009 we reported in our congressionally mandated bimonthly review of recovery act funds that retaining and creating jobs was the primary use of funds by leas across the three education programs .

in assessing transparency , we reviewed all available prime recipient award records on recovery.gov as of april 30 , 2010 , for the three education programs covered in this review .

to apply our transparency criteria to award information , we looked for information on the general purpose of the award ( eg , retaining funding for k - 12 schools or programs ) and the nature of activities being conducted ( eg , purchase of educational technology or training of instructional support staff ) in the fields we reviewed on recovery.gov .

we also looked for information on where award activities are being conducted , the amount awarded , the status ( percentage complete ) , what is expected to be achieved ( outcomes ) , and the scope ( eg , number of schools or students covered by the project ) .

using these seven attributes and our professional judgment , we assessed information in the selected data fields collectively for understandability , clarity , and completeness to determine whether they met our transparency criteria .

we did not find any descriptions that did not include at least some of the information needed to inform the public .

 ( see table 2. ) .

states that were able to provide enough detailed information to fully meet our transparency criteria made few or no awards to subrecipients and / or they reported that their subrecipients used recovery act funds for a limited purpose , such as teacher retention .

for example , hawaii , which has only one lea , provided information on its use of recovery act esea title i part a funds that was clear and included sufficient detail for the general public to understand the award's purpose , scope , location , award amount , nature of activities , outcomes , and status of work ( see table 3 ) .

specifically , the description of the award notes that the funds were used for continued support of the state's extended learning opportunities program , which served 8,018 economically disadvantaged students across 90 campuses statewide .

the state also reported on a number of outcomes from its recovery act esea title i , part a fund use , including student improvement over the course of the program , as well as jobs created .

thirteen percent of descriptions by states included most , but not all information needed to allow the public to understand how recovery act education funds were being used .

for example , kentucky's information for its recovery act esea title i , part a award met all elements of our transparency criteria except for outcomes ( see table 4 ) .

specifically , kentucky's description reported that its leas primarily used these funds for job retention across a number of occupational types .

however , while the purpose of these funds is clear , “to improve the teaching and learning of targeted low performing students and schools,” it is not clear what specific outcomes had resulted or were expected to result from their fund use ( for example , averting staff layoffs , preventing teacher furloughs , or maintaining current class size ) .

most states ( 78 percent ) only partially met our transparency criteria because their description contained much less information and met only a few attributes of our criteria .

for example , alaska's description does not provide sufficient information on what project activities were supported and what outcomes resulted from the use of these funds to enable the public to understand how it is using recovery act funds ( see table 5 ) .

while alaska does provide jobs - related information in terms of the number of jobs created or retained , the information is not clear as to whether or not job creation or retention was the only or primary use of its recovery act sfsf education stabilization funds .

we found that for all three education programs , descriptions that contained only education's suggested standard language were less transparent than those that entered information specific to the program and activities conducted in their states .

education's reporting guidance provided standard language for the quarterly activities / project description field but it did not contain instructions or guidance for recipients to describe how funds were being used by subrecipients .

for example , the suggested language for the esea title i , part a program instructed states to enter “improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards.” while the use of such language by states may facilitate the process of reporting their section 1512 data ( i.e. , reduce the reporting burden ) , it does not provide information on what funds are being spent on ( eg , professional development , technology , or testing assessments ) and it provides the public with little information on how funds are being used at the local level .

for example , we collected information from seven leas in texas that reported they used esea title i , part a recovery act funds for technology purchases for at - risk students , but the information in texas' recovery act esea title i , part a project description contains only the standard language discussed above .

our may 2010 report made several recommendations to omb with the goal of helping the public gain a better understanding of how recovery act funds are being spent .

one of those recommendations was that omb work with executive departments and agencies to ensure that supplemental guidance ( like education's tip sheets ) provides for transparent descriptions of funded activities .

omb agreed with these recommendations and reported that it is making plans to address them .

all 15 states and the district of columbia we visited have mechanisms to provide the public with information about uses of award funds .

the states reported that the information is available online through , for example , state recovery act web sites or state department of education web sites .

some states also included information on these web sites about frequently asked funding questions , subrecipient information , and expenditures to vendors .

other states reported that they had additional mechanisms to make the public aware of their uses of award funds .

for example , officials in arizona reported that they issued press releases about uses of their sfsf education stabilization funds , and florida officials reported that they provided information to the public during sessions of the state's legislative committees .

in addition , 14 of the 17 leas we visited made information available to the public on how they were using their esea title i , part a , idea , part b for school aged children , and sfsf education stabilization funds .

these leas used different ways to report this information .

the most common means was through their web sites or those of their state education agencies .

other ways included disseminating information through public meetings .

for example , york , pennsylvania presented expenditure data at school board meetings , the district of columbia public schools held parent forums about the use of recovery act idea , part b for school aged children funds , and springfield , massachusetts held a public budget presentation .

in addition , some leas disseminated recovery act information through newsletters .

for example , rock round independent school district in texas published a newsletter that included information on the status and implementation of its recovery act funds .

education faced an extraordinary task in developing the new sfsf program and significantly expanding funding for esea title i , part a and idea , part b for school aged children while at the same time trying to ensure that the information recipients report is transparent and useful to the public .

the transparency and understandability of descriptions on recovery.gov are important aspects of the recovery act as they provide a key mechanism through which the public can understand how tax dollars are being spent and what is likely to be achieved from these expenditures .

however , because descriptive information on how subrecipients are using the funds is not included in the quarterly activities / project description field on recovery.gov , the public may not be able to clearly discern how recovery act education funding is being spent in their state .

still , education officials noted that requiring states to report this information could impose an undue reporting burden on many states , and may be impossible for states that have high numbers of subrecipents because of the reporting field character limitations built into the recipient reporting system .

guidance on reporting requirements for recovery act grants that pass through a prime recipient to a subrecipient should balance the need for transparency with the reporting burden and these system limitations .

however , because education's suggested standard language for two fields — award description and quarterly activities / project description — is exactly the same , an opportunity for greater transparency is lost if recipients use only this language .

providing more information than offered in education's standard language , such as an overview analysis of how localities are spending the funds and the anticipated results , could help the public gain a better understanding of how the funds are being used .

in order to provide the public with more useful information on how recovery act funds are being used , we recommend that the secretary of education , in consultation with omb , remove the standard language for one field — the quarterly activities / project description field — from its guidance and instruct states to include , to the extent possible , information on how the funds are being used and potential project outcomes or results .

education provided comments on a draft of this report by email and agreed with the information in our draft report and our recommendation .

education noted that it strongly supports efforts to improve the transparency and accountability of federal spending as exemplified by the resources it devoted to executing the reporting process under section 1512 of the recovery act .

education reported that it was encouraged by our finding that 100 percent of the education descriptions we reviewed included at least some of the information needed to meet our criteria for transparency .

education noted that our report clearly describes the challenge states face in providing detailed information on the uses of funds without creating undue burden because programs are primarily executed by local educational agencies ( leas ) and because the current reporting mechanism restricts the amount of information that states can report .

education emphasized , as stated in our report , that it would be extremely burdensome and challenging , if not impossible , for many states to provide detailed information for each lea .

finally , education agreed to work toward implementing our recommendation of increasing the transparency of descriptions required by recipient reporting while balancing the reporting burden on states .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of education and interested congressional committees .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or ashbyc@gao.gov if you have any questions about this report .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

the state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) included approximately $48.6 billion to award to states by formula and up to $5 billion to award to states as competitive grants .

the recovery act created the sfsf in part to help state and local governments stabilize their budgets by minimizing budgetary cuts in education and other essential government services , such as public safety .

stabilization funds for education distributed under the recovery act must first be used to alleviate shortfalls in state support for education to local educational agencies ( lea ) and public institutions of higher education ( ihe ) .

states must use 81.8 percent of their sfsf formula grant funds to support education ( these funds are referred to as education stabilization funds ) and must use the remaining 18.2 percent for public safety and other government services , which may include education ( these funds are referred to as government services funds ) .

after maintaining state support for education at fiscal year 2006 levels , states must use education stabilization funds to restore state funding to the greater of fiscal year 2008 or 2009 levels for state support to leas and public ihes .

when distributing these funds to leas , states must use their primary education funding formula , but they can determine how to allocate funds to public ihes .

in general , leas maintain broad discretion in how they can use education stabilization funds , but states have some ability to direct ihes in how to use these funds .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for sfsf awards available on recovery.gov .

we found that 18 percent met our transparency criteria , 12 percent significantly met our criteria , 69 percent partially met our criteria , and zero percent did not meet our criteria .

given that few descriptions met our transparency criteria we conducted a national survey of school districts to discover how they are using the funds .

the information on sfsf is found in appendix iv .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

executive office of the state of colorado state fiscal stabalization fund - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , postsecondary and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

the state of colorado awarded public institutes of higher education stabilization dollars for fiscal years 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 in order to maintain the state's financial support to public education .

currently , the institutes of higher education have sought reimbursement for over 50% of the currently awarded funds .

as stipulated by the u.s. department of education , state fiscal stabilization funds were primarily utilized to provide support for salaries and benefits related to the classroom and laboratory instruction , student services and administrative support within the colorado public university system .

as such , the majority of the positions covered related to the professorial job series as well as graduate teaching assistants .

other positions supported included accountants , administrative assistants , general professionals , it support staff , as well as college and central level administrators .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) denver , colorado 802031792 more than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund $823661223 education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

no activity this quarter .

funds expended in calendar year 2009 were used to restore state funding levels for leas in accordance with the submitted state plan .

distributions for ihes planned in future quarters .

no funds expended this quarter .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) more than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

funds are being used to support k - 12 and post - secondary education throughout the commonwealth of kentucky .

we have established memorandum of agreements ( moas ) with ten sub - recipients .

the sub - recipients are the kentucky department of education ( kde ) and the 9 public universities in ky. we expect kde to interface with the school districts across the commonwealth for k - 12 .

they collect financial information and job creation data and report that to our office in the finance & administration cabinet .

the universities report similar data to our office .

we review that data and file the required 1512 reports .

as reported on the sub - recipient tab of this report , all of the sub - recipients have incurred expenses and received reimbursement through arra funds .

local educational agencies ( lea ) primarily used the funds to retain certified and classified positions in their school districts such as: elementary , middle and high school teachers , alternative school teachers , elementary , middle , and high school counselors , nurses , elementary , middle and high school librarians , math and science teachers , curriculum coordinators , technology coordinators , clerical staff , elementary , middle and high school resources teachers , speech language pathologists , arts and humanities teachers , instructional assistants , full - day kindergarten teachers , preschool program positions , and district coordinators .

the retained positions allowed leas to maintain the same level of staff support as from the previous year .

also , two of the nine public universities that are sub - recipients used arra funds to pay the salaries of some full - time faculty .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) frankfort , kentucky 406013410 more than 50% completed treasury , louisiana department of the state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund the grant is used for creating and / or retaining educational jobs and programs by supporting staff salaries for teachers , faculty , professors , professional , and support employees in higher education and public elementary secondary and postsecondary educati the grant provides support of institutes of higher education , public elementary secondary and postsecondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services to continue educating the citizens of the state .

the majority of the jobs retained and / or created are instructional jobs ( teachers , faculty , and professors ) .

other jobs created are for pupil support , operational support , school administration , and clerical or service worker related .

retaining educational jobs during an economic downturn ensures the continued education of the youth in the state .

education is a major economic driver and vital for the success of the state's and country's economy .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) baton rouge , louisiana 708025243 more than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund: for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) helena , montana 596200801 more than 50% completed north dakota , state of state fiscal stabilization - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

north dakota used all education stabilization funds to restore state support for elementary and secondary education to the fy 2009 level freeing up state funds for other one - time school district infrastructure investments .

north dakota distributed arra education stabilization funds through the state's school aid funding formula .

all school districts agreed to apply the share of the state school aid formula funding identified as federal arra funds to instructional salaries .

instructional staff are hired for a 'definite term with salaries paid out of recovery act funds and the remaining portion with non - recovery act funds .

using the guidance provided in m - 10-08 ( part2.5.8 ) , the 'number of jobs* reporting uses an alternative calculation in which an adjustment is made to the fte number to match the appropriate percentage of recovery funding .

the 'number of jobs* calculation is for the entire project and will be used for each reporting quarter .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) bismarck , north dakota 585050001 more than 50% completed 175 state of oklahoma , the state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education budget stabilization - budget stabilization grant funds were used to supplement state appropriations and other revenues used for the payment of public schools' and higher education institutions' payroll costs .

funds were used pay a portion of the monthly payrolls at numerous public schools at both the common education and higher education levels .

funded a portion of public schools' and higher education institutions' ftes by offsetting a portion of the current year budget reduction .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) oklahoma city , oklahoma 731054801 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of utah state fiscal stabilization fund: education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

retain 1,259.69 full - time - equivalent administrative , support and faculty positions within utah's higher education system ; 110.7 full - time - equivalent administrative and faculty positions within utah's applied technology college ; and 1,717.77 full - time - equivalent teaching positions within utah's local education agencies in order to maintain quality education programs and student support services within utah's education system .

instructional , teaching and administrative positions for local education agencies ( 1,717.77 ftes ) , higher education institutions 1,259.69 ftes ) and applied technology colleges ( 110.7 ftes ) within the state of utah .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) salt lake city , utah 841142210 more than 50% completed 130 executive office of the state of wyoming state fiscal stabilization fund - education stimulus phase 1 of the state fiscal stabilization fund - education grant program , as amended , allocates stabilization funds to the university of wyoming and the stateï¿½s seven community colleges .

specifically , funding will be used by ihes for education and general expenditures , in such a way as to mitigate the need to raise tuition and fees , and for modernization , renovation or repair of facilities primarily used for instruction or research .

wyoming's amended phase ii application , which is waiting approval , reduced the amount designated for educational purposes from $67,507,805 to $57,568,071 .

at march 31 , 2010 , the remaining balance of the education grant funding , $10,052,126 , has not been allocated by the governor .

state fiscal stabilization fund - education grant program , as amended , provides funding to the state's ihes: the university of wyoming and the state's seven community colleges .

allocated funding will be expended during fy 2011 .

the governor's office has finalized agreements for renovation , modernization or repair of facilities and general education operations funding which outline the special arra contracting provisions , reporting requirements and limitations on qualifying expenditures .

the state's ihes executed agreements for renovation , modernization or repair of facilities with the governor on february 24th and march 3rd , 2010 .

it is anticipated that the ihes' general education operations agreements will be signed by april 2010 .

the balance of wyoming's sfsf - educaton grant funding , $10,052,126 , has not been allocated by the governor .

at march 31 , 2010 , the state is waiting approval of the sfsf phase ii application and has not expended any portion of the education related sfsf resources .

as a result , there are no activities currently funded by sfsf - education grant resources .

stabilization dollars will be used to fund top educational priorities for which a shortfall exists , i.e. , library acquisitions and instructional excellence .

instructional excellence would cover general education costs such as support budgets and student lab equipment .

a large amount of these funds will be used for removation , modernization , or repair of facilities dedicated for instruction and research .

it is anticipated that a substantial number of jobs would be created or retained through this renovation effort .

the following award descriptions contained most but not all details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

state fiscal stabilization funds - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

support elementary , secondary and postsecondary , and early childhood education programs ; hire and retain teachers and reduce potential layoffs ; cover budget shortfalls or gaps in state's budgets and restore funding cuts to programs ; improve student achievement through school improvement and reform ; make progress toward rigorous college - and career - ready standards , including english language for learners ( referred to hereafter as ell ) and individuals with disabilities education act ( referred to hereafter as idea ) ; establish pre - k to college and career data systems ; make improvements in teacher effectiveness and equitable distribution of qualified teachers ; provide intensive support and effective interventions for the lowest performing schools .

instructors / faculty , emt program coordinator , librarian , website coordinator , associate director of planning and research , administrative staff , janitorial staff , coach , security staff , child development coordinator , principals , certified school personnel , school support personnel , and professors .

less than 50% completed office of the govenor , arizona office of economic recovery , the state fiscal stabilization fund - education grant funds education fund – for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

in previous quarters this funding was used to create or save education jobs at k - 12 , community college , and higher educational institutions .

the timing of these disbursements are such that no payments were made during this reporting period and thus there were no programmatic activities this quarter .

further , on october 29 , 2009 the state of arizona's amendment to the statewide cost allocation plan ( swcap ) was approved by the department of health & human services division of cost allocation .

the approved amendment granted the state of arizona the ability to charge the estimated arra administrative costs for the period beginning february 17 , 2009 through june 30 , 2013 .

a portion of this agreement's share of the swcap expenses was drawn down and expended during this quarterly reporting period and thus this activity is captured in the financial transactions in this report .

jobs and quarterly activities may appear disproportionate to the overall funds drawn down and expended due to this swcap reconciliation .

in previous quarters this funding was used to create or save education jobs at k - 12 , community college , and higher educational institutions .

the timing of these disbursements are such that no payments were made during this reporting period and thus no jobs were created or saved this quarter .

further , on october 29 , 2009 the state of arizona's amendment to the statewide cost allocation plan ( swcap ) was approved by the department of health & human services division of cost allocation .

the approved amendment granted the state of arizona the ability to charge the estimated arra administrative costs for the period beginning february 17 , 2009 through june 30 , 2013 .

a portion of this agreement's share of the swcap expenses was drawn down and expended during this quarterly reporting period and thus this activity is captured in the financial transactions in this report .

jobs and quarterly activities may appear disproportionate to the overall funds drawn down and expended due to this swcap reconciliation .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) phoenix , arizona 850072812 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of arkansas state fiscal stabilization fund - education grants education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , past secondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) little rock , arkansas 722010000 less than 50% completed planning and research , governor's office of state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund sfsf - education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary and postsecondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

sfsf - education state grants recovery act funds were provided to help stabilize state and local budgets in order to mitigate and avoid reductions in education and other essential services in exchange for a state's commitment to advance essential education reform in four areas: ( 1 ) making improvements in teacher effectiveness and in the equitable distribution of qualified teachers for all students , particularly students who are most in need ; ( 2 ) establishing pre - k - to - college - and - career data systems that track progress and foster continuous improvement ; ( 3 ) making progress toward rigorous college - and career - ready standards and high - quality assessments that are valid and reliable for all students , including limited english proficient students and students with disabilities ; and ( 4 ) providing targeted , intensive support and effective interventions for the lowest - performing schools .

local education agencies were able to use funds for activities previously authorized in various federal education acts .

possible uses of the funds may include using them to avert layoffs of teachers and other personnel ; furthering education reform in the key areas of teacher quality , standards and assessments ; using longitudinal data to improve instruction ; and supporting struggling schools .

with respect to postsecondary , the university of california used arra funds to retain the university's state - funded workforce responsible for core operations - teaching , research and public service .

the california state university used arra funds to retain positions in the areas of instruction , academic support , student services , institutional support , and public services .

the california community colleges used arra funds for workforce salaries and academic and operating expenses at its local college campuses .

35323.480000000003 jobs created or retained include 3547.13 classified jobs , 16139.08 certificated jobs , 286.16 vendor jobs , and 15351.11 ihe jobs .

classified jobs include non - teaching positions such as food service , bus drivers , teacher assistants , custodians , office staff , librarians , and instructional aides .

certificated jobs include teaching positions .

vendor jobs represent a variety of different types of jobs .

with respect to postsecondary , a total of 15351.11 fte were funded using arra funds as calculated using the omb 'definite term guidance .

the positions funded at the university of california ( uc ) include 27.5% ( an estimated 9,617.3 fte ) of the uc's state - funded workforce responsible for core operations: teaching , research and public service .

csu used funds to retain 5,254 fte positions in the areas of instruction , academic support , student services , institutional support , and public services .

the california community colleges ( ccc ) distributed funds to its 72 local campuses to be used for campus expenses , including workforce payroll , instructional materials , and operating costs , specifically funding 479.81 fte jobs .

more than 50% completed administration , nevada department of state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services support of public postsecondary education .

includes 2 universities , 1 state college and 4 community colleges in las vegas , reno / carson city and rural nevada .

expenditures supported include salary and benefits for instructional and support positions as well as related expenses .

using the methodology outlined in m - 10-08 , released 12 / 18 / 2009 , the nevada system of higher education calculated the number of jobs retained ( none were created ) as 'one in which the wages or salaries are either paid for or will be reimbursed with recovery act funding. .

 ( section 5.2 ) .

it should be noted that state fiscal stabilization funds account for approximately 28% of the operating budgets of 7 institutions ; however the allocation of stabilization funds / fund maps within those budgets was made july 1 , 2009 and revised through the year for accounting purposes only and does not reflect board of regents or legislative priorities on what positions would have been eliminated or what other cuts would have been made had these funds not been available .

the number of jobs retained presented here only reflects positions that were paid for with recovery act dollars this quarter and should not be interpreted as more than a financial accounting .

new york , state of state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund for the support of public elementary , secondary , and post secondary education and , as , applicable early childhood education programs and services for the support of public elementary , secondary , and post secondary education and , as , applicable early childhood education programs and services new york state primarily used the arra state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) to restore proposed cuts in school aid compared to earlier levels caused by the severe economic recession effect on state tax revenues .

public school districts were eligible for the education stabilization fund ( esf ) portion of the state fiscal stabilization fund .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) state fiscal stabilization fund - - education fund .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for central administration staff , 0.13 jobs created and 32.65 jobs retained .

for teachers / instructors / department heads staff , 51.05 jobs created and 2537.36 jobs retained .

for paraprofessionals staff , 3.50 jobs created and 143.87 jobs retained .

for clerical support staff , 0.45 jobs created and 12.75 jobs retained .

for guidance counselors staff , 0.83 jobs created and 18.55 jobs retained .

for school nurse / health services staff , 0.00 jobs created and 3.00 jobs retained .

for maintenance personnel staff , 1.00 jobs created and 24.95 jobs retained .

for technical / computer specialists staff , 0.30 jobs created and 5.00 jobs retained .

for library / media staff , 0.00 jobs created and 13.48 jobs retained .

for food services staff , 0.50 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for athletics / coaches staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.50 jobs retained .

for class advisors staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.50 jobs retained .

for all outside consultants and vendors except for rescs and serc staff , 1.00 jobs created and 2.00 jobs retained .

for the current fiscal year , sfsf comprises 14.26 percent of the education cost sharing ( ecs ) grant , connecticut's major education funding mechanism ( 9.19 percent from the education state grants and 5.07 percent from government services ) .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) hartford , connecticut 061061659 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabalization fund - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) dover , delaware 199010000 less than 50% completed district of columbia , government of sfsf: education stabilization fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

funds are used for the support of public elementary , secondary , and higher education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

these funds are used to help restore for fy 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 support for public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education to the greater of the fy 2008 or fy 2009 level .

the funds needed to restore support for elementary and secondary education are run through the state's primary elementary and secondary education funding formulae .

the funds for higher education go to the university of dc .

all reported jobs are for instructional , support services , and administrative positions within district of columbia school districts .

executive office of the governor of florida state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

the majority of the jobs saved and created related to instruction or instructional support .

types of jobs included but were not limited to adjunct faculty , faculty , classroom teachers , school - based administrators , clerical personnel , instructional aides , librarians / media specialists , career specialists , supervisors , and paraprofessionals .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) tallahassee , florida 323990400 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund â “ education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education , as , applicable , early childhood education program and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) atlanta , georgia 303341600 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of hawaii state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

state fiscal stabilization funds , education funds were used to retain teachers , counselors,lecturers , teaching faculty , and support staff positions necessary to support the state's public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education programs .

for the state's public traditional schools , preference is for positions requiring a teaching license that is assigned to a classroom and / or carry out an instructional role .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) honolulu , hawaii 968132407 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of idaho state fiscal stabilization fund - educational grants , recovery funds state fiscal stabilization fund - educationl grants , recovery funds for higher educatin and support of public elementary and secondary education ( k - 12 ) programs and services .

k - 12 education fund for the support of public elementary and secondary education programs and services .

higher education to maintain publicly supported education opportunities in the state .

higher education retained faculty , administrative and infrastructure support staff .

k - 12 66.61% teacher / teacher aides , 8.79% custodial / maintenance , 8.44% school administraitive / office support , 5.76% special education services , 2.75% district administrative / office support , 2.40% student transportation , 1.65% guidance / health workers , 1.51% alternative school programs , 0.98% information technology workers , 0.64% education media workers , 0.44% extracurricular program workers , and 0.03% child nutrition workers .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) boise , idaho 837200034 more than 50% completed 150 .

state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

management occupations , computer and mathematical occupations , life , physical , and social science occupations , community and social service occupations , education , training and library occupations , health practitioners and technical occupations , protective service occupations , food preparation and service related occupations , building and grounds cleaning and maintenance occupations , personal care and service occupations , sales and related occupations , office and administrative support occupations , construction and extraction occupations , installation , maintenance and repair occupations , production occupations , transportation and material moving occupations .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) springfield , illinois 627770002 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of iowa fiscal stabilization fund - education education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) des moines , iowa 503190000 more than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) topeka , kansas 666121590 more than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

149.80 fte jobs were created or retained as a result of the arra funds for k - 12 public education ; 14 limited period teachers , 1 limited period sro , 126.8 teachers , 1 librarians , 2 school resource officers , and 4 educational technicians and 1 support person .

higher ed total jobs 5.7 fte are cmcc ; jalbert hall renovations 3 hours , cmcc ; parking lot 82 hours , smcc ; roofing repairs 727.75 hours , smcc ; heating improvements 850.75 hours , smcc ; auto tech envelope repair 144.50 hours , smcc ; museum & storage renovations 602.75 hours , smcc ; sea center 9.5 hours , smcc ; salt shed 9 hours wccc ; residence hall renovations 319 hours wccc ; harol howland building renovations 45 hours , yccc ; phone modernization 87 hours yccc ; rooftop hvac unit replacement 35.5 hours , yccc ; emergency generator replacement 27 hours , total ; 2,942.75 hours / 520 hours=5.7 fte .

for the university of maine system jobs , 50.09 fte jobs were funded with state fiscal stabilization funds .

for narrative - - 39.43 fte were faculty and 10.66 were students .

state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , past secondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , past secondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

teaching positions ( full time , substitute and tutors ) .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) baltimore , maryland 212012595 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education stabilization fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

commercial and institutional building construction these funds have supported administrators , teachers , paraprofessionals , and staff members in school districts across massachusetts .

in addition , these funds have supported administrators , faculty members , and staff members at the state and community colleges and the university of massachusetts campuses .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) boston , massachusetts 021331099 more than 50% completed 483 state of michigan , executive office of the state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) sub - recipients created and retained jobs in several categories .

the majority of sub - recipients retained jobs , indicating that they would have had to lay off the positions that were retained by the use of sfsf monies .

the following jobs categories apply to the positions that were created and / or retained: k - 12 teachers in the following subject areas - language arts , science , math , physical education , social studies , art , music , drama , spanish , computer technology , english as a second language , business management , reading recovery , english , home economics , chemistry , physics , economics , government , u.s. history , world languages , and general education ; supplemental enrichment instructors ; paraprofessionals ; bus drivers ; custodians ; mechanics ; administrative professionals ; school librarians ; school counselors ; recess aides ; library aides ; social workers ; nurses ; hall monitors ; athletic directors ; media specialists ; literacy coaches ; cooks ; technology assistants ; principals ; school administrators ; support staff ; assistant principals ; and college work study student positions .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) lansing , michigan 489330000 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of minnesota state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

4667.2399999999998 types of jobs created or retained with this grant include administration / supervision , counselor , educational speech / language pathologist , licensed instructional support , non - instructional support , non - licensed classroom personnel , non - licensed instructional support , other , paraprofessional , school psychologist , school nurse , security specialist , social worker , substitute teacher salaries , teachers , and cultural liaison .

types of jobs created or retained in higher education include , professors , instructional lab assistants , administrative support , graduate instructors , teaching specialists , adjunct instructors , lecturers , research and teaching assistants , assistant scientists , personnel specialists , clinical specialists and information technology professionals .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) st. paul , minnesota 551551606 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of mississippi state fiscal stabilization fund - education grants for the support of elementary , secondary and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services and local educational agencies in the state of mississippi .

provided support for local education agencies ; teacher salaries and institutions of higher education faculty salaries , operating costs and student financial aid .

classroom teachers , assistant teachers , lobrarians , guidance couselors , school administrators .

all lea's used arra sfsf to reimburse salary expenditures for district personnel .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) lincoln , nebraska 685094987 less than 50% completed executive office of the state of new hampshire state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) education state grants , recovery act education fund – for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

no funds paid for jobs during this reporting period .

these funds paid for jobs between 7 / 1 / 09 and 9 / 30 / 09 .

using the definite term methodology , 510.23 jobs were created / retained in q1 2010 .

position types include teachers , support staff at school administrative units across the states , as well as at the university of new hampshire system .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) concord , new hampshire 033016312 more than 50% completed new jersey , state of state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

with regard to k - 12 education , the following were the types of jobs created or retained: instructional positions , student support positions , and administrative positions .

with regard to higher education , the following were the types of jobs created or retained: full - time faculty , administrative / staff positions , clerical positions , part - time faculty / adjunct custodians , police / security , and teaching assistants .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) trenton , new jersey 086250001 more than 50% completed secretary of state , new mexico state fiscal stabilization fund - education grants , recovery funds education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) santa fe , new mexico 875012744 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the leas and charter schools these are the following job types: teachers , teacher assistants , assistant principals , instructional support , clerical personnel , custodians , and transportation personnel .

for the universities the job type was: instructional faculty .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) raleigh , north carolina 276038001 less than 50% completed executive office state of ohio state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public , elementary , secondary and post - secondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public , elementary , secondary and post - secondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

8465.1499999999996 elementary and secondary education: teachers , school administrators , school counselors , librarians , lunchroom personnel , school bus drivers , technology coordinators , secretaries , educational aides , tutors , construction and renovation jobs .

higher education institutions retained professional and support staff in the following functional areas of a campus budget: instructional staff ; academic support staff ; student services staff ; institutional support staff ; and plant operations and maintenance staff .

no infrastructure funds were used for higher education .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) columbus , ohio 432154183 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of pubic elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

teachers , instructional aides , and professors for oregon public k - 12 and university educational institutions .

more than 50% completed executive office of the commonwealth of pennsylvania state fiscal stabilization fund - ed grants , recovery funds education fund – for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

7875.5600000000004 reflects sub - recipient submitted information on school administrators , teachers , student aids and other educational support staff providing services detailed in the project description for the current reporting quarter for this award .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) harrisburg , pennsylvania 171012210 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

principal , assistant principal , preschool teacher , kindergarten teacher , special education ( self contained ) , special education teachers , classroom teacher , media specialist , guidance counselor , other professional instruction - oriented , adult education supervisor / teacher , temporary instruction oriented staff , bookkeeper , technology / it personnel , professional development director , director of technology , coordinator , federal projects , nurse , director , attendance , other nonprofessional staff , assistance superintendent , district superintendent , supervisor secondary education , director , career and technology education , special services coordinator , guidance coordinator , support personnel , library aide , kindergarden aide , special education aide , instructional aide , director , communication / pio , instructional coach , other district office staff , school - to - work coordinator , social worker , director of student services , purchased - service teacher , school resource officers , bus driver , custodian , secretary , certification specialist , clerical assistant / administration , data specialist , sasi clerk , attendance clerk , parent educator , coordinator - real project , security monitor , academic success tutors , accountant / fiscal analyst i , admin asst / coord , administrators , assistant professor , associate professor , campus ambassadors , cashier , cliniacal assistant professor , community intern director , community interns , curriculum coordinator i , custodian , development / alumni , executive , facilities worker , faculty , graduate staff assistants , grants administration , groundskeeper , human resources staff , information technology , instructors , international recruitment mgr , laboratory manager , law enforcement officer i , librarians , mail room clerk , master instructor / trainer , multicultural outreach coord. , professor , program coordinator ii , receptionist / admin asst. , records / info resource asst. , regional admissions associates , research assistant professor , sponsored award management , student svcs prog coord ii , support , visitors center staff , administration ; administration specialist ; bookstore specialist ; cashier ; counselor ; foundation associate ; job developer ; procurement officer ; coordinator ; adjunct instructor ; business instructor ; math instructor ; transitional studies columbia , south carolina 292112267 less than 50% completed south dakota , state of state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

colleges , universities , and professional schools staff to provide the opportunity for maximum citizen access to appropriate , high quality collegiate and university degree programs .

pierre , south dakota 575015007 more than 50% completed executive office of the state of tennessee state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund the sfsf education fund helps states restore support for public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood programs and services .

activities conducted under the sfsf education fund include maintaining educational , administrative , clerical , support , professional , teaching and other positions essential to the delivery of public education in tennessee's k - 12 and higher education systems .

4706.8199999999997 tdoe: teachers , k - 12 higher education: support staff , professional support staff , professional support temporary , student workers , adjunct faculty , overload faculty , accountant , instructor of engineering , lecturers , professors , student assistant , administrative staff , graduate assistants , graduate teaching assistants , instructors , it technicians , director , extension agents , post retirement appointments , coordinator , it administrator , graduate research assistants , service aides , research associates , research technician , clerical positions , professional positions , academic faculty positions , technology , foundations instructor , counselors , part - time instructors , receptionists , pt faculty welding instructor , pt dental assistant instructor , secretaries , federal work - study positions , admissions office clerical , asst dir of fin aid , clinical assistant , custodians , director , executive aides , financial aid , counselor , financial management analyst , forensic tech , full time adjuncts , gme coordinator , graduate program specialist , info res tech , int med / psych , internal medicine , lab coordinator , lecturers , manager , ob / gyns , office coordinator , post doc , psychiatry , research specialist , technical clerk , hourly temps , visiting assistant professors , financial management analyst , executive aides , student help staff , temporary clerical support , accountant , consultant , extension agents , it administrator , visiting scholar , temp hourly instructional , website developers .

less than 50% completed governor , texas office of the state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and post secondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and post secondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

instructional and non - instructional staff employed by school districts and open enrollment charter schools , including teachers , educational aides , support staff , administrators , counselors , librarians , school nurses , federal program directors and speech pathologists .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) austin , texas 787011935 less than 50% completed 1181 executive office of the state of vermont state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public , elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

education fund - for the support of public , elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

preschool / prekindergarten teachers , kindergarten teachers , elementary teachers ( grades 1-6 ) , secondary teachers ( grades 7-12 ) , teachers of ungraded classes ( include eee , special ed .

 ) , teachers aides - ( paid only ) , guidance counselors / directors - elem ( grades 1-6 ) , guidance counselors / directors - sec ( grades 7-12 ) , nurses , admin .

assists. , clerical & secretarial support staff , athletic directors , audiovisual & instructional technology staff , librarians , school library support staff , superintendents , assistant superintendents , principals , assistant principals , business managers , maintenance and security .

although it is impossible to know whether these jobs or others would have been eliminated in the absence of arra - funding , these jobs were in existence and are maintained with funds which will be reimbursed from the state fiscal stabilization fund .

since only expenditures of arra funds received are reportable by the state , the expenditures made by the state will be reported in the period in which the federal arra reimbursement for those expenditures is made .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) montpelier , vermont 056090003 less than 50% completed state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) - education state grants , recovery act state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) - education state grants , recovery act to support and restore funding for elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as applicable , early child hood education programs and services in states and local ed for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

6357.1000000000004 jobs accounted for during the quarter ended 3 / 31 / 2010 represent employment types including: 5981.1 teachers , 2 bus drivers , 15.5 technology support , 36.8 principals , 93.6 instructional assistants , 16.8 guidance councelors , 15 librarians , 67.5 aids , 50.8 clerical staff , 11 custodians , 9.3 truancy officers , 6 nurses , and 51.7 other .

this total is made up of 6235.4 saved positions and 121.7 created positions .

less than 50% completed executive office of the state of washington state fiscal stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , postsecondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services for the support of public elementary , secondary , postsecondary education , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

k - 12 education staff , including certificated teachers , teacher / classroom aides and other classified staff ( administrative assistants , building operations , information services and other technical staff ) .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) olympia , washington 985040002 less than 50% completed state stabilization fund - education fund education fund - for the support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education and , as , applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

for the support of public elementary and secondary education and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services .

3937.3600000000001 jobs created and retained include teachers , education aides , administrative assistants , custodians , bus drivers , principals , and information technology specialists .

the recovery act provided supplemental funding for programs authorized by the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , as amended , the major federal statute that supports the provisions of early intervention and special education and related services for children , and youth with disabilities .

part b ( $11.7 billion ) provides funds to ensure that preschool and school - aged children with disabilities have access to a free and appropriate public education and is divided into two separate grant programs — part b grants to states ( for school - age children ) and part b preschool grants.. our review focused only on part b grants to states for school aged children .

we assessed the transparency of descriptive information for idea part b for school aged children awards available on recovery.gov .

we found that an estimated 4 percent met our transparency criteria , 9 percent significantly met our criteria , 87 percent partially met our criteria , and zero percent did not meet our criteria .

given that few descriptions met our transparency criteria we conducted a national survey of school districts to discover how they are using the funds .

the information on idea is found in appendix v .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , hawaii dept of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

funds were used up to the september 30 , 2009 quarter , to pay for contracted special education - related services .

calculated 'jobs retained' were 346.86 for that quarter , as noted above , based on vendor hours of service .

for the quarters ended december 31 , 2009 and march 31 , 2010 , no additional expenditures were made .

therefore , the 'number of jobs' for this reporting quarter is zero .

in the quarter ended september 30 , 2009 , jobs were create / retained totaling 346.86 ftes , for contracted special education - related services .

in that quarter , vendors provided services in the areas of school - based behavioral health services , and assistance to students diagnosed with the autism spectrum disorder .

based on vendor data and prime recipient - analyzed detailed records of minutes , and 445,834 hours of service , and standard cumulative hours since grant origination date of february 17 , 2009 to september 30 , 2009 of 1,285.33 hours , the fte calculation was 346.86 for that quarter .

for the quarters ended december 31 , 2009 and march 31 , 2010 , no additional expenditures were made .

therefore , the 'number of jobs' for this reporting quarter is zero .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) honolulu , hawaii 968132403 more than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

funds were just released to leas in january and most districts are still planning and goal setting , prior to expenditures .

albany 1 , big horn 1 , carbon 1 , carbon 2 , crook 1 , fremont 1 , fremont 21 , fremont 24 , fremont 6 , hot springs 1 , johnson 1 , laramie 1 , lincoln 1 , natrona 1 , niobrara 1 , park 1 , platte 1 , sheridan 2 , sublette 1 , sublette 9 , sweetwater 1 , sweetwater 2 , uinta 4 , washakie 2 waiting on application approval , were just approved , not fully started , or still in planning phase .

big horn 2 we are setting up spread sheets and budgets .

big horn 3 purchased computers , amplification system , travel expenses , data management system , resource classroom equipment .

all items were purchase ordered in february , but draw down will happen in march .

big horn 4 projects have not been funded through feb. 28 , but we have expenses planned for march .

campbell have made some minor purchases and are in the process of starting our first large project this month .

converse 1 application approved and we are beginning the activities .

have generated purchase orders for activities and equipment .

converse 2 submitted purchase orders in line with our budgeted expenditures .

waiting for receipt of items on those purchase orders .

we have not yet expended any funds .

fremont 14 purchase orders for materials and some staff training have been processed , but none have been submitted for payment .

fremont 25 grant approved in feb , we are preparing budgets and getting bids / quotes for future purchases .

we expect to start expending funds in march .

goshen 1 application approved , action will begin in june 2010 .

laramie 2 planning continues .

some encumbrances have been made , but no expenditures - to date .

lincoln 2 built tracking device for arra spending , processed purchase requisitions , and report generation .

park 16 increased capacity and productivity by purchasing contract services for students w / disabilities .

occupational therapy and psycholog 5.6600000000000001 leas have just begun to save or create jobs with this funding .

the initial job information is as follows: big horn 4 admin support has been given a stipend to help tvi director with the administration of arra funds .

she stays after her normal workday to assist with purchasing , labeling tracking of funds .

in march she worked 3 hours .

she has not yet been paid her stipend for this time .

fremont 1 the job created by this grant is 35 hours per week .

there were 20 days worked in march .

this position is 100% funded by arra grant .

the district tells us they are tracking this with a time sheet .

db laramie 1 clerical work has begun .

lincoln 2 job 1: administration services for managing arra funding and requests .

i have logged 29 hours in the first quarter for administrative work which was 100% funded by arra .

job 2: professional development for special educators - - a series of six classes two hours each - - total of 12 hours per teacher .

there are currently 20 teachers enrolled estimating a total of 240 hours training .

to date , we have a total of 104 hours completed .

hours of completion is based on actual attendance logs at each of the trainings .

park 16 the job information listed is for contract services .

park 6 retained case manager and job coach positions ; start date for both was 2 / 8 / 10 .

created reading teacher fully funded from this grant ; start date was 2 / 23 / 10 .

also created rti coordinator and arra secretary positions to oversee all arra activities and expenditures .

rti coordinator worked 184 hours this quarter , arra secretary worked 167 hours this quarter .

47% of these positions are paid from this grant .

sheridan 2 2 part time jobs created this quarter sweetwater 1 part time administrative assistant was hired to coordinate professional development .

the arra funded admin .

assistant submits a monthly report documenting arra hours .

sweetwater 2 hours reported were for after school tutoring positions , staff development , and ell translation .

teton 1 admin program development , oversight and compliance .

albany 1 , big horn 1 , big horn 2 , big horn 3 , campbell 1 , carbon 1 , carbon 2 , converse 1 , converse 2 , crook 1 , fremont 14 , fremont 21 , fremont 24 , fremont 25 , fremont 6 , goshen 1 , hot springs 1 , johnson 1 , laramie 2 , lincoln 1 , natrona 1 , niobrara 1 , park 1 , platte 1 , platte 2 , sheridan 1 , sheridan 3 , sublette 1 , sublette 9 , uinta 1 , uinta 4 , uinta 6 , washakie 2 , weston 1 , weston 7 no jobs this quarter .

the following award descriptions contained most but not all details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , georgia department of idea part b flow thru - arra h391a090073a the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) 2004 , section 611 ensures that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education ( fape ) in the least restrictive environment that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education , employment and independent living .

idea funds are used to assist leas with the excess costs of providing special education and related service to students with disabilities ; provide leas with assistive technology , alternative materials and programs and positive behavioral supports ; and , support leas to collect , manage , analyze and report data through their district to enhance school system improvement strategies and results for students with disabilities .

funded programs must use instructional strategies based on scientifically based research and implement parental involvement activities .

teachers ( 693.30 ) ; aides & paraprofessionals ( 1528.57 ) ; clerical staff ( 27.95 ) ; interpreter ( 2.63 ) ; technology specialist ( 4.00 ) ; school nurse ( 2.69 ) ; physical therapist ( 5.50 ) ; teacher support specialist ( 55.47 ) ; secondary counselor ( 3.00 ) ; school psychologist ( 22.33 ) ; school social worker ( 3.91 ) ; family services / parent coordinator ( 5.00 ) ; bus drivers ( 57.30 ) ; other management ( 21.07 ) ; other administration ( 89.79 ) ; other salaries & compensation ( 11.38 ) ; speech language therapist ( 2.95 ) ; other ( 15.26 ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) atlanta , georgia 303349049 less than 50% completed education , indiana department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

used for hiring and retaining staff , and purchasing equipment .

education of children with disabilities ( ages 3-21 ) special education teachers , aides and related services personnel such as occupational / physical therapists , job coaches , music therapists , mental health therapists , audiologists , psychologists and coordinators .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilites assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea local educational agencies primarily used the funds to retain elementary , middle and high school positions such as: special education teachers , ece instructional assistants , psychologist , therapist , interpreters and paraprofessionals .

the positions were retained to provide continuation services to special needs students and also provide differentiated instruction targeted at each individual student's needs .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , alabama dept of special education - grants to states , recovery act / state grants provide a free and appropriate public education to all children with disabilities .

provide a free and appropriate public education to all children with disabilities .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed 132 education & early development , alaska department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist state in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

to date , 52 of 54 districts in the state have received an arra award under this gan .

assist state in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea teaching and support staff .

the number of jobs reported was calculated in a manner consistent with omb memo 10-08 ( december 18 , 2009 ) less than 50% completed idea grants to states part b sec 611 recovery act to provide grants to states to assist them in providing a free appropriate public education to all children with disabilities .

ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education , employment and independent living .

paraprofessionals , transition coordinators , special education teachers , occupational therapists , speech - language pathologists .

education , arkansas department of grants to states for education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) little rock , arkansas 722010000 less than 50% completed education , california department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities special education grants to states , recovery act funds to assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

the special education grants to states , recovery act funds are provided to ensure that children with disabilities have access to a free appropriate public education to meet each child's unique needs and prepare each child for further education , employment , and independent living .

the uses of funds under the special education grants to states , recovery act are to be consistent with the current idea , part b statutory and regulatory requirements .

some of the valid uses of the funds may include: ( 1 ) purchases of equipment for student use in instruction , ( 2 ) purchases of workstations for student use , ( 3 ) purchases of new resources and materials for use in instruction , ( 4 ) provide intensive professional development on evidence - based practices for academics and behavior , and ( 5 ) expand staff to support closing the achievement gap .

5715.5699999999997 jobs created or retained include 3160.76 classified jobs , 2359.00 certificated jobs , 193.81 vendor jobs , and 0.00 ihe jobs .

classified jobs include non - teaching positions such as food service , bus drivers , teacher assistants , custodians , office staff , librarians , and instructional aides for special education .

certificated jobs include teaching positions .

vendor jobs represent a variety of different types of jobs .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , colorado board of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea special education certified teachers , speech therapists / pathologists , school psychologists , severe needs paraprofessionals , social workers , program coordinators and directors , autism specialists , grant accountants , data analysts , hearing and vision screener , occupationsl therapists , nurses , physical therapists , administrative , consultants .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

744.16999999999996 for central administration staff , 7.82 jobs created and 8.24 jobs retained .

for teachers / instructors / department heads staff , 151.87 jobs created and 226.92 jobs retained .

for paraprofessionals staff , 143.42 jobs created and 156.42 jobs retained .

for clerical support staff , 7.19 jobs created and 4.63 jobs retained .

for guidance counselors staff , 4.74 jobs created and 1.50 jobs retained .

for school nurse / health services staff , 2.66 jobs created and 2.86 jobs retained .

for maintenance personnel staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.08 jobs retained .

for technical / computer specialists staff , 0.82 jobs created and 2.00 jobs retained .

for library / media staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for food services staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for athletics / coaches staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for class advisors staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for all outside consultants and vendors except for rescs and serc staff , 16.63 jobs created and 6.37 jobs retained .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , delaware department of state grants - special education to enhance and supplement services provided by idea and to cushion the progam from the current economic conditions .

to enhance and supplement the idea progam and cushion it from the current negative economic financial conditions funding was used to increase the number of services available to special ed students including the need to hire additional staffing to serve them .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) washington , district of columbia 200020000 less than 50% completed education , florida department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

the majority of the jobs paid for with arra funds related to instruction or instructional support .

types of jobs included but were not limited to classroom teacher , paraprofessionals , career specialists , school - based administrators , clerical , supervisors , guidance counselors , pre - kindergarten teachers , psychologists , social workers , and technicians .

less than 50% completed idaho state board of education grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist state in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

special education 77.44% teacher / teacher aides , 14.21% school / district administration / office support , 5.05% speech / physical / occupational / behavioral / other therapists , 0.76% iep services , 0.53% nurses , 0.50% social workers , 0.42% interpriter , 0.27% special education data plan work , 0.20% psr facilitator , 0.19% job coaches , 0.16% ibi services , 0.10% day tratement , 0.10% professional development , 0.07% other services .

less than 50% completed education , illinois state board of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea education , training and library occupations , office and administrative support occupations , management occupations , computer and mathmatical occupations , life , physical and social science occupations , community and social service occupations , health practitioners , building and grounds cleaning and maintenance occupations , personal care and service occupations , installation , maintenance and repair occupations , healthcare support occupations , food preparation and serving related occupations , construction and extraction occupations , transportation and material moving occupations .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) springfield , illinois 627770002 less than 50% completed education , iowa department of assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) des moines,, , iowa 503190000 less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) topeka , kansas 666121103 less than 50% completed education , maine department of individuals with disabilities education act grants to states "recovery act" idea special education grant to the state for distribution the the school administrative units .

idea special education grant to the state for distribution the the school administrative units .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) more than 50% completed education , maryland department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities to assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea teachers , teaching assistants , student services , staff development workshop staff , dropout prevention specialists , technology specialist , behavior specialists , psychologist intern , physical therapists , occupational therapists , sign language interpreter , speech therapists , reading intervention tutors .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) baltimore , maryland 212012549 less than 50% completed department of elementary and secondary education grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the individuals with disabilities education act .

support special education and related services to children with disabilities .

1694.9100000000001 special education teachers , paraprofessionals , and service providers were hired or retained .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

teachers of students with cognitive impairment , emotional impairment autism spectrum disorder , visual impairment and early childhood special education and resource room teachers ; school psychologists ; school social workers ; para - professionals ; assistive technology staff and assistants ; speech therapist and pathologists ; special education supervisors and directors ; behavior specialists ; response to intervention specialists , coaches , aides and consultants ; transition coordinators ; occupational therapists ; vocational education coordinators ; technology interventionist ; diagnostic aide ; curriculum consultants ; professional development and training coordinators ; administrative support staff ; reading teachers and literacy consultants ; special education planners / coordinators and compliance staff ; positive behavior support - behavior specialists ; music therapist ; emotionally impaired crisis aides ; differentiated instruction educational coaches ; curriculum specialists ; instructional trainers for special education teachers ; technology and data support .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , minnesota , department of grants to state for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

types of jobs created or retained with this grant include administration / supervision , cultural liaison , educational speech / language pathologist , licensed instructional support , mental health professional,licensed nursing services , non - instructional support , non - licensed classroom personnel , non - licensed instructional support , paraprofessional , physical / occupational therapist , school psychologist , school nurse , social worker , substitute teacher salaries , teachers , and other .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed elementary and secondary education , missouri department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) jefferson city , missouri 651012901 less than 50% completed public instruction , montana office of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

teachers , aides , specialists , and administrative staff needed to provide special education instruction and related services for k - 12 elementary and secondary schools .

teachers , aides , specialists , and administrative staff needed to provide special education instruction and related services for k - 12 elementary and secondary schools .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , nebraska department of grants to states for the education of childrenwith disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of idea positions created or retained were to provide a free appropriate public education for students with verified disabilities .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , nevada department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilitiesin accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilites in accordance with part bof idea .

45.2 fte teachers jobs paid by arra funds .

48.37 fte teachers aide jobs paid with arra funds .

.62 fte speech therapist job paid by arra funds .

2.06 support staff paid with arra funds .

.33 nurse fte paid with arra funds .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) carson city , nevada 897015096 less than 50% completed education , new jersey department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

a total of 1396.0 jobs were created or retained .

of those , 729.4 were instructional positions , 314.0 were student support services positions , 22.0 were administrative positions and 330.6 did not indicate a job classification .

we provide funds on a reimbursement basis , and therefore it is not unusual for leas to report jobs created or retained prior to actually receiving the funds .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) trenton , new jersey 086250500 less than 50% completed new mexico education , department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea - b ) .

idea - b allocations that are funded by arra are formula driven flow - through allocations to leas .

169.72 for the current quarter , local educational agencies ( lea ) have reported that jobs created or saved included teachers , related service providers , and instructional assistants .

the creation of the new teaching jobs helped reduce the student teacher ratio in classrooms in new mexico .

this allowed students to receive a more individualized education tailored to meet their unique needs .

the additional related service providers allowed students with disabilities to receive additional therapy services to assist them in the educational setting .

instructional assistants provide students with disabilities with needed instructional support and assistance with behavioral and / or medical needs .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) santa fe , new mexico 875012744 less than 50% completed new york state education department grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea commercial and institutional building construction new york state used the arra idea grants for sub - recipients receiving idea funds and used part of these funds to save or create jobs .

these programs were implemented consistent with federal idea requirements and it is expected that sub - recipients will report additional jobs saved or created in future quarters .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) albany , new york 122340000 less than 50% completed public instruction , north carolina department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

director and / or supervisor ( 113 ) person assigned to direct or supervise staff members , a function , a program , or a support service .

teacher ( 121 ) person certified to teach the standard course of studies and assigned to instruct pupils not classified elsewhere new teacher orientation ( 125 ) person attending assigned new teacher orientation , outside of the teacher's contract calendar , not to exceed 3 days.re - employed retired teacher - exempt from the earnings cap ( 128 ) retired teachers hired back into the classroom.instructional support i ( 131 ) person assigned duties that require a high degree of knowledge and skills , in support of the instructional program .

duties include health services , attendance counseling , guidance services , media services , and nurses.instructional support ii ( 132 ) person assigned duties that require a high degree of knowledge and skills which place them on the advanced pay scale .

includes speech and audiologists psychologist ( 133 ) person assigned to perform duties involving psychology.teacher mentor ( 134 ) individuals who are employed to serve as full - time mentors to teachers only.lead teacher ( 135 ) includes curriculum specialists , instructional facilitators , as well as lead teachers in the summer school program .

teacher assistant ( 141 ) person assigned to assist with students in roles without the extra education required for nclb .

examples include personal care assistants and physical therapy assistants.teacher assistant ? .

nclb ( 142 ) person assigned to perform the day - to - day activities of assisting the regular classroom teacher , in roles requiring the extra education of nclb.tutor ( within the instructional day ) ( 143 ) person assigned to perform tutorial duties .

interpreter , braillist , translator , education interpreter ( 144 ) person assigned to perform the activities of an interpreter , brail , translator , or education interpreter , and their assistants.therapist ( 145 ) person assigned to perform the activities of physical or occupational therapy .

includes the positions of physical therapist , occupational therapist.specialist ( school - based ) ( 146 ) person assigned to perform technical activities in a support capacity such as data collection , compiling research data , preparing statistical reports , technology and other technical duties .

includes the positions such as certified nurses , computer lab assistants , technology assistants , cte tech assistants , and behavioral modification techs , parent liaisons , and home school coordinators.monitor ( 147 ) person assigned to perform the activities of a monitor - bus monitors , lunchroom monitors , and playground monitors .

office support ( 151 ) person assigned to perform activities concerned with preparing , transferring , transcribing , systemizing , or filing written communications and records .

includes secretary , accounting personnel , admin assistant , photocopy clerk , file clerk , ncwise specialist , clerical specialist in a central office role , cost clerk , and school - based office personnel driver ( 171 ) person whose assignment consists primarily of driving a vehicle , such as a bus , truck , or automobile .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) raleigh , north carolina 276011058 less than 50% completed public instruction , north dakota department of idea - b grants for children with disabilities h391a090049a assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) bismarck , north dakota 585050602 less than 50% completed special education - grants to states , recovery act special education - grants to states , recovery act the purposes of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) are to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education ( fape ) that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education , employment and independent living ; to ensure that the rights of children with disabilities and parents of such children are protected ; and to assist states , localities , educational service agencies , and federal agencies to provide for the education of all children with disabilities ; to assist states in the implementation of a statewide , comprehensive , coordinated , multidisciplanary , interagency system of early intervening services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families ; to ensure that educators and parents have the necessary tools to improve educational results for children with disabilities by supporting system improvement activities ; coordinated research and personnel preparation ; corrdinated technical assistance , dissemination , and support ; and technology developement and media services ; and to assess , and ensure the effectiveness of , efforts to educate children with disabilities .

intervention specialists , licensed as a special education teachers , special education aide , director of pupil services , tutoring , paraprofessional positions , support staff , behavior intervention specialist,transition services coordinator , special education compliancy coordinator,federal adminstrator , speech and psychologist services , medical assistant , special education bus driver , reading specialists,brailist , literacy coaches , esl liaison , secondary curriculum specialist , special services liaison .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) columbus , ohio 432154183 less than 50% completed education , oklahoma state department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) oklahoma city , oklahoma 731054503 more than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

these recovery act funds have been crucial to retain jobs to provided educational services to students with disabilities .

of jobs reported , 72% are those that have been retained .

these positions include autism specialists , behavioral specialists , case managers , early interventionists , instructional assistants , literacy specialists , occupational therapists , psychologists , reading specialists , nurses , special education teachers , speech and language pathologists , and transition specialists .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , pennsylvania dept of grants to states for the education of children with disabili assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

reflects sub - recipient submitted information on educators and other support staff providing services detailed in the project description for the current reporting quarter for this award .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed department of education , south carolina grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to students with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) columbia , south carolina 292013730 less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

teacher and paraprofessional positions were created to assist school districts in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) pierre , south dakota 575012291 less than 50% completed education , tennessee department of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea the hiring and retaining of special education teachers , paraprofessionals , support and related service personnel to provide free appropriate public education to children with disabilities .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

the positions created or retained during this period included professional jobs as well as positions for support staff .

the major job categories include counselors , teachers , educational aides , administrators , and speech pathologists .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed grants to states for the education of children with diabilities ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education , employment , and indepe ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education that emphasizes special education and related services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education , employment , and independent living .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , virginia department of special education grants to states , recovery act special education grants to states , recovery act to provide grants to states to assist them in providing a free appropriate public education to all children with disabilities .

funds are used by state and local educational agencies , in accordance with the idea , to help provide the special education and related services needed to make a free appropriate public education available to all eligible children and , in some cases , early intervening services .

jobs accounted for during the quarter ended 3 / 31 / 2010 represent employment types such as: special education teachers , councelors , psychologists , special education services coordinators , and early intervention specialists .

this total is made up of 600.5 saved positions and 310.6 created positions .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed public instruction , washington state superintendent of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities h391a090074a assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed public instruction , wisconsin dept of grants to states for the education of children with disabilities assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

assist states in providing special education and related services to children with disabilities in accordance with part b of the idea .

the types of jobs created and / or retained as a result of the american recovery and reinvestment act at the local district level include: special education teachers , special education paraprofessionals , substitute special education teachers , special education administrative assistants , transition coordinators , speech and language therapists , occupational therapists and assistants , school psychologists , social workers , directors of special education , special education program support teachers and coordinators , assistive technology personnel , diagnosticians , behavioral analysts , audiologists , orientation and mobility specialists , special education transportation providers , and personnel supporting infrastructure investments ( i.e .

electricians , construction workers , etc. ) .

an arra coordinator position has also been created at the sea level .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) .

the recovery act provides $10 billion to help local educational agencies ( lea ) educate disadvantaged youth by making additional funds available beyond those regularly allocated through title i , part a of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 as amended ( esea ) .

these additional funds are to be distributed through states to leas using existing federal funding formulas , which target funds based on such factors as high concentrations of students from families living in poverty .

in using the funds , leas are required to comply with current statutory and regulatory requirements and must obligate 85 percent of the funds by september 30 , 2010 .

education is advising leas to use the funds in ways that will build the agencies' long - term capacity to serve disadvantaged youth , such as through providing professional development to teachers .

all states and the district of columbia received recovery act grant awards for the three education programs included in our review .

however , award - related information for the following prime recipients was not available on recovery.gov during the period of our review , and therefore these states were excused from our analysis: rhode island was not included in the number of awards for esea title i because it was granted a reporting waiver by education .

utah was not included in the number of recovery act title i awards because education reported that it failed to submit its 1512 reports by the deadline , primarily because of various technical issues .

the following award descriptions contained sufficient information on general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , and expected outcomes to meet our transparency criteria .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , hawaii dept of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

initial project provided extended learning opportunities ( 'elo' ) during summer 2009 for economically disadvantaged students .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

third quarter activities provided more extended learning opportunities ( 'elo' ) during school year 2009-10 for after - school and other non - school hour time periods such as 'intersessions,' for economically disadvantaged students , struggling to demonstrate grade level proficiency in english language arts ( 'ela' ) and mathematics , as measured by the hawaii state assessment ( 'hsa' ) .

in addition , this quarter's activities included payments to vendors for the elo summer 2009 program , the initial title i recovery act project provided extended learning opportunities ( 'elo' ) during summer 2009 for the same types of students .

students' growth is measured by teacher - developed assessments ; school quarterly assessments ; and the hsa .

during the first quarter elo in 2009 , 8,018 students participated in the program , with an average of 76% showing improvement over the course of the program .

first quarter included 202.49 fte for an initial title i recovery act extended learning opportunities ( 'elo' ) project .

second quarter included 13.40 additional ftes , to provide more elo services during the 2009-10 school year at 35 schools so far , for after - school and other non - school hour time periods such as 'intersessions,' with part - time teachers , tutors , and other support staff .

third quarter included 43.78 ftes , providing elo services during the 2009-10 school year , for after - school and other non - school hour time periods , with part - time teachers , tutors , and other staff .

elo has provided a stimulus to the local economy by providing additional employment opportunities during the summer of 2009 , and during school year 2009-10 .

the summer program was held at 90 campuses statewide , with 8,018 students who participated .

these students were supported by 1,146 staff members during the summer , equating to 202.49 fte for the first quarter , based on 105,295.50 hours worked , divided by 520 standard hours for the quarter , as noted in the 'number of jobs' total in the preceding reporting data field , in accordance with u.s. department of education specific guidance .

these employees hired included part - time and substitute teachers ; program directors ; para - professionals ; and other support positions .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) honolulu , hawaii 968132403 less than 50% completed title 1 , part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

big horn 1 , 2 , 4 carbon 1 , 2 converse 2 crook 1 fremont 1 , 21 , 24 , 38 , 6 hot springs 1 johnson 1 laramie 1 , 2 natrona 1 park 1 platte 1 , 2 sheridan 2 sublette 1 , 9 sweetwater 2 teton 1 uinta 1 , 6 weston 1,7 washakie 2 just getting started .

park 16 purchased a literacy intervention program as part of our current balanced literacy program called rigby reading .

professional development workshops have been attended and many of the leveled books have been ordered .

big horn 3 po for comp equip .

bought ascend math intervention licensing .

75% of computers are installed at the elementary school and in use .

uinta 4 prof services for staff dev implemented .

reg and org dues paid for ira annual convention , i teach k conf and wyo nca spring improvement conf .

sheridan 1 math tutor works with students on a weekly basis .

tutors work with students in homework club / friday school on a weekly basis .

converse 1 job ad and interviews for t1 .

retained teacher planning the 2nd sem .

purchased supports required for parent involvement activities .

conf travel expenditures .

lincoln 2 built tracking devices for arra .

ordered books .

set up tracking system for prof dev activities .

park 6 hired 6 new positions .

four t1 teachers , rti coordinator and arra secretary sweetwater 1 expanded before and after school programs at 2 title i schools .

parent liaison is beginning to provide parenti nvolvement activities and support to t1 parents .

title i sec working additional hours manage requirements for the arra funds .

fremont 25 continued to evaluate our program and process purchase orders for future expenditures .

campbell 1 - hired 4 positions .

1 more to be filled .

started 2 fast cycles at schools .

ordering technology and starting staff development .

campbell 1 purchased computers and supplies for students .

amanda schafer doing help desk to assist districts and proceeding according to the contract .

park 1 sweetwater 1 albany 1 sheridan 2 lincoln 1 n 13.06 some leas have begun to add funded jobs this month , as follows: albany 1 , big horn 1 , big horn 2 , big horn 3 , big horn 4 , campbell 1 , carbon 1 , carbon 2 , converse 2 , crook 1 , fremont 1 , fremont 14 , fremont 21 , fremont 38 , fremont 6 , goshen 1 , hot springs 1 , johnson 1 , laramie 1 , laramie 2 , lincoln 1 , natrona 1 , niobrara 1 , park 1 , park 16 , sheridan 2 , sublette 1 , sublette 9 , sweetwater 1 , uinta 1 , uinta 4 , uinta 6 , weston 1 , weston 7 no jobs impact this quarter .

washakie 2 full time title i paraeducator funded by arra for 86% of the work day worked 60 days at 7 hours a day for quarter 1 .

fremont 24 a teacher worked a total of 3 additional hours for an extended school day .

this was funded 100% with arra t1 funds .

platte 2 retained 1 teacher ( ayers ) and 1 para ( wambach ) .

both began work on february 1 , 2010 and worked a 35 hour weekly schedule through the end of the quarter ( 8 weeks x 35 hours ) .

sheridan 1 a math tutor was hired to help students in title i which will be reimbursed 100% with arra funds .

6 tutors were hired to help students in title i at homework club / friday school ( after hours ) and worked a total of 36 hours , funded at 45% from teton 1 admin hours 1 / 2 half funded by title ia for program development , oversight , and compliance .

sweetwater 2 created title i at granger school .

additional hours reported were substitute teachers for training of teachers , and pay for classroom aides to attend training .

converse 1 title i teacher is retained .

platte 1 sub teachers for 7 days at 7 hours per day , all funded by arra funds lincoln 2 administrative services for maintaining arra funding and spending requests .

professional development / inspiring education for teachers - - this will be a six session course of 2 hours per session with currently 119 teachers enrolled .

estimated hours of training 1,428 .

this project is near 50% complete with a total of 611 training hours complete .

park 6 four new title 1 teacher positions were created that were fully funded by arra .

all 4 started on 2 / 18 / 2010 .

also created rti coordinator and arra secretary positions to oversee all arra activities and expenditures , funded 51% .

sweetwater 1 teachers are providing an extra 1 / 2 to one hour of instruction per day for t i students during before and after school programs .

parent liaison has been hired to provide parent involvement activities and support in title i schools.the title i secretary is working additional hours to help with arra fiscal and program needs .

fremont 25 two classified aide positions were filled during the month of march 2010 campbell 1 expanded our ready 4 learning program by 2 class room adding 2 full time teachers .

added a title i resource center clerk to help in the center while arra funds are being distributed .

this is a full time position that was added at the beginning of march .

added a part time title i esl assistant to one school which was added in march .

position is 40% out of arra .

laramie 1 clerical work has begun .

platte 2 1 full time teaching position was retained and funded from february 1 , 2010 to the end of the quarter .

with short fridays , this averages to be 35 hours per week.1 full time para educator was hired beginning february 16 , 2010 , and worked until the end of the quarter .

amanda schafer amanda is a hired consultant that assists with page design and grant design , along with help desk efforts .

an estimated 70% of her working hours are funded by this arra project for january , and 100% for february and the future .

she worked 40 hours a week for the entire quarter so far .

the following award descriptions contained most but not all details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , california department of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies title i - grants to leas , recovery act funds to improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

title i - grants to leas , recovery act funds provided to assist leas and schools that have high concentrations of students from families that live in poverty in order to help improve teaching and learning of students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the uses of funds under title i – grants to leas , recovery act are to be consistent with the title i , part a and d statutory and regulatory requirements , including the requirements to provide equitable services to eligible private school students .

uses should be aligned with the core goals of the arra to save and create jobs and to advance reforms consistent with the requirements of title i .

possible uses of funds may include: ( 1 ) establishing a system for identifying and training highly effective teachers to serve as instructional leaders in title i schoolwide programs ; ( 2 ) strengthening and expanding early childhood education by providing resources to align a district - wide title i pre - k program with state early learning standards and state content standards for grades k – 3 ; ( 3 ) providing new opportunities for title i schoolwide programs for secondary school students to use high - quality , online courseware as supplemental learning materials for meeting mathematics and science requirements ; and ( 4 ) using reading or mathematics coaches to provide professional development to teachers in title i targeted assistance programs .

jobs created or retained include 1030.83 classified jobs , 3517.20 certificated jobs , 223.15 vendor jobs , and 0.00 ihe jobs .

classified jobs include non - teaching positions such as bilingual teacher assistants , office staff , district coordinators , and instructional aides .

certificated jobs include teaching positions .

vendor jobs represent a variety of different types of jobs .

education , georgia department of title i - a , grants - arra title i , part a , is a formula grant program that provides financial assistance to leas and schools with high numbers or high percentages of poor children to help ensure that all children meet challenging state academic standards .

title i funds are used to provide additional academic support and learning opportunities to help low - achieving children master challenging curricula and meet state standards in core academic subjects .

for example , funds support extra instruction in reading / english language arts , science , social studies , and mathematics , as well as , after - school , and summer programs to extend and reinforce the regular school curriculum .

funded programs must use instructional strategies based on scientifically based research and implement parental involvement activities .

teachers ( 947.85 ) ; aides & paraprofessionals ( 219.83 ) ; clerical staff ( 2.25 ) ; technology specialist ( 4.00 ) ; teacher support specialist ( 3.75 ) ; elementary counselor ( 1.50 ) ; secondary counselor ( 23.50 ) ; family services / parent coordinator ( 68.57 ) ; bus drivers ( 20.80 ) ; other management ( 49.59 ) ; other administration ( 195.09 ) ; other salaries & compensation ( 46.71 ) ; other ( 53.18 ) ; administrative specialist - gadoe ( 2.00 ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed title i , part a - - improving basic program operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for student most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standard .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards 1024.26 local educational agencies primarily used the funds to retain positions such as title i teachers , instructional coaches , instructional assistants , paraprofessionals , preschool teachers , literacy specialists , curriculum specialists and teacher mentors .

the positions were retained to improve the teaching and learning of targeted low performing students and schools .

job embedded professional development for elementary teachers and administrators were also provided .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed administration , louisiana division of title i part a improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

title i arra statement for jobs saved - retained districts have targeted 4 major areas regarding pending title i part a arra funding .

the areas are as follows: ( 1 ) college and career - ready standards and high quality valid and reliable assessments for all students including ell ? s and students with disabilities .

 ( 2 ) prek to higher education data systems that meet the principles in the america competes act .

 ( 3 ) teacher effectiveness and equitable distributions of effective teachers and ( 4 ) intensive support and effective interventions for lowest performing schools.all jobs that have been retained or saved are related to the 4 major areas of focus .

they include instructional coaches ( reading / math coaches ) graduation coaches reading / math interventionist reading content leaders professional development coordinators pre - school teachers and pre - school paraprofessionals class size reduction teachers technology facilitators / coaches academic behavior counselors turn around specialist and drop - out interventionist and curriculum specialist .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed 26 education , maryland department of title i , parta - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the type of jobs created and retained includes teachers , paraprofessionals , coordinators , and other instructional and administrative support staff .

these jobs enable local school systems and schools to maintain and in some cases upgrade the level of supplemental services to students failing or at - risk of failing who are enrolled in high poverty schools .

the jobs created and retained data was obtained from reports submitted from each sub - recipient .

each sub - recipient report is maintained at the maryland state department of education education , nebraska department of title i , part a improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improving teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards title i funds are used to provide services to meet the educational needs of low - achieving students and to work toward closing the achievement gap between high - and low - performing students .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed 248 education , new hampshire department of title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the addition of title i arra funds has resulted in an increase in the number of students , duration of services , resources utilized and the variety of intervention programs used to support school district's most academically at risk students .

the personalized , supplemental services provided are expected to increase student achievement and decrease achievement gaps .

projects range in design and implementation , based on specific student and school needs and resources , but include supplemental instructional support in and outside the classroom as well as extended day learning opportunities and professional development opportunities to stafff .

title i arra funds have been used to secure previously funded title i positions that would have been eliminated due to decreases in regular title i funding to particular school districts .

title i arra funds have also been used to add positions in school districts including: teachers , tutors , paraprofessionals , content specialists , professional development coordinators and providers , project managers and various other positions .

through the creation and maintenance of these jobs , school districts have been able to strengthen existing programs as well as expand the number of students served ( including increasing the number of title i schools in districts ) and provide additional professional development opportunities for staff .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) concord , new hampshire 033013852 less than 50% completed new york state education department title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards 4366.7200000000003 the title i portion of the arra was an increase to the allocation under esea sections 1125 and 1125a for title i part a. sub - recipients of arra title i included 650 public school districts and 150 charter school local educational agencies .

recipients used the funds primarily to cover compensatory education expenses not previously funded by title i .

the ability to pay for a higher proportion of allowable title i positions freed up funds for other purposes including instructional positions and professional development opportunities for teachers such as through literacy coaching .

arra title i funds were used to save existing positions ( especially in academic intervention services ) and to create new ones ( especially for professional development ) .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) .

the following award descriptions did not contain sufficient details on one or more of the following pieces of information necessary to facilitate general understanding of the award , based on our criteria: general purpose , scope and nature of activities , location , or expected outcomes .

the award description information is taken directly from recovery.gov .

we did not edit it in any way , such as to correct typographical or grammatical errors .

education , alabama dept of title i grants to leas , recovery act help local education agencies and schools improve the teaching and learning of children failing , or most at - risk of failing , to meet challenging state academic achievement standards .

help local education agencies and schools improve the teaching and learning of children failing , or most at - risk of failing , to meet challenging state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed title 1 grants to local educational agencies , recovery act to help local educational agencies ( leas ) and schools improve the teaching and learning of children failing , or most at - risk of failing , to meet challenging state academic achievement standards .

improving the opportunity for disadvantage children and ensuring disadvantage children have a fair , equal , and significant opportunity to obtain a high - quality education and reach , at a minimum , proficiency on challenging state academic achievement standards and state academic assessments .

title i teachers , paraprofessionals , professional development positions and education coaches .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed 156 education , arkansas department of title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local education agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

14.7 unclassified jobs created * 28.18 contracted staff jobs created * 73.11 licensed staff jobs created * 29.97 non - licensed staff jobs created * 32.35 unclassified jobs retained * 7.19 contracted staff jobs retained * 37.365 licensed staff jobs retained * 10 non - licensed staff jobs retained * little rock , arkansas 722010000 less than 50% completed education , colorado board of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

integration specialists , full and part time teachers , english language teachers , paraprofessionals , literacy & math coaches , classroom assistants , interventionists , family center coordinators , secretaries , intervention school director , title i coordinators , consultants , computer technicians , bookkeepers , family and community outreach liaisons , onsite technical staffing , mentors , nurses , administrative staff , counselors , psychologists , social workers , consultants .

less than 50% completed 114 title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

for central administration staff , 4.70 jobs created and 6.66 jobs retained .

for teachers / instructors / department heads staff , 125.62 jobs created and 196.14 jobs retained .

for paraprofessionals staff , 31.31 jobs created and 49.53 jobs retained .

for clerical support staff , 2.36 jobs created and 2.45 jobs retained .

for guidance counselors staff , 0.70 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for school nurse / health services staff , 0.86 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for maintenance personnel staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for technical / computer specialists staff , 2.00 jobs created and 1.00 jobs retained .

for library / media staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for food services staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for athletics / coaches staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for class advisors staff , 0.00 jobs created and 0.00 jobs retained .

for all outside consultants and vendors except for rescs and serc staff , 9.60 jobs created and 7.53 jobs retained .

less than 50% completed education , delaware department of title i grants to lea , awards granted in order for leas to maintain title i services and retain instructional staff to provide those title i services.. funding used to increase the number of services availabale to title i students including retaining title i teachers to continue title i services and provide additional services .

funding used to increase the number of services availabale to title i students including retaining title i teachers to continue title i services and provide additional services .

less than 50% completed title i , part a: grants to local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards the title i , part a program provides financial assistance to leas and schools with high numbers or high percentages of poor children to help ensure that all children meet challenging state academic standards .

recovery act funds create new opportunities for educators to implement innovative strategies in title i schools that improve education for at - risk students and close achievement gaps while also stimulating the economy .

jobs created or retained include instructional and support services staff .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) washington , district of columbia 200020000 less than 50% completed education , florida department of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

types of jobs included but were not limited to classroom teachers , instructional aides , school - based administrators , clerical support , librarians / media specialists , supervisors , guidance counselors , social workers , psychologists , and instructional district - based administrators .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) tallahassee , florida 323990400 less than 50% completed idaho state board of education title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

82.83% teachers / teacher aides , 4.94% school / district administration / office support , 3.71% tutors / substitutes , 1.61% state administration / office support , 1.55% instructional improvement coaches , 1.12% educational media workers , 1.07% behavior specialists , 0.85% reading coaches , 0.78% after school program , 0.50% professional development , 0.38% technology specialist , 0.15% computer lab technicians , 0.13% math intervention specialist , 0.12% testing facilitator , 0.11% social worker , 0.07% program review contractors , 0.05% counselors , 0.02% library technicians , 0.01% programmer for data collection .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) boise , idaho 837200027 less than 50% completed education , illinois state board of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local education agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

education , training and library occupations , management occupations , computer and mathmatical occupations , community and social service occupations , health practitioners and technical occupations , office and administrative support occupations .

personal care and service occupations .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) springfield , illinois 627770002 less than 50% completed education , indiana department of title i part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

at risk intervention teachers and aides .

instructional coaches for professional development .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed education , iowa department of title i - basic lea grants funding to school districts to support struggling readers ( consistent with regular title i programming ) expansion of title i basic grants intended to support students struggling with reading and math .

title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) augusta , maine 043330023 more than 50% completed department of elementary and secondary education title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

provide educational services to students most at risk of failing to meet academic standards .

remaining funds will be expended by school districts as needed to supplement existing title i funds .

title i teachers , paraprofessionals , and support staff members were hired or retained .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) malden , massachusetts 021484906 less than 50% completed title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the following jobs were created and retained with arra title i , part a funds: academic counselors , aides / paraprofessionals , classroom / instructional interventionists , early childhood intervention specialists , instructional coaches , instructional specialists program coordinators , reading recovery teachers , social workers , substitute teachers summer school teachers , teachers , and tutors .

education , minnesota , department of title1-parta - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

types of jobs created or retained with this grant include administration / supervision , counselor , cultural liaison , licensed instructional support , mental health professional , non - licensed classroom personnel , non - licensed instructional support , other , paraprofessional , physical / occupational therapist , substitute teacher salaries , and teachers .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) roseville , minnesota 551134266 less than 50% completed mississippi state department of education title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local education agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the jobs created / retained with title i , part a arra funds include instructional and non - instructional positions which all directly impact increasing the academic achievement of at - risk populations .

instructional positions include teachers , paraprofessionals , speech therapists , interventionists , in - school and after school tutors .

non - instructional positions include guidance counselors , social workers , security officers , and library / media specialists .

elementary and secondary education , missouri department of title i , parta - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) jefferson city , missouri 651012901 more than 50% completed public instruction , montana office of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

public elementary and secondary school subgrantees continued their school year projects .

funding is being distributed based on subrecipients' monthly cash requests and reporting .

jobs related to the provision of educational services in public elementary and secondary schools under title i , part a improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies , recovery act .

education , nevada department of title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local education agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic acchievement standards improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards 230.49 teaching jobs and 93.2 teachers aid jobs were paid with arra funds .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) carson city , nevada 897015096 less than 50% completed education , new jersey department of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

a total of 794.2 jobs were created or retained .

of those , 577.5 were instructional positions , 62.4 were direct student support services positions , 40.0 were administrative positions and 114.3 did not indicate a job classification .

we provide title 1 funds on a reimbursement basis , and therefore it is not unusual for leas to report jobs created or retained prior to actually receiving the funds .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) trenton , new jersey 086250500 less than 50% completed 291 new mexico education , department of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

new mexico's public school districts and charter schools reported 145.08 positions for the title i grant .

the positions created / retained are teachers , educational assistants , curriculum coaches , subject matter specialists , data specialists , counselors , and school nurses .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) santa fe , new mexico 875012744 less than 50% completed public instruction , north carolina department of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards 2789.27 director and / or supervisor ( 113 ) person assigned to direct or supervise staff members , a function , a program , or a support service.assistant principal ( 116 ) person , licensed as an assistant principal , who has been designated by a local board of education to perform the duties of a non - teaching assistant principal .

teacher ( 121 ) person certified to teach the standard course of studies and assigned to instruct pupils not classified elsewhere new teacher orientation ( 125 ) person attending assigned new teacher orientation , outside of the teacher's contract calendar , not to exceed 3 days.re - employed retired teacher - exempt from the earnings cap ( 128 ) retired teachers hired back into the classroom.instructional support i ( 131 ) person assigned duties that require a high degree of knowledge and skills , in support of the instructional program .

duties include health services , attendance counseling , guidance services , media services , and nurses.instructional support ii ( 132 ) person assigned duties that require a high degree of knowledge and skills which place them on the advanced pay scale .

includes speech and audiologists psychologist ( 133 ) person assigned to perform duties involving psychology.teacher mentor ( 134 ) individuals who are employed to serve as full - time mentors to teachers only.lead teacher ( 135 ) includes curriculum specialists , instructional facilitators , as well as lead teachers in the summer school program .

teacher assistant ( 141 ) person assigned to assist with students in roles without the extra education required for nclb .

examples include personal care assistants and physical therapy assistants.teacher assistant – nclb ( 142 ) person assigned to perform the day - to - day activities of assisting the regular classroom teacher , in roles requiring the extra education of nclb.tutor ( within the instructional day ) ( 143 ) person assigned to perform tutorial duties .

interpreter , braillist , translator , education interpreter ( 144 ) person assigned to perform the activities of an interpreter , brail , translator , or education interpreter , and their assistants.therapist ( 145 ) person assigned to perform the activities of physical or occupational therapy .

includes the positions of physical therapist , occupational therapist.specialist ( school - based ) ( 146 ) person assigned to perform technical activities in a support capacity such as data collection , compiling research data , preparing statistical reports , technology and other technical duties .

includes the positions such as certified nurses , computer lab assistants , technology assistants , cte tech assistants , and behavioral modification techs , parent liaisons , and home school coordinators.monitor ( 147 ) person assigned to perform the activities of a monitor - bus monitors , lunchroom monitors , and playground monitors .

office support ( 151 ) person assigned to perform activities concerned with preparing , transferring , transcribing , systemizing , or filing written communications and records .

includes secretary , accounting personnel , admin assistant , photocopy clerk , file clerk , ncwise specialist , clerical specialist in a central office role , cost clerk , and school - based office personnel.administrative specialist ( central support ) ( 153 ) person assigned to perform activities concerned with the administrative specialties of a school system .

includes internal auditor , budget specialist , administrative support , hr specialist , public relation personnel , energy and safety monitor , central office specialist , nutritional specialist , and specialists who manage a program area driver ( 171 ) person whose assignment consists primarily of driving a vehicle , such as a bus , truck , or automobile.custodian ( 173 ) person assigned to perform plant housekeeping and operating heating , ventilating , and air conditioning systems .

manager ( 176 ) person assigned to direct the day - to - day operations of a group of skilled , semi - skilled , or unskilled workers .

examples would include child nutrition manager , and maintenance foreman .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) bismarck , north dakota 585050440 less than 50% completed title i - grants to leas , recovery act title i grants to local educational agencies , recovery act title i , part a funds are distributed to school districts based on four distinct funding formulas as affected by census poverty data .

districts determine which eligible buildings are to participate based on federal requirements .

targeted assistance buildings must direct services to specific students .

schoolwide building may use the funds for more schoolwide activities intended to improve outcomes across the building .

purpose: to provide supplemental funding to economically disadvantaged districts and some of their elegible schools for improving educational outcomes for students .

building projects are either targeted assistance whereby students to be served are selected based on academic needs or school - wide whereby an improvement plan can be focused on any or all students .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) oklahoma city , oklahoma 731054503 more than 50% completed title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the jobs created or retained with these recovery act funds include k - 12 teachers , instructional assistants , and mentor positions for new teachers .

teaching positions focus on reading and math .

of the total number of jobs reported , over 50% are newly created positions .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) less than 50% completed 171 education , pennsylvania dept of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards reflects sub - recipient submitted information on educators and other support staff providing services detailed in the project description for the current reporting quarter for this award .

more than 50% completed department of education , south carolina title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

pre - k teacher , kindergarten teachers , special education ( self - contained ) , special ed ( resource ) , classroom teacher , retired teacher , media specialist , guidance , other professional instructional oriented , extended day teacher , title i director , school nurse , social worker , clerical support , teacher leader , coordinators , administrator , title i instructional paraprofessionals , child development aide , instructional assistants , instructional aides , instructional coach , other aides , principal , assistant principal , computer technician , supervisor , support personnel , kindergarten aide , school food service worker , school logistical support staff , curriculum / academic specialist , interventionist , esol part - time teacher , short - term substitutes , consultant , school parent facilitators columbia , south carolina 292013730 less than 50% completed title i part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

teacher and paraprofessional positions were created to improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

pierre , south dakota 575012291 less than 50% completed education , tennessee department of title i grants to local educational agencies , recovery act improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

teachers , paraprofessionals , instructional facilitators , parent involvement coordinators , guidance counselors , resource specialists , tech coaches , clerical , and other educational specialists .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) nashville , tennessee 372431219 less than 50% completed title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

the positions created or retained during this period included professional jobs as well as positions for support staff .

the major job categories include counselors , teachers , educational aides and administrators .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) austin , texas 787011402 less than 50% completed title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) montpelier , vermont 056202501 less than 50% completed education , virginia department of title i grants to local educational agengies , recovery act title i grants to local educational agengies , recovery act to help local education agencies ( leas ) and schools improve the teaching and learning of children failing , or most at - risk of failing , to meet challenging state academic standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

jobs accounted for during the quarter ended 3 / 31 / 2010 represent employment types such as: teachers , paraprofessionals , literacy coaches , reading specialist , math specialists , intervention specialist , aids , and resource professionals .

this total is made up of 333.6 saved positions and 245.5 created positions .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) richmond , virginia 232193673 less than 50% completed public instruction , washington state superintendent of title i , part a - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) olympia , washington 985047200 less than 50% completed 286 west virginia department of education improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet the state academic achievement standards .

place of performance ( city , state , zip code ) charleston , west virginia 253050330 less than 50% completed public instruction , wisconsin dept of title i , part a - - improving basic programs operated by local educational agencies improve teaching and learning for students most at risk of failing to meet state academic achievement standards .

353.70 jobs were reported in this quarter .

these positions include: math and reading literacy coaches ; math support teacher ; substitute teachers ; literacy specialist / coach ; reading teachers and specialists ; day program teachers ; counselors ; stimulus projects coordinator ; literacy support teachers ; teacher ; administrative assistant ; instructor ; director of learning & reform ; title i coordinator ; english teacher ; parent assistant ; paraprofessionals ; clerical staff ; intermediate literacy support coach ; direct instruction specialist ; site specific school improvement ; teacher mentor ; rti coordinator ; title i inclusion teacher ; title i teachers ; speech pathologist ; aide ; social worker ; behavioral specialist ; academic intervention specialist ; secretarial support ; academic support ; remediation specialist ; teacher assistant ; title i paraprofessional ; home visitors ; speaker / presenter / trainer ; reading / literacy consultant ; curriculum consultant ; data consultant ; math consultant ; it staff ; principal ; new leader advanced placement ; early childhood workers ; at - risk teacher ; curriculum development coordinator ; title i teacher 316- license ; remediation skills coordinator ; reading coordinator ; reading recovery teacher ; kindergarten assistance ; math resource teacher ; parent involvement coordinator ; title i family coordinator ; literacy coordinator ; family outreach coordinator ; resource teacher ( preschool , elementary ) ; secondary reading support teachers ; homeless community liaison ; research analyst ; goal aide ; solutions coordinator ; dean of students ; music teacher ; student success coordinator ; art therapist ; autoskill coordinator ; homework club staff ; hearing interpreter ; electronic sub ; afterschool program tutor and administrator ; expended day coordinator , secretary , clerk and extended day staff ; school family liaison ; ell teacher ; data analysis coach ; program managers ; parent presenters ; mentors ; tutors ; accounting staff ; education consultant ; sifi / ayp coordinator ; dual language immersion teacher ; culturally relevant teacher ; private / parochial professional development teacher ; after school professional development coordinator ; after school program coordinator ; parent involvement teachers ; reading consultant ; science teacher ; interventionists ; family coordinator ; staff development specialist ; food service support ; bilingual resource specialist - saturday program ; learning facilitator ; librarian ; americorps workers ; and arra administration coordinator .

the state fiscal stabilization fund included approximately $48.6 billion to award to states by formula and up to $5 billion to award to states as competitive grants .

the recovery act created the sfsf in part to help state and local governments stabilize their budgets by minimizing budgetary cuts in education and other essential government services , such as public safety .

stabilization funds for education distributed under the recovery act must first be used to alleviate shortfalls in state support for education to local educational agencies and public institutions of higher education .

states must use 81.8 percent of their sfsf formula grant funds to support education ( these funds are referred to as education stabilization funds ) and must use the remaining 18.2 percent for public safety and other government services , which may include education ( these funds are referred to as government services funds ) .

after maintaining state support for education at fiscal year 2006 levels , states must use education stabilization funds to restore state funding to the greater of fiscal year 2008 or 2009 levels for state support to leas and public ihes .

when distributing these funds to leas , states must use their primary education funding formula , but they can determine how to allocate funds to public ihes .

in general , leas maintain broad discretion in how they can use education stabilization funds , but states have some ability to direct ihes in how to use these funds .

given that few descriptions fully met our transparency criteria , we administered a web - based survey to school district superintendents in the 50 states and the district of columbia to determine how they are using recovery act funds .

we conducted our survey between march and april 2010 , with a 78 percent final weighted response rate .

we selected a stratified random sample of 575 leas from the population of 16,065 leas included in our sample frame of data obtained from the common core of data in 2007-2008 .

of this sample , we randomly selected 150 leas ( 50 for each program ) to gather illustrative information on how they used their recovery act funds .

see appendix vii for more information on how we designed our survey .

what follows are summaries of how these leas described their use of recovery act sfsf funds , based on their survey responses as well as information we collected through follow - up communications .

acton - boxborough regional school district acton , ma 01720 award amount: $1,366,907 acton - boxborough regional school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to address special needs of its students and teachers .

these funds covered the two schools in the district — the raymond grey junior high and the high school .

specifically , the funds were used for paraprofessional staff retention , for teachers' health insurance , and for special education out - of - district tuition .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately eight paraprofessionals and recover two special education assistants .

therefore , officials reported that the district could maintain its student - teacher ratios for special education and other classes and allow the district to remain in compliance with massachusetts regulations that require special education assistant teachers for every nine special education students .

they also said these funds resulted in the district being able to pay for staff members' health insurance and tuition for four out - of - district students ( which totaled $220,670 ) .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

anchorage school district anchorage , ak 99504 award amount: $23,231,318 anchorage school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to enhance existing effective programs ; implement innovative new programs ; and ensure a safe learning environment with modern , efficient , and functional technology .

not including substitute teachers hired because of the impact of arra - funded professional development , or parents and families affected by arra - funded programs , the sfsf award covered 4,969 teachers , teacher aides , administrators , and staff , and 47,089 students in a range of schools and programs within the district .

specifically , the funds were used to retain and hire staff , provide professional development for instructional staff , purchase instructional materials , support preschool and summer school programs , enhance parent involvement activities , purchase or upgrade computer technology ( hardware , software , servers , and systems ) , conduct student assessments and internal program evaluations , replace failing equipment , and implement building system renewals .

anchorage school district selected projects that would continue its ongoing work to improve scores on standardized tests , increase graduation rates , decrease student dropout rates , and prepare students for college and careers following graduation , all in a safe learning environment .

district officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

arcadia unified school district arcadia , ca 91007 award amount: $3,294,536 arcadia unified school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to backfill staff reductions caused by state budget cuts , thereby ensuring student progress by maintaining the district's standard of an approximate 30-to - 1 student - teacher ratio and providing the necessary programs to meet student needs .

these funds covered all 10 schools in the district that serve approximately 10,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff and support the district's response - to - intervention program , its walk - to - read program , and before - school intervention in math and language arts .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately 20 of its 450 instructional positions and continue programs that meet the needs of its students , including those with special needs .

they also said that these funds had the indirect result of allowing the district's student - teacher ratio in grades k - 3 to remain at approximately 20-to - 1 .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

atlanta public schools atlanta , ga 30303 award amount: $14,536,203 atlanta public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to save and retain instructional and noninstructional jobs .

these funds benefited the district's 107 schools and student population of approximately 47,000 .

specifically , the district reported that the funds are being used to retain jobs that would have been lost because of a decrease in funding .

as a result of the award , officials reported that atlanta public schools saved over 440 jobs , which allowed class sizes to remain the same and support personnel to continue providing high levels of instruction with little or no distraction .

furthermore , the district reported that it anticipates that the additional funds will significantly assist the district with maintaining and expanding instructional reform efforts that focus on building capacity .

officials also anticipate that student achievement will be affected in a positive manner , as will standardized test scores , high school graduation rates , and teacher and principal effectiveness .

district officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

broward county public schools fort lauderdale , fl 33301 award amount: $91,104,960 broward county public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to save as many jobs as possible , which primarily included teaching positions and school support positions .

these funds covered 234 schools .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save over 1,400 jobs .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

burton elementary porterville , ca 93257 award amount: $1,224,856 burton elementary reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to save staff positions , including classified positions for those who work as classroom aides , librarians , and office clerks ; maintain professional development and student programs ; and purchase instructional materials .

these funds covered approximately 3,800 students in seven schools .

specifically , the funds were used to pay staff salaries , and thus maintain low class sizes and programs such as art , music , libraries , and physical education .

in addition , burton elementary used the funds to maintain staff development in order to help its teachers become better leaders and give them the necessary resources to help their students be successful .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save 15 instructional positions and 5.25 classified positions and maintain its current student - teacher ratio of 20 to 1 in its lower grades .

they also said that the funds will result in the district achieving higher levels of student success , improving scores on standardized tests , exiting program improvement status , and maintaining the district's purpose and goals .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

central union high school district el centro , ca 92243 award amount: $1,895,213 central union high school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to continue academic counseling and provide development for certified staff .

the funds covered 10.6 full - time - equivalent counselors who advised 4,000 students in two comprehensive and one continuation high school .

in addition , the district used the funds to provide 3 full days and 12 half days of staff development to 225 teachers .

specifically , the funds were used to continue previous allocation of staff development time , collaboration , and standards - based assessment .

in addition , the funds were used to focus on a formative instructional methodology called assessment for learning , which uses information from a variety of sources to inform pedagogical decisions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain existing levels of academic advisement and its previous commitment to assessment for learning and standards - based initiatives .

they also said that these funds resulted in retaining existing counseling staff and the services they were providing .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

cheney unified school district #268 cheney , ks 67025 award amount: $493,548 cheney unified school district #268 reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain its educational system at the current level to ensure student progress .

these funds covered the three schools in this district that serves 775 students .

specifically , the funds were used to save certified and classified staff positions and maintain a desired student - teacher ratio .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain a 20-to - 1 student - teacher ratio at its elementary school and a 24-27-to - 1 ratios at the middle and high schools .

they also said that these funds resulted in the district saving between three and five positions , including a part - time math position , which kept math classes from having more than 30 students .

officials reported that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

chester school district deep river , ct 06417 award amount: $61,222 chester school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain teachers and to provide them with professional development in teaching strategies and data analysis .

these funds covered teachers in all three elementary schools in the district .

specifically , the funds were used to provide consultation services through performance pathways , which is a technical tool that uses student data such as regular , standardized , and benchmark testing to inform decisions about changes in students' academic programs .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the district expects to see improved scores on standardized tests as well as improved strategies using data - driven decisions in the classroom .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

clayton county public schools jonesboro , ga 30236 award amount: $23,144,036 clayton county public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain personnel .

these funds supported approximately 312 personnel at 62 schools .

specifically , the funds were used for salaries of teachers across all grade levels and subject areas ( except for vocational and special education ) .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately 312 personnel .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

coeur d'alene district coeur d'alene , id 83814 award amount: $4,182,019 coeur d'alene district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to support existing employee salaries and benefits for a month .

these funds supported 17 schools and approximately 1,100 employees working in maintenance , transportation , and administrative offices .

specifically , the funds were used to help offset the cost of existing staff so that their health insurance benefits could be maintained and so that further cuts to existing programs would not be made .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save extracurricular programs at the schools and health benefits for employees , but did not necessarily save any positions .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

creighton elementary district phoenix , az 85016 award amount: $2,275,658 creighton elementary district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain class sizes at levels prior to those of 2010 and retain teaching staff .

these funds provided support to approximately 7,400 students in nine schools and approximately 500 teachers and other staff members .

specifically , the funds mitigated losses in state funding by paying for staff salaries .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the district was able to maintain student - teacher ratios at pre 2009-2010 , levels that were a maximum of 27 to 1 for grades k - 3 and 32 to 1 for grades 4-8 .

officials reported that maintaining these student - teachers ratios will ensure that students receive meaningful instructional opportunities .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

crossroads charter high school charlotte , nc 28213 award amount: $61,050 crossroads charter high school reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to hire and retain teachers , paraprofessionals , and contractors ; to enhance technology for computer - based instruction and school safety , and to purchase educational supplies and materials .

these funds covered crossroads charter high school's one site that serves 271 students , has 16 teachers , and employs a host of paraprofessionals and contractors .

specifically , the funds were used for providing staff development for teachers and administrators , purchasing computers and safety equipment , and allowing for college and career readiness tours .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to save five positions , create three positions , and thus maintain its student - teacher ratio of 20 to 1 .

school officials said they also hope that the funds will facilitate increased graduation rates and improved high - stakes test scores from the concentrated staff and career exploration activities .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

e - cademie , a charter school phoenix , az 85006 award amount: $123,381 e - cademie , a charter school reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to pay for monthly maintenance and operations expenses so the school could keep its doors open after the state of arizona cut its regular payments for october , november , may , and june .

these funds covered approximately 170 students , 10 teaching staff , and 6 support staff .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the school was able to pay its staff and rent , thus preventing it from going into massive debt or closing down .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

fairfax county public schools falls church , va 22042 award amount: $37,426,150 fairfax county public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to avoid further increases in general education class size by retaining an average of 1.5 teachers per school in approximately 189 schools .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately 276 classroom teachers .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

flathead high school kalispell , mt 59901 award amount: $893,761 flathead high school reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain and hire staff , pay for professional development , and purchase instructional materials .

these funds covered six schools , which included elementary , middle , and high schools .

specifically , the funds were used to maintain its current level of staffing for at - risk students and to maintain tutors for those students without using other funds .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain its 20-to - 1 student - teacher ratio for its special education classes .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

forsyth county schools winston salem , nc 27103 award amount: $13,621,983 forsyth county schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award for offsetting pay for noninstructional personnel to replace the loss of state funds , as dictated by the north carolina general assembly .

these funds covered all noninstructional personnel in the district — specifically , clerical and custodial positions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save 389 positions , as the average salary and total benefits of each position is approximately $35,000 .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

fort sam houston independent school district san antonio , tx 78234 award amount: $843,721 fort sam houston independent school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to purchase technology infrastructure , hardware , software , and training for staff .

these funds covered approximately 1,500 students in three schools — an elementary , middle , and high school .

specifically , they were used to purchase network servers , mounting racks , and catalyst smartnet power supplies .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to upgrade its technological infrastructure , hardware , and software for its staff and students .

as a result of enhancements to the district's infrastructure , teachers and students have more access to the latest technology for general classroom instruction .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

hooksett school district hooksett , nh 03106 award amount: $426,184 hooksett school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to move more students with educational disabilities from special education classrooms into the general education classrooms by hiring new staff , providing professional development , and purchasing technology and instructional materials that target the special education population .

these funds supported five schools , with a combined population of about 1,275 students .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve instructional practices resulting in increased student achievement .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

houston heights learning academy , inc. houston , tx 77007 award amount: $20,267 houston heights learning academy , inc. , reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain two full - day prekindergarten programs for school readiness at one school .

these funds targeted seven teachers and 129 students at the one school .

specifically , the funds were used for students who are in a lower economic bracket , have limited english proficiency , and need a full - day program to prepare them for school readiness .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that they expect the school's students will receive a strong foundation for academic achievement , which will eventually close gaps on standardized tests and improve graduation rates .

in addition , the school will be able to retain two full - day prekindergarten teachers .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

huron school district 02-2 huron , sd 57350 award amount: $920,254 huron school district 02-2 reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award for general day - to - day operations of the district .

these funds covered all 2,000 students in the district and supplanted south dakota state aid .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save 8 to 10 staff positions and maintain the same level of services offered in the prior year .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

integrity education corporation scottsdale , az 85271 award amount: $41,640 integrity education corporation reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain its education program in the face of declining state funding .

these funds covered one school consisting of 70 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff and purchase instructional materials and kitchen equipment .

as a result of this sfsf award , officials reported that the school was able to save one instructional position and improve scores on standardized tests .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

joshua academy evansville , in 47713 award amount: $126,496 joshua academy , a charter school , reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain normal operations after the state of indiana substituted its regular funding with the award money .

thus , the academy received the same funding as usual , just from a different source .

these funds covered the 22 teachers and 240 students at joshua academy .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the academy was able to continue operations as normal without undertaking additional budget cuts even though the state of indiana is undergoing budget cuts .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

lee county school district bishopville , sc 29010 award amount: $796,651 lee county school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to save instructional positions .

these funds primarily targeted 12 instructional positions and affected all schools in the district — including its elementary , middle , and high schools .

specifically , the funds were used to pay for the district's utility bills and property , casualty , and worker's compensation insurance premiums , which freed up state and local funds to pay for instructional staffs' salaries and fringe benefits .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save approximately 12 instructional positions by using state and local funds for the salaries , which have helped maintain class sizes in its elementary schools and helped the district continue offering assistance to its esol ( english for speakers of other languages ) students at all locations .

the funds also resulted in the district keeping programs such as ap ( advanced placement ) english , the teacher cadet program , art and music in its middle and high schools , and a vocational program directed at special needs students .

officials reported that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

liberty school district roland , ok 74954 award amount: $85,795 liberty school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to save and retain instructional positions .

these funds covered all 325 students and 24 certified teachers in this k - 8 district .

specifically , the funds were used to save and retain third , fifth , and sixth grade instructional positions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save a total of three positions .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

liberty - eylau independent school district texarkana , tx 75501 award amount: $971,887 liberty - eylau independent school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to provide the best education possible for its students by providing services and implementing programs .

these funds covered all six campuses in the district that serves a total of 2,900 students .

specifically , the funds were used to hire and retain supplemental classrooms teachers and instructional aides , as well as a career and technology specialist for its vocational program .

in addition , officials reported that the district used the funds to provide core subject professional development for teachers at a local service center , pay for substitute teachers so that new teachers could participate in a mentoring program , and purchase test preparation materials and several new computers and projectors .

as a result of these funds , officials said the district was able to improve technology availability in the classroom and save or retain 10 to 12 positions , which the district hopes will improve scores on standardized tests .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

life skills center - middletown middletown , oh 45042 award amount: $164,378 life skills center - middletown reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to hire and retain teachers despite budget cuts .

these funds covered this dropout recovery high school and affected teachers in the school's learning lab that serves 30 to 50 students per day .

specifically , the funds were used to serve all new students with the transition lab , which will prepare them for the classroom labs .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to retain three full - time equivalents and that they hope to increase retention , attendance , and student acclimation , thereby leading to increased graduation rates .

in addition , they said they hope that the increased individualized attention will increase scores on students' standardized tests .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

lombard school district 44 lombard , il 60148 award amount: $460,145 lombard school district 44 reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to construct a four - classroom addition at its butterfield school .

these funds will affect approximately 100 students and six schools , two directly and four indirectly .

specifically , the four - classroom addition will house the district's early childhood and kindergarten readiness programs .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district will be able to serve all of its early childhood and kindergarten readiness programs at one building with state - of - the - art facilities , which will alleviate overcrowding at their current location .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

marietta city schools marietta , ga 30060 award amount: $3,484,874 marietta city schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award for instructional personnel salaries and benefits to offset state funding reductions in accordance with directions from the state .

officials said it was not possible to say how many schools or students were affected .

they reported that the funds were reclassified to compensate for funds the state could not provide because of a decline in state revenues .

as a result of these sfsf funds , officials said that the district was able to save about 97 staff positions according to the state budget calculation .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

medical center charter school houston , tx 77030 award amount: $37,889 medical center charter school reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to increase special education services and increase teacher quality .

these funds covered one campus with about 250 students in grades prekindergarten through sixth .

specifically , the funds were used for the early detection of learning disabilities and the expansion of all - day prekindergarten .

in addition , the school used the funds for the implementation of new software , staff retention , professional development , and incentives .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to support eight positions and increase staff job satisfaction .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

mobile county public schools mobile , al 36618 award amount: $14,817,861 mobile county public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to pay for teachers , which allowed the district to avoid reducing its number of teachers .

in addition to retaining teacher positions , the funds were used for professional development ( specific to their grade level and subject area ) that allowed teachers to meet school system requirements .

the award funds affected about 60,000 students and about 6,000 teachers in the district's 89 schools .

as a result of this sfsf award , officials reported that the district was able to maintain its 20-to - 1 student - teacher ratio for grades k through 3 , 24 – to - 1 ratio for grades 4 through 6 , and 28 – to - 1 ratio for grades 7 through 12 .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

mount vernon school district 17-3 mount vernon , sd 57363 award amount: $133,960 mount vernon school district 17-3 reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to supplant money from the state and that the funds were used for salaries .

these funds covered all 240 students in the district , but officials indicated that it was not possible to say which positions would have been affected .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save two positions .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

muscogee county school district columbus , ga 31906 award amount: $16,907,769 muscogee county school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award for staff retention throughout the district .

specifically , these funds were used to retain elementary teachers , media specialists , paraprofessionals , clerks , and assistant principals .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save 223.4 jobs .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

newhall elementary valencia , ca 91355 award amount: $2,206,649 newhall elementary reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain teachers and maintain programs .

these funds targeted 10 schools and affected approximately 758 students .

specifically , the funds enabled the district to enrich the learning experience in the primary grades by keeping class sizes low as part of the state's class size reduction program in grades k - 3 .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the district was able to retain 31 teachers , and thus maintain an average student / teacher ratio of 22 to 1 in grades k - 3 .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

north merrick union free school district merrick , ny 11566 award amount: $675,135 north merrick union free school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain a comprehensive educational program for both general and special education students , equitably supporting programs in each of its schools .

these funds targeted each of the district's three elementary schools , which serve approximately 1,320 students .

specifically , the district used the award predominantly to retain staff and provide ongoing professional development in support of important federal / state initiatives ( eg , response to intervention ) and used a small portion of it to purchase educational technology in support of district initiatives .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district expects to maintain important district educational programs and staff in the arts , music , library , and literacy ; continue to demonstrate excellent student results on all educational assessments ; and continue to meet the goals of the district technology plan , especially in terms of technology integration with instruction .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

northwestern school corporation kokomo , in 46901 award amount: $943,353 northwestern school corporation reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain current staffing as a substitute for its state tuition support .

these funds covered about 115 teachers at four schools that have a total of about 1,650 students .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain its level of teachers , its current academic program , and high test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were fully completed .

pacific elementary davenport , ca 95017 award amount: $39,724 pacific elementary reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain an intervention program for the lowest - performing students by retaining the program's staff .

these funds affected one position and covered 14 of the 101 students at pacific elementary , which is a single school district .

specifically , the funds were allocated for a reading specialist , funding 80 percent of the position in the 2009-2010 school year and allowing the district to retain the position for the 2009-2010 and 2010- 2011 school years , even though doing this will require spending down reserves .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the specialist can continue providing significant interventions for students performing below grade level .

according to officials , these learners are making academic progress based on a variety of assessments such as the bader reading and language assessment , the lindamood auditory conceptualization test , and the comprehensive test of phonological awareness .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

pelham city school district pelham city , ga 31779 award amount: $915,617 pelham city school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to hire and retain instructional staff .

the funds targeted three schools — one elementary , middle , and high school — that serve a total of approximately 1,425 students .

specifically , the funds were used to hire and retain paraprofessionals , full - time certified staff , and an instructional specialist .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save six paraprofessionals , two full - time certified staff , and 25 percent of an instructional specialist's position .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

prince george's county public schools upper marlboro , md 20772 award amount: $46,542,234 prince george's county public schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to restore financial support to maintain its buildings in a manner that provides for a safe , healthy , and comfortable learning environment .

these funds affected all of the district's 127,000 students and 202 schools .

specifically , the funds were used to support districtwide fixed utility costs as an indirect way of continuing to build academic progress , maintain successful instructional programs , and fund the necessary resources to prepare students for state assessments .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to prevent districtwide employee furloughs , saving the district from a potential lost of 37 days across various employee classifications .

next , officials reported that the funds prevented the potential downgrade of activities and programs , such as the advancement via individual determination program - - an instructional program designed to improve extended learning opportunities in the core subject areas .

in addition , the sfsf award resulted in the district not increasing its student - teacher ratios of 22 to 1 in grades k through 2 , 25 to 1 in grades 3 through 6 , 30 to 1 in grades 7 through 8 , and 20 to 1 in grades 9 through 12 .

last , the funds allowed them to restore bus driver and bus attendant positions .

district officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

recovery school of southern minnesota owatonna , mn 55060 award amount: $16,823 recovery school of southern minnesota reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to provide instruction to students by retaining instructional staff .

these funds covered one site that serves approximately 30 students .

in particular , the funds were used , along with other funds , to retain a full - time general education / special education teacher .

according to school officials , these funds assisted the school with retaining one instructional position .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

san bernardino city unified school district san bernardino , ca 92410 award amount: $22,316,420 san bernardino city unified school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to reduce layoffs due to budget cuts .

these funds covered 44 elementary schools , which have a combined enrollment of approximately 25,175 students .

specifically , the funds were used to keep class sizes lower in grades k - 3 .

as a result of the sfsf award , officials reported that the district was able to save 65 positions and maintain a class size of 21:1 , rather than increasing to 22: 1 for grades k - 3 .

district officials reported that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

santa clara county office of education san jose , ca 95131 award amount: $3,414,075 santa clara county office of education ( sccoe ) reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain and augment its support to school districts , charter schools , regional occupation programs , and alternative education programs through creating and retaining staff positions .

the sccoe reported that the award was used to augment its support of 12,749 teachers for 261,945 students at 36 school districts ( 21 elementary , 6 unified , 5 high school , 4 community colleges ) and 387 public school sites inclusive of 34 charter schools ( 239 elementary , 55 middle , 51 high school , 18 continuation , 10 alternative , 9 community day , 2 k - 12 , 1 special education , 1 juvenile hall , and 1 county community ) .

specifically , they said the funds were used to maintain and augment support for curriculum , instruction , assessment , accountability , career technology education , preschool services , school health services , and categorical programs .

 .

as a result of their sfsf funds , officials reported that the district was able to create 17.1 positions , which was the equivalent of 14.45 ftes .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were projected to be more than 50 percent completed by june 30 , 2010 .

sbe – the school of arts and enterprise sacramento , ca 95814 award amount: $187,919 sbe – the school of arts and enterprise reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain standards by preventing layoffs .

these layoffs would have occurred because the state reduced per student funding by $500 , which would have meant a $200,000 reduction for the school .

these funds covered all 400 students at the school by retaining staff and replacing employees from turnover .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to save three to four teacher positions , which allowed it to have a 20-to - 1 student - teacher ratio rather than a 25-to - 1 ratio that it would have had without the award funds .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

terrebonne parish school district houma , la 70360 award amount: $2,659,177 terrebonne parish school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain master teachers , to fund performance pay for employees at schools that meet the state - established growth target on the leap test , and to fund its summer school and remediation programs .

the award helped fund performance pay for employees at the 12 district schools that met state growth targets , targeted 10 schools where master teachers serve , and provided partial funding for approximately 3,000 students in its summer program .

specifically , the funds covered summer school stipends , materials and transportation , and teachers' performance pay stipend and benefits costs .

as a result of their sfsf funds , officials reported that the school was able to retain 10 master teachers who assisted with curriculum and instruction .

they also said that these funds resulted in the school continuing its summer school and remediation programs so that students who did not pass the leap test could have additional instructional time before they retake it .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

tulelake basin joint unified school district tulelake , ca 96134 award amount: $295,390 tulelake basin joint unified school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to support the continued operation of its music program and staff retention .

specifically , the funds were used to rehire the music teacher and retain one teacher at the elementary school and another at the middle school .

these funds affected a total of 536 students who took classes from the music teacher , 125 students at a k through 2 elementary school , 170 students at a 3 through 6 elementary school , and 241 students at the middle and high schools .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain class sizes of approximately 20 students and save three instructional positions .

these funds also allowed the district to keep its arts program in the schools .

district officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

valley view elementary polson , mt 59860 award amount: $14,664 valley view elementary reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to retain highly qualified teachers and an instructional aid at its 23-student school .

in particular , the funds were used to retain the staff and pay for the cost of additional benefits , especially its health insurance costs .

as a result of the sfsf award , the school anticipates it will be able to retain three staff , and it hired one instructional aide .

school officials reported that their recovery act sfsf award activities than 50 percent completed .

vineland public school district vineland , nj 08360 award amount: $14,788,960 vineland public school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to pay for employee health benefits that are a key part of the budget .

district officials said that they decided to use the funds for health benefits because doing so allows them to charge as few items as possible to the sfsf award , thus enabling the greatest amount of transparency and taxpayer review .

these funds covered health benefits for all of the district's 431 administrative staff members and 352 high school staff members at the two campuses that do not receive title i funds .

specifically , the funds were used for benefits of bus drivers , assistant elementary school principals , basic skills teachers , and other instructional and noninstructional positions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately 219.5 positions — specifically 61 bus drivers , 7 assistant elementary school principals , 41 basic skills teachers , and 110.5 other instructional and noninstructional positions throughout the district .

they indicated that their recovery act award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

wake county schools raleigh , nc 27609 award amount: $35,150,824 wake county schools reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to offset a reduction in state funds for noninstructional support , which the north carolina department of public instruction reduced for the 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 school years .

these funds covered all schools in the wake county public school system .

specifically , the funds were used to support custodial and clerical positions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to continue to provide school - based clerical and custodial support and save an estimated 493 custodial and 423 clerical jobs .

specifically , they said it saved a total of 10,552.25 months of school - based employment and 48 months of employment in central services for a total of 10,600.25 months of employment per year .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

west holmes local school district millerburg , oh 44654 award amount: $908,249 west holmes local school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to maintain purchased services that were previously state - funded .

because west holmes local school district is over 50 percent state - funded , it used the sfsf funds to offset what it had always received .

these funds included general funding for an alternative school , virtual classroom , and community school ; internet services for the district ; gifted education services ; computer technician services ; and district audit services .

however , it is not possible to say exactly how many students or schools were affected .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain its property , fleet , and liability insurance coverage and pay for audit - related and technology fees .

these funds also allowed the district to save several jobs and maintain its current student - teacher ratio to help it achieve its goal of improved scores on standardized tests .

they indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

woodson independent school district woodson , tx 76491 award amount: $46,884 woodson independent school district reported that it used its recovery act sfsf award to purchase hardware and software to improve , supplement , and expand instructional programs , including response - to - intervention and progress monitoring .

these funds supported all students — 120 total — in this k - 12 district .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain staff .

they also said they expect that student achievement will increase .

officials indicated that their recovery act sfsf award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

the recovery act provided supplemental funding for programs authorized by the individuals with disabilities education act , as amended , the major federal statute that supports the provisions of early intervention and special education and related services for children , and youth with disabilities .

part b ( $11.7 billion ) provides funds to ensure that preschool and school - aged children with disabilities have access to a free and appropriate public education and is divided into two separate grant programs: part b grants to states ( for school - age children ) and part b preschool grants .

our review focused only on part b grants to states for school aged children .

given that few descriptions fully met our transparency criteria , we administered a web - based survey to school district superintendents in the 50 states and the district of columbia to determine how they are using recovery act funds .

we conducted our survey between march and april 2010 , with a 78 percent final weighted response rate .

we selected a stratified random sample of 575 leas from the population of 16,065 leas included in our sample frame of data obtained from the common core of data in 2007-2008 .

of this sample , we randomly selected 150 leas ( 50 for each program ) to gather illustrative information on how they used their recovery act funds .

see appendix vii for more information on how we designed our survey .

what follows are summaries of how these leas described their use of recovery act idea part b funds , based on their survey responses as well as information we collected through follow - up communications .

american charter schools foundation d.b.a .

sun valley high school phoenix , az 85020 award amount: $27,382 american charter schools foundation d.b.a .

sun valley high school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve scores on standardized tests , increase special education students' access and understanding of general education curriculum , and enhance supports and instructional modifications for special education students in the inclusive setting .

these funds served over 70 special education students .

specifically , the funds were used to hire a part - time special education coordinator to enhance supports and instructional modifications , purchase instructional materials , and provide related services for special education students such as speech , physical therapy , psychological , hearing and vision services .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve standardized test scores , improve of dropout and graduation rates , and increase understanding of and accessibility to general education curriculum .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

arp independent school district arp , tx 75750 award amount: $382,876 arp independent school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to hire a special education teacher and instructional aide to work with students with emotional disabilities , purchase special education manager software , and purchase a bus for hearing - impaired students .

these funds supported one campus and approximately 90 students .

the funds were also used to create two new staff positions .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to transport students with hearing impairments more efficiently , individualize instruction to the needs of students with emotional disabilities , and cut down on referrals by identifying students with special needs .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

biloxi public school district biloxi , ms 39530 award amount: $1,165,859 biloxi public school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to retain jobs and replace and upgrade technology for students with special needs .

these funds supported 593 students with special needs across all 11 schools .

specifically , the funds were used to retain two examiners and two psychologists and purchase new computers and printers for student use .

as a result of idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to ensure that students with disabilities receive assessment services and provide them more individualized assistance .

the technology will allow the students to access the newer intervention software .

district officials reported that their recovery act idea award activities were completed 50 percent or more .

blackstone valley regional vocational technical high school upton , ma 01568 award amount: $215,190 blackstone valley regional vocational technical high school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to fund administrative stipends for two special education personnel .

these funds supported the single regional school in the district , affecting the entire special education population of 140 students .

specifically , the funds were used to support a special education chair whose purpose is to carry out many aspects of administration of special education , and a special education team leader whose purpose is to improve coordination within the department and among the different disciplines .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to integrate academic and vocational studies , revise its curriculum with recommendations from state and federal agencies , and assist with an inclusion program for special education students .

officials also said that these funds also resulted in coordination of individualized education program ( iep ) services and reevaluations , provision of liaisons with parents , and improvement of services to special education students .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

bonham independent school district bonham , tx 75418 award amount: $387,509 bonham independent school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to purchase technology and instructional materials , provide professional development , and create one part - time position .

because students with special needs are included in the general education classroom , these funds affected all students in the district ( approximately 2,000 ) .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase technology and software for students with special needs , a special needs school bus , instructional materials , and additional technology for the classrooms .

the award was also used for professional development for teachers working with students with special needs and to create one part - time social worker position .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to positively affect the ability of the teachers to improve their instructional techniques and increase student achievement .

they also said that these funds resulted in better transportation of students with special needs so they can participate in school activities .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

christina school district wilmington , de 19801 award amount: $4,954,517 christina school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to support coordinated early intervention services for students with disabilities who have academic or behavioral issues , to supplement funds to secondary schools for extended day and extended year programs for students with disabilities , to provide professional development to staff working with students with disabilities , and to expand birth - to - five activities for parents and students .

these funds supported about 22 schools and 16,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to: expand birth to 3- year - old parent and child programs in high - need areas ; provide afternoon preschool programs for 30 children , construct an academic support center at one high school to assist and enrich students at a variety of achievement levels , hire academic and behavior interventionists to support student needs , conduct training in research - based instructional practices , and conduct formal - third party reviews of all schools to gather baseline information on the school's performance , and create professional development plans for the staff and school leaders .

as a result of these idea funds , district officials reported seeing a significant improvement in behavioral referrals this school year and expect student enrollment and retention rates to improve as well as improvement in academic achievement over time .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

colton - pierrepont central school district colton , ny 13625 award amount: $41,595 colton - pierrepont central school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to keep in place a response to intervention reading program , purchase materials for this program , and retain one position .

these funds supported one school with approximately 330 students and were specifically used for both special education students and regular education students to help prevent their classification into special education .

specifically , the funds were used to keep the district's co - teacher model working by employing a special education teacher , purchase teaching materials to update literacy programs , and provide staff with high - quality , research - based professional development .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain its small class sizes by not having to reduce teaching staff .

they also said that these funds resulted in the reading groups remaining small with the assistance of reading specialists to provide the best literacy instruction they need .

officials reported that their recovery act idea award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

dekalb county school system decatur , ga 30032 award amount: $19,669,324 dekalb county school system reported that it used its recovery act idea award to increase the achievement of students with disabilities .

these funds affected roughly 20 high schools and 20 middle schools .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff , hire additional board certified behavior analysts to support schools as needed , fund special education paraprofessionals , and hire lead teachers for special education to provide support to elementary schools .

the funds were also used to provide professional development , provide personnel to supply ongoing coaching and support to school staff , and purchase equipment .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve the achievement of students with disabilities and provide elementary schools with more time with their existing lead teachers for special education .

in addition , they said that the district was able to fund special education paraprofessionals who were previously paid through local dollars .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

eastern york school district wrightsville , pa 17368 award amount: $310,132 eastern york school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide services and mental health / behavioral counseling to students with disabilities as well as professional development to staff .

these funds supported 35 schools across york county and 111 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide transportation ; occupational / physical therapy ; speech , vision , and transition services to students ; and response to instruction and intervention and schoolwide positive behavior support training for instructional staff and paraeducators .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that they were able to reduce dropout rates from 14 percent in the 2007-2008 school year to two percent in the 2009-2010 school year and continue to provide a low student - teacher ratio .

district officials reported that their recovery act idea award activities were fully completed for the 2009-2010 school year , and they plan to continue these activities even after the recovery act funds expire .

elko county school district elko , nv 89803 award amount: $1,402,931 elko county school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to assist in maintaining innovative programs that were in jeopardy of being eliminated .

funds were also used to incorporate new strategies and retain jobs .

these funds supported approximately 1,500 students throughout the 22 schools in the district .

specifically , the funds were used for 25 percent of each of four rise ( a student retention and teacher mentor program ) instructional coaches' salaries ; one rti ( response to intervention ) coordinator , 25 percent of the salary of one special teacher who works with the administration of the positive behavior support model across the district , and one teacher who provides support to teachers working with students with autism .

in addition , a significant amount of professional development was offered , and smartboards , smartresponse systems , audio enhancement technology , and other assistive technology were infused into the classrooms .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to provide additional instructional materials and resources for teachers , maximizing the impact on children directly as well as saving jobs .

they also said that these funds resulted in efforts to positively affect student achievement .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

florence city schools florence , al 35630 award amount: $1,010,802 florence city schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide instruction and support to at least 724 special needs children in eight schools .

specifically , the funds were used to retain or hire staff and purchase instructional software for title i schools .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save at least six instructional and clerical positions .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

galesville - ettrick - trempealeau school district galesville , wi 54630 award amount: $284,286 galesville - ettrick - trempealeau school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve literacy scores in grades k - 8 for all students , including special education students .

these funds supported four schools with a total student population of 950 students , 120 of whom are special education students .

specifically , the funds were used to add a middle school literacy program called read 180 , which includes books , software , and computers .

additionally , the funds were also used to hire a literacy coach for elementary schools .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase reading levels and help teachers identify students who struggle in reading and develop strategies to improve reading .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

glasgow k - 12 schools glasgow , mt 59230 award amount: $219,619 glasgow k - 12 schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to establish new learning centers to help at - risk students before and after school .

these funds targeted 25 students with special needs or who are at risk in three schools .

specifically , the funds were used to hire three paraprofessionals to assist in these learning centers .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase the level of achievement , especially in the area of communication arts .

they indicated that their recovery act idea activities were less than 50 percent completed .

greenville county schools greenville , sc 29602 award amount: $8,466,248 greenville county schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to maintain the same level of special education service delivery and support for special education students within the school district of greenville county .

these funds supported all preschool , elementary , middle , and high schools , as well as a number of special centers in the district ( 98 locations total ) and served 10,251 students as of december 1 , 2009 .

specifically , the funds were used to retain personnel , as well as provide instructional and contract services , and purchase instructional materials and equipment .

they also provided in - county travel mileage for staff members .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to save approximately 100 jobs , many of which were classroom positions .

they also said that these funds resulted in maintaining classroom sizes to prevent compromising special education services .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

harmony science academy ( waco ) waco , tx 77099 award amount: $77,766 harmony science academy ( waco ) reported that it used its recovery act idea award to contract for services to provide professional development and educational materials for the special education teacher .

these funds supported approximately 10 special education students being served at this school .

specifically , the funds were used to retain one special education teacher , provide new instructional materials , and provide professional development to the teachers .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve instruction for students .

school officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

henry johnson charter school albany , ny 12206 award amount: $54,628 henry johnson charter school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to add staff for academic intervention services ( ais ) math intervention .

these funds targeted 20 to 25 students served daily by an ais teacher .

specifically , the funds were used to hire an ais math teacher to provide math intervention for students with special needs as well as those students who are struggling with math learning .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve math achievement and scores on standardized tests .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were fully completed .

houston independent school district houston , tx 77092 award amount: $42,407,819 houston independent school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to retain and hire staff , provide professional development , purchase instructional materials , and provide social and emotional services .

these funds served 297 schools and 200,345 students , including 16,503 idea students in grades k through 12 and 1,342 idea students in preschool .

specifically , the funds were used to restructure the school day and class size , support new professional development programs , provide resources to establish and support differentiated instructional programs and online learning , provide social and emotional support activities , and provide academic reinforcement .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve scores on standardized tests and increase graduation rates .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

hunterdon central regional high school flemington , nj 08822 award amount: $625,920 hunterdon central regional high school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve the district's self - contained programs in life skills education and the behavioral disabilities program and to improve core content instruction in special education academic settings .

these funds supported approximately 500 students with special needs in the district's single school .

specifically , the funds were used to hire consultants to train staff about behavioral interventions in the classroom and on using new computer - assisted materials that remediate writing , reading , and mathematics weaknesses .

new materials were purchased to improve the depth of the curriculum offered in special education classrooms and that focus on the remediation of writing , reading , and math skills .

in addition , personal computing devices will be purchased for special education students to assist with coursework completion .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain programs for students with multiple disabilities and behaviorally disabled students .

they also said that they anticipate improved test results on standardized state testing .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

lafayette school corporation lafayette , in 47904 award amount: $5,099,284 lafayette school corporation reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide additional educational services for students with special needs and students with academic deficiencies .

these funds have allowed increased educational services to 1550 idea students within the 11 schools in the school corporation .

specifically , the funds were used to hire additional staff to work with special needs students and students with academic needs .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that lafayette school corporation was able to retain or hire staff for over 130 instructional positions to work with idea students .

they also said that these funds resulted in the preservation of programs and maintenance of current student - teacher ratios .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

metropolitan school district of decatur township indianapolis , in 46221 award amount: $764,847 metropolitan school district of decatur township reported that it used its recovery act idea award to continue and expand idea reform efforts in the district by providing professional development for special education teachers .

these funds supported the retention of nine teachers who function as instructional coaches , benefiting all students and teachers in the district .

these instructional coaches concentrate half their time supporting professional development for staff who work with idea students , and half their time providing interventions for idea students .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that in response to the increased focus on instructional strategies and smaller learning communities , they expect that idea students in all grades will have strong gains in standardized testing in areas where improvement was stagnant last year .

in addition , officials report that they expect their graduation rate to continue to improve to at least 80 percent in the near future.. officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

detroit midtown academy detroit , mi 48201 award amount: $79,647 detroit midtown academy reported that it used its recovery act idea award to retain and improve the capacity of special education programming .

these funds supported one school with approximately 52 students with special needs .

specifically , the funds were used to hire an additional full - time teacher , retain a part - time aide , purchase computer equipment for one special education lab , purchase additional instructional supplies , and purchase adaptive technology .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to maintain the current student - teacher ratio and improve scores on standardized tests because of greater use of instructional technology and new instructional materials .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

mattoon community unit school district #2 mattoon , il 61938 award amount: $805,786 mattoon community unit school district #2 reported that it used its recovery act idea award to implement a vocational program for idea students in high school and retain staff who work with idea students .

these funds benefited all students in the district , which serves about 3,300 students , including approximately 700 idea students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain and hire staff who work with idea students , as well as for professional development of idea staff , and the purchase of some new equipment for idea students .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district increased graduation rates among idea students .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

menifee union elementary menifee , ca 92584 award amount: $3,040,489 menifee union elementary reported that it used its recovery act idea award to integrate more special education pupils into the regular curriculum .

these funds supported 11 schools and 811 pupils .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff and provide professional development for classroom management and instructional delivery to pupils .

as a result of the idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to save 50 positions and improve learning opportunities for students .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

mesa arts academy mesa , az 85210 award amount: $36,983 mesa arts academy reported that it used its recovery act idea award for staff salaries and to purchase supplies and computer equipment to maintain or improve the quality of special education services .

these funds supported one school serving approximately 230 children , including 15 special education students .

specifically , the funds were used to increase the instructional hours of the speech and special education teachers , as well as purchase supplies , assistive technology , and computer equipment .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that school increased special education students' access to resources and instruction .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

omaha public schools omaha , ne 68131 award amount: $14,300,464 omaha public schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to expand early - childhood services , expand the district's data systems , increase teacher effectiveness through professional development , and undertake dropout prevention efforts .

idea funds were also used for assistive technology and summer school expansion programs for students with special needs .

these funds covered 79 schools and seven alternative programs , which serve 49,079 students .

specifically , the funds were used to implement an online assessment system to support classroom instruction , provide professional development for instructional staff , increase student support to prevent students from dropping out of school , implement an online system for individualized education programs , and expand early childhood programming .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve scores on state reading and mathematics tests , decrease the dropout rate , increase the graduation rate , increase the number of high - need children in prekindergarten programs , and create or retain 298 jobs .

they also said that these funds resulted in more learning opportunities for the students by expanding the school day and offering summer school and tutoring .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

oxnard elementary oxnard , ca 93030 award amount: $2,773,322 oxnard elementary reported that it used its recovery act idea award to start up a cochlear implant classroom in the district , which required special acoustics , and furniture and included the hiring and training of a teacher .

these funds served three students in the district and approximately six more from neighboring districts .

in particular , the funds were used to create a classroom , train staff , and buy supplies .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to provide services locally at a much reduced cost rather than sending students to an institute in los angeles .

they also said that the district can now serve students in their own district as well as students in surrounding districts .

the cochlear implant classroom will open in the 2010-2011 school year .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

pasadena independent school district pasadena , tx 77502 award amount: $10,757,671 pasadena independent school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve and enhance programming for students with disabilities .

these funds affected all schools and all special needs students ( approximately 3,800 ) in the district .

specifically , the funds were used to retain special education staff , add support staff such as diagnosticians and transition teachers , implement data management systems for special education programs , and provide professional development for staff who work with special needs students in the area of autism , inclusion / co - teach , and other specialized programming .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain 26 support positions to improve instructional practices resulting in improved student outcomes , and improve data integrity to meet compliance requirements .

they also said that these funds resulted in improved functioning capability and skills of campus and district staff in order to build capacity to sustain improvement .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

pima accommodation district tucson , az 85701 award amount: $16,917 pima accommodation district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide related special education services to the new 18 – to 21- year - old special education inmates at the pima county adult detention facility so that they can acquire a general equivalency diploma or work toward high school completion .

these funds targeted 32 students in one school .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase direct and support services , buy instructional material , provide special education staff development , and provide inmates with transitional support .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to provide 4 hours of daily instruction in the adult special education classroom to inmates at the jail facility .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were fully completed .

pinellas county schools largo , fl 33770 award amount: $25,539,310 pinellas county schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to enhance services to students with disabilities by providing response to intervention / early intervening services ( eis ) and by providing services to private school students with disabilities .

these funds supported all 122 pinellas schools .

specifically , the funds were used to hire instructional and content coaches for rti / eis and social workers for counseling services for students with disabilities as well as to hire exceptional student education teachers to serve private school students with disabilities .

funds were also used to provide teacher training and to provide instructional materials and technology for students with disabilities , students requiring rti / eis , and private school students with disabilities .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve achievement for students with disabilities and students requiring rti / eis .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

puritas community school cleveland , oh 44135 award amount: $41,797 puritas community school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide ongoing high - quality special education services to students who need assistance in their educational processes and experiences .

these funds covered 13 special needs students out of a total student population of 196 .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the school was able to retain 0.25 full - time - equivalent staff to maintain its special education program for all students .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

sacramento city unified sacramento , ca 95824 award amount: $10,069,615 sacramento city unified reported that it used its recovery act idea award to retain instructional staff , provide professional development for special education staff and upgrade facilities to include an occupational therapy clinic at a school that serves a large number of special education students. .

these funds served approximately 2,000 students with special needs in the district .

specifically , the funds were used to retain special education staff , provide professional development for instructional staff , and to make school facility upgrades so that students could receive occupational therapy services while at school rather than being bussed to another location .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase academic proficiency in california standards tests ( cst ) and retain approximately 10 instructional positions .

in addition , the facility update allowed students with special needs to receive services during their school day , thereby reducing disruptions to their education .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

salt lake district salt lake city , ut 84111 award amount: $5,757,525 salt lake city school district officials reported that it used its recovery act idea award for five main purposes .

first , they used the funds to develop and expand their capacity to collect and use data for student achievement and progress monitoring in 28 elementary schools and 5 middle schools as a way to improve teaching and learning .

to that end , they retained a special education supervisor to oversee implementation of arra - funded activities ; hired a part - time data specialist to support data collection , analysis and reporting requirements ; contracted a parent liaison to help parents understand the use of data for decision making ; and purchased laptops and personal digital assistants for approximately 56 itinerant support staff ( eg , occupational therapists , school psychologists ) who are responsible for monitoring student progress .

second , officials reported that they used the funds to obtain and upgrade assistive technology devices for approximately 375 students in special classes at 22 elementary and three middle schools .

specifically , they purchased computers , monitors , and technology assistance for the academic and behavior support classrooms in the elementary schools and purchased computers , applications , and site licenses for reading , math , and science instruction in the middle schools .

in addition , officials provided training for approximately 140 special and regular education teachers in using the technology to improve instruction and monitor student progress .

third , salt lake city school district officials used the funds to hire high school transition and compliance coaches at the district's four high schools to work with employers in the community , postsecondary schools , and 44 high school special education teachers to develop appropriate transitions for approximately 750 high school and post - high special education students .

for all high school special education teachers , the district used the funds for professional development on transition issues .

the district also has plans to hire a certified teacher to support students in acquiring adult living skills and participating in adult basic education classes ; hire eight job coaches to support students in integrated job settings , and contract with the university of utah special education department for job coach training and monitoring of student job training outcomes .

fourth , officials reported that they used the funds to provide intensive districtwide professional development for 75 special education and regular education teachers at 28 elementary schools and 5 middle schools that focus on scaling - up evidence - based , schoolwide strategies to improve behavioral outcomes , interventions and supports for students with disabilities .

furthermore , the district hired 2.5 licensed clinical social workers for the middle schools and 3 behavior staff to support schools with intervention plans for students , implement least restrictive behavioral interventions , and train staff in behavior de - escalation .

finally , salt lake city school district used its recovery act idea award to improve language arts , math , and science instruction and student outcomes through providing intensive district - wide professional development for 130 special education and regular education teachers in evidence - based , schoolwide strategies to improve outcomes for students with disabilities .

to assist teachers , district officials hired 6 special education interns to support selected elementary schools in early intervening services in reading and math ; 2.5 elementary special education academic coaches to improve student achievement in elementary academic support and behavior support classes ; two elementary and middle school special education academic coaches to improve student achievement in elementary and middle school functional academic classes ; 3.5 speech language pathologists to support elementary schools in literacy acquisition programming ; and a .5 autism specialist and 2 autism coaches to support students with high functioning autism .

each school also received supplemental and intensive interventions curricula to support students with disabilities .

in addition , the district plans to purchase research - based curriculum for language arts , math , and science for middle school and high school special education classrooms and professional development on effective instruction for special and general education teachers .

overall , salt lake school district officials reported that through the use of the recovery act idea funds , they have created or retained a total of 38 jobs and obtained technology and software for special education staff , classrooms , and students to use for student record keeping , teaching and learning .

they expect to involve other stakeholders ( eg , parents , universities ) in identifying appropriate outcomes for students with disabilities ; increase the graduation rate and reduce the dropout rate of students with disabilities ; prepare students with disabilities for adult - oriented outcomes , increase the capacity of special education and general education teachers to teach and accommodate ( both academically and behaviorally ) students with disabilities ; design more efficient systems and processes to improve compliance and to meet the state performance plan indicators ; and increase grade - level achievement of students with disabilities in language arts and math .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

san antonio independent school district san antonio , tx 78210 award amount: $2,144,674 san antonio independent school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to enhance each special education program to support activities that will improve results for students .

these funds served over 5,900 students at over 90 campuses across the district .

specifically , the funds were used on a full range of activities including professional development , computer software packages for instructional programs and student data management , upgrade of technology equipment in classrooms serving special education programs , purchase of assistive technology , and parent involvement activities .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve student achievement and performance resulting in reduced dropouts , higher graduation rates , and improved postsecondary student outcomes , as well as retaining teaching and other instructional support staff positions .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

san dieguito union high encinitas , ca 92024 award amount: $1,431,581 san dieguito union high school district officials reported that it used its recovery act idea award for four main activities .

first , officials told us that they used the funds to train 25 staff in writing transition plans for students who have individualized education programs ( iep ) and working with autistic students .

therefore , officials could ensure staff members' compliance with writing transition plans and decrease the use of nonpublic agencies for students with autism .

second , officials reported that they used the funds for special education students at eight schools by assisting them with making up course credits and implementing a literacy program called read 180 .

officials told us that they were able to decrease the number of special education students who are credit deficit in the twelfth grade and improve their reading success .

third , the officials told us that they used $577,456 of the funds to reduce contributions from the district's general fund .

they could therefore pay for nonpublic schools and agencies that provide services for students with special needs .

last , officials reported that they replaced seven older buses that serve 63 students in need of transportation per their iep .

specifically , the buses that were replaced were 1988-1995 models that had between 250,000-399,000 miles .

the buses went into service in may 2010 and have allowed san dieguito union high to increase the reliability of its transportation .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

san juan unified carmichael , ca 95609 award amount: $9,330,839 san juan unified reported that it used its recovery act idea award to focus on instruction and best practices for all administrators and teachers , from pre - k to grade 12 .

these funds affected 1,000 idea students in 50 school sites , and were used to hire two reading coaches and two behavior specialists .

additionally , 100 teachers , 30 psychologists , and 20 administrators participated in intensive behavior training .

specifically , the funds were used to implement an intensive reading intervention for idea students , train staff to build positive behavior interventions , replace and upgrade older computers for 11 psychologists and five other special education managers , and establish a preschool special education class equipped with preschool furniture and playground equipment for students with disabilities .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to develop reading skills for idea students , implement positive behavior interventions in schools and dramatically reduced school suspensions in some schools , and improve preschool programs .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

scholarts preparatory school columbus oh 43236 award amount: $72,409 scholarts preparatory school reported that it used its recovery act idea funds for professional development as well as technology purchases .

the funds supported the professional development in data - driven instruction and assessment planning of two school administrators and 15 instructional staff , including special education teachers .

overall , 180 students in the school , and specifically 110 special education students were affected by the funds .

specifically , by paying salaries , the school used its recovery act idea funds for special education support services such as tutoring , psychologists , social workers , and transportation .

the funds were also used to purchase smartboards and associated technology for schoolwide use that the school could not afford in the past .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to pay approximately five to six teacher salaries , increase its professional development program , and enhance classroom instruction through the use of technology .

school officials said they also hoped to increase standardized test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were completed .

sea girt borough public schools sea girt , nj 08750 award amount: $43,835 sea girt borough public schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide all special education teachers with a full range of multisensory approaches to improve the teaching of reading .

it also offset the unbudgeted cost due to specific individualized education program ( iep ) demands .

these funds supported approximately 10 to15 percent of the single school district's 180 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide professional development ( i.e. , wilson training and instructional materials ) and make capital improvement to the classroom through installation of infrared sound field systems .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase classified students' ability to perform on all academic assessments ( i.e. , greater reading proficiency ) and continue with regular established programs to the benefit of all students .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

south pointe public charter middle school phoenix , az 85020 award amount: $33,948 south pointe public charter middle school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve scores on standardized tests , increase special education students' access and understanding of the general education curriculum , and enhance supports and instructional modifications for special education students in the inclusive setting .

these funds served over 35 special education students .

specifically , the funds were used to hire a part - time special education coordinator to enhance supports and instructional modifications , purchase instructional materials , and provide related services for special education students such as speech , physical therapy , psychological , hearing , and vision services .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve standardized test scores , improve dropout and graduation rates , and increase understanding of and accessibility to the general education curriculum .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

southwest schools houston , tx 77057 award amount: $422,874 southwest schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to increase instructional staff and provide additional related services .

these funds served 285 idea students across five campuses .

specifically , the funds were used to increase instructional staff by hiring one educational diagnostician and one licensed specialist in school psychology ; provide additional professional development for instructional staff ; purchase supplemental instructional material ; provide additional related services such as speech therapy occupational therapy , and physical therapy for students with disabilities ; and provide one - on - one aides for autistic students .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve idea students' performance in the classroom and on standardized tests and increase graduation rates for idea students .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

special school district baton rouge , la 70802 award amount: $125,077 special school district reported that it plans to use its recovery act idea award to focus on improving student performance .

these funds will serve 550 special education students in 13 programs .

specifically , the funds will be used to purchase research - based , technology - rich instructional programs focused on literacy and numeracy , and provide professional development teachers with instructional materials and strategies .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that they expect improved academic achievement , especially in literacy and numeracy areas , enhanced student engagement , and teacher growth .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities have not started .

telfair county school district mcrae , ga 31055 award amount: $334,766 telfair county school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to maintain a low student - teacher ratio ; increase inclusion as a model for special education students ; use implementation specialists in reading / english language arts , math , and technology to support best practices with teaching staff ; train staff in direct instruction ; and increase the use of technology in the classrooms .

these funds covered all 1,800 students in the district and over 200 teachers , including 22 special education teachers and 5 pre - k teachers .

specifically , the funds were used to hire implementation specialists in reading / english language arts , math , and technology for job - embedded training and staff development in grades k - 8 , as well as to initiate a specialized program to meet the needs of special learners and decrease achievement gaps .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district was able to encourage implementation of standard - based instruction using best practices in all schools .

they also said that these funds resulted in maintenance of a low student - teacher ratio , enabling the district to better support student learning , which they expect will increase the academic performance of struggling students on standardized tests .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

tennessee school for the deaf knoxville , tn 37920 award amount: $37,051 tennessee school for the deaf , a residential facility for deaf and hard - of - hearing students , reported that it used its recovery act idea award to purchase classroom supplies and two - way radios to be used by principals and other administrators in case of an emergency .

these funds supported each of its three schools ( an elementary , middle , and high school ) and approximately 180 students from across the state of tennessee .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase instructional materials and emergency radio equipment .

as a result of funds , officials reported that the school was able to enhance students' learning through instructional materials .

additionally , they said that two - way radios will be used in emergency situations to relay information quickly to the school departments .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

the max charter school houma , la 70364 award amount: $22,423 the max charter school reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve academic progress and standardized tests scores for students with disabilities and at - risk students .

these funds covered students districtwide , including approximately 65 students of the 106 enrolled at max charter school ( 61 percent of the lea's membership ) .

specifically , the funds were used to hire three part - time paraprofessionals to provide small - group instruction / remediation to at - risk and learning disabled students and to hire two instructional staff to provide after school remediation and tutoring to at - risk and learning disabled students .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to create five part - time instructional positions .

additionally , they said that the activities were expected to increase academic progress and proficiency and scores on standardized tests in english language arts and math for at - risk students and students with disabilities .

school officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

tippecanoe school corporation lafayette , in 47909 award amount: $2,663,788 tippecanoe school corporation reported that it used its recovery act idea award to hire and pay staff and provide additional educational services for students with special needs and academic deficiencies .

by using these funds to retain or hire over 130 instructional positions who work with idea students , the funds have allowed increased educational services to 1,563 idea students in the school corporation .

specifically , as part of the greater lafayette area special services ( glass ) cooperative , tippecanoe school corporation worked with lafayette school corporation and west lafayette school corporation to hire additional staff to work with special needs students and students with academic needs .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school corporation and the special education cooperative to were able to preserve programs and maintain current student - teacher ratios .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

tucson unified district tucson , az 85719 award amount: $4,938,806 tucson unified district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to hire and retain staff to provide services to students with disabilities , order assistive technology , and purchase updated software for students with academic difficulties .

these funds supported over 8,000 students with special needs who receive services in more than 100 schools in the district .

specifically , the funds were used to hire 15 new teachers and over 30 new paraprofessionals to work with students on a one - to - one basis .

other staff were contracted to provide therapy services and translate documents into spanish .

additionally , devices for better movement , sight , and hearing were used to meet the adaptive needs of students .

updated software was ordered for students with academic difficulties and for better case management of these students .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that they expect the district to improve academic performance and help students gain access to the general curriculum .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than half completed .

twinsburg city schools twinsburg , oh 44087 award amount: $798,028 twinsburg city schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to create staff positions and provide staff development .

these funds were used in all five schools in the district .

these schools together serve approximately 400 special education students .

the district also used the funds to add approximately five staff positions .

specifically , the funds were used for staff development , to add two instructional staff and three instructional assistants , and to purchase technology for special education classrooms , such as smartboards and projectors .

additional items were purchased for the district to provide an after - school game club for students with special needs to promote peer interaction .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that the district improved student achievement by reducing class size and the caseload in the special education program to provide students with special needs the same extracurricular opportunities as their peers .

district officials reported that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

waconia public school district waconia , mn 55387 award amount: $696,390 waconia public school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to maintain staff and its student - teacher ratio , especially in the elementary grade levels .

these funds targeted two schools and approximately 178 students with special needs .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save four instructional positions and maintain its current student - teacher ratio .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

wareham public schools wareham , ma 02571 award amount: $443,782 wareham public schools reported that it used its recovery act idea award to improve prekindergarten and kindergarten services , decrease class size , retain staff , provide professional development , purchase instructional materials and software , and implement a new program .

these funds supported approximately 600 students with special needs , in addition to approximately 345 regular education students in inclusion classrooms throughout the district's eight schools .

specifically , the funds were used to hire an elementary school special education teacher , retain special education teachers at the middle and high school levels , provide professional development for staff who work with students with special needs , provide seed money for a new alternative placement program for behaviorally challenged special education students , purchase instructional materials for students with special needs and an iep software program ( e - sped ) .

the funds were also used to decrease class size at the elementary level in inclusion programs .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to reduce district costs by implementing the new program and improve the network for data retrieval and collection .

they indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

wayzata public school district wayzata , mn 55391 award amount: $2,301,098 wayzata public school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to provide services to students with disabilities and to prevent the need for future services by concentrating on early identification and intervention .

these funds targeted 11 sites with a total of 1,100 students benefiting directly from the funds .

specifically , the funds were used to continue to dedicate 2 percent of the district's $100 million budget for staff development activities on a districtwide basis .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to continue staff development through education and integration , which allowed the teachers to properly identify strategies to assist students with special needs .

they also said that these funds resulted in enhanced student learning .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

west salem school district west salem , wi 54669 award amount: $367,098 west salem school district reported that it used its recovery act idea award to hire a staff person to help teachers improve lesson plans for special education students , purchase a software program for special education students , purchase textbooks for special education students ; and purchase equipment for students with physical disabilities .

the district has additional plans to remodel a classroom to improve accessibility for students with physical disabilities .

these funds served 186 special education students across the district .

specifically , the funds were used to hire an experienced special education teacher to teach general education high school teachers how to modify tests and assignments for special education students and how to address modifications and accommodations for students with ieps ; purchase a software program for special education students that enables them to follow a modified version of the general education curriculum , purchase textbooks for students with learning disabilities who read at lower reading levels , and purchase two hoyer lifts for students with physical disabilities in middle school .

the district also has plans to remodel a classroom to increase accessibility for students with physical disabilities .

as a result of these idea funds , officials reported that they expect reading scores to increase , the quality of instruction for students with disabilities to improve ( especially in inclusion classes ) , and the school to have a more accessible classroom for students with physical disabilities .

officials indicated that their recovery act idea award activities were more than 50 percent completed .

the recovery act provides $10 billion to help local educational agencies educate disadvantaged youth by making additional funds available beyond those regularly allocated through title i , part a of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 , as amended ( esea ) .

these additional funds are to be distributed through states to leas using existing federal funding formulas , which target funds based on such factors as high concentrations of students from families living in poverty .

in using the funds , leas are required to comply with current statutory and regulatory requirements and must obligate 85 percent of the funds by september 30 , 2010 .

education is advising leas to use the funds in ways that will build the agencies' long - term capacity to serve disadvantaged youth , such as through providing professional development to teachers .

given that few descriptions fully met our transparency criteria , we administered a web - based survey to school district superintendents in the 50 states and the district of columbia to determine how they are using recovery act funds .

we conducted our survey between march and april 2010 , with a 78 percent final weighted response rate .

we selected a stratified random sample of 575 leas from the population of 16,065 leas included in our sample frame of data obtained from the common core of data in 2007-2008 .

of this sample , we randomly selected 150 leas ( 50 for each program ) to gather illustrative information on how they used their recovery act funds .

see appendix vii for more information on how we designed our survey .

what follows are summaries of how these leas described their use of recovery act title i , part a funds , based on their survey responses as well as information we collected through follow - up communications .

alamo heights independent school district san antonio , tx 78209 award amount: $181,506 alamo heights independent school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to retain a teaching position and increase the effectiveness of its teachers .

these funds supported one teacher who serves at - risk children in reading and math at and professional development for several teachers in two other schools , affecting about 100 students all together .

the professional development was in data director , a software program that allows data disaggregation to better inform curricular and instructional decisions .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save an instructional position and improve test scores of at - risk students .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

arizona call - a - teen youth resources , inc. phoenix , az 85003 award amount: $37,375 arizona call - a - teen youth resources , inc. , reported that it used its recovery act title i award to increase student achievement in math and reading .

these funds targeted 125 students at one school .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff , purchase instructional materials , and provide professional development .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that they were able to save two instructor positions .

they also said these funds resulted in improved scores on standardized tests .

officials reported that their recovery act title i activities were 50 percent or more completed .

arlington independent school district arlington , tx 76013 award amount: $11,345,205 arlington independent school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide title i resources to students who attend campuses that were eligible , but not previously served under title i ; improve instructional practices ; provide supplemental resources for students ; and enhance the family involvement program .

these funds supported approximately 42 title i campuses serving about 32,000 students and families who live in title i attendance zones .

specifically , the funds were used to hire additional curriculum specialists to work directly with teachers , a social worker to provide support for families , a spanish language translator to meet the oral and written needs of families , and a fathers' outreach liaison to work specifically to get more fathers involved with their children's education .

the funds were also used to provide professional development for instructional staff and coaches and to purchase instructional materials and technology for classrooms .

as a result of title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve the achievement of students , improve classroom teaching using 21st century technology and materials , and better meet the needs of families so that the children may improve their academic achievement and attendance .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

austin independent school district austin , tx 78703 award amount: $22,974,560 austin independent school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to support english language learners' academic achievement and math and science achievement in elementary and middle schools .

the district also used its funds to support credit recovery and dropout prevention , and increase graduation rates in addition to intervention and supports for persistently low - performing schools .

these funds supported over 50,000 students in 52 elementary schools , 10 middle schools , and 5 high schools .

specifically , the funds were used to hire staff and purchase supplies and materials , including computer equipment , software , and site licenses .

instructional materials and curriculum were purchased to support math and science education at the elementary and middle school levels .

science technology engineering and mathematics ( stem ) materials and equipment were purchased for use at the high school level .

the funds were also used to provide professional development , additional intervention to struggling students , and support for parent involvement and college and career readiness .

as a result of these title i funds , official reported that the district was able to continue full - day prekindergarten , improve scores on standardized tests , improve rigor and uniformity of math and science instruction , turnaround struggling schools , and improve academic performance for english language learners .

they also said that these funds resulted in the creation of 16 positions and the retention of approximately 26 positions .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

beal city public schools mt .

pleasant , mi 48858 award amount: $28,009 beal city public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to purchase technology that would assist a specific group of boys who were struggling in reading .

these funds targeted 30 to 40 fifth grade boys in the district's elementary school , who according to test scores , were lagging behind in reading .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase technology that included computers , a smartboard , projectors , and kindles for intensive direct instruction in reading .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase scores on standardized tests for the male students .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

bourbonnais school district 53 bourbonnais , il 60914 award amount: $138,439 bourbonnais school district 53 reported that it used its recovery act title i award to expand the use of technology in early interventions with at - risk students .

these funds supported 300 students at four schools .

specifically , the funds were used to hire extra staff for after school and summer school programs and provide cutting edge technology to support these programs .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to decrease the number of elementary students who are currently academically at risk .

they indicated that their recovery act title i activities were 50 percent or more completed .

callaway public schools callaway , ne 68825 award amount: $19,230 callaway public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to acquire technology to aid in computer - assisted instruction for title i students .

these funds supported approximately 40 students in the elementary school .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase a smartboard and a projector .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to increase student test scores on classroom assessments , as well as standardized test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

camden city public schools camden , nj 08102 award amount: $6,397,060 camden city public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide professional development for instructional staff and purchase materials to implement a reading program .

these funds covered all schools in the district , which includes 5 high schools , 5 middle schools , and 22 elementary schools that serve 12,068 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide an intensive districtwide reading program , including professional development and an intense data component that allows teachers and administrators to track the students' progress .

the funds were also used to provide additional tutoring services for those students who are failing or most at risk of failing to meet the state's academic achievement standards .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that they expected improved scores on standardized state tests .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

cedar ridge school district newark , ar 72562 award amount: $160,979 cedar ridge school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to enhance the curriculum , ensure that high - quality instruction is being delivered in every classroom , ensure that curriculum frameworks are being taught at every grade level ; find strengths and weaknesses in the curriculum , and assist and ensure that the curriculum is taught at the appropriate level .

these funds supported approximately 852 students at two elementary schools and one junior / senior high school .

specifically , the funds were used to hire an assistant superintendent of curriculum and instruction and a resource officer .

professional development time was given to teachers to develop pacing guides , and compass learning software was purchased to provide assistance to teachers .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that they expect standardized test scores to increase .

they also said that these funds helped teachers become more effective and the curriculum become more enriched officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

colon community school district colon , mi 49040 award amount: $140,013 colon community school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to implement a title i preschool and offer summer school for students not achieving at grade level .

these funds supported 16 students in preschool and 40 students in summer school .

specifically , the funds were used to retain one staff member , hire one staff member , and purchase some instructional materials .

as a result of title i funds , officials reported that the district met the challenge of closing its socioeconomic gaps by providing preschool opportunities and by offering summer school .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

commerce city schools commerce , ga 30529 award amount: $140,824 commerce city schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to retain personnel and provide professional development .

these funds supported an elementary school and a primary school .

specifically , the funds were used to retain two teachers and one paraprofessional and use one academic coach for professional development related to science curriculum at the elementary school .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain three staff positions and maintain programs .

they also said that these funds allowed the district to pay for professional development .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

cotter school district cotter , ar 72626 award amount: $173,280 cotter school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to lower the student - teacher ratio and enhance instructional effectiveness .

these funds supported a student population of approximately 350 at amanda gist elementary , a k - 6 school .

specifically , the funds were used to provide professional development to teachers , retain a licensed teacher and a paraprofessional , and purchase instructional materials for literacy and mathematics and technology hardware and software for instructional use .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save two instructional positions and provide additional instructional materials and current technology .

they also said they anticipate these funds will result in increased student achievement , higher graduation rates , and greater college or technical school completion rates .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

des moines independent community school district des moines , ia 50309 award amount: $6,550,371 des moines independent community school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to increase the number of schools receiving title i services , to initiate a school improvement leader model , and to provide instructional materials in reading and math .

these funds increased title i support in 7 schools ( 2 high schools , 1 middle school , 4 elementary schools ) serving a total of 4,000 students , supported 6 school improvement leaders ( 3 at each of 2 middle schools ) serving a total of 1,000 students , and targeted more than 60 schools districtwide serving over 30,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff at schools previously designated as title i , hire additional staff to increase the number of schools receiving title i services , and purchase reading and math instructional materials .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain 11 to 14 positions , maintain its current level of title i services , and improve achievement in reading and math .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed el paso independent school district el paso , tx 79998 award amount: $28,173,486 el paso independent school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to attain high student achievement , provide a challenging learning environment , and graduate mentally , emotionally , and physically healthy students who are lifetime learners .

these funds supported each of the 76 title i schoolwide campuses serving 54,195 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain and hire staff , provide professional development activities for instructional staff , integrate instructional technology in the classroom , and purchase other instructional materials .

as a result of these title i funds , officials said that the district expects to improve scores on standardized tests , decrease the number of schools in school improvement , and increase the number of students that graduate on time that are ready for college or the world of work .

these funds also resulted in the retention of 50 instructional positions and maintained the current student - teacher ratio .

district officials reported that recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

escondido union high school district escondido , ca 92027 award amount: $637,836 escondido union high school district reported that it used its recovery act title i to purchase instructional equipment .

these funds targeted three comprehensive school sites that serve over 7,700 students .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase equipment for an lcd projector installation project .

technology components that were added to the classrooms were computers to run software for the at - risk math and reading students .

in addition , there was a technology component of the state adopted materials that required additional equipment for the teachers to use in classroom instruction .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to upgrade its instructional technology .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

fairland local school district proctorville , oh 45669 award amount: $380,588 fairland local school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to create instructional positions and will also use funds from the award to retain instructional positions and purchase computer equipment for two elementary schools .

the district will also use funds from the award to provide a substitute teacher for intervention services .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district has been able to create two instructional positions and reduce class size .

district officials reported that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

goddard public schools usd 265 goddard , ks 67052 award amount: $203,973 goddard public schools usd 265 reported that it used its recovery title i award to promote programs that help students acquire skills needed to succeed in life and provide services to students deficient in reading and math skills and foundational academic skills to all .

these funds supported four elementary schools serving approximately 1,950 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff .

as a result of title i funds , district officials said they were able to maintain the district's student - teacher ratio of approximately 22 to 1 and save two teaching positions .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

green woods charter school philadelphia , pa 19128 award amount: $131,622 green woods charter school reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide additional supports for at - risk students in reading and math .

these funds supported a single charter school that serves approximately 220 students .

specifically , the funds were used to hire new staff , purchase instructional materials , and provide new professional development opportunities for instructional staff .

additionally , classroom libraries , communications systems for parents , and computers for classrooms were purchased .

substitutes were also provided so teachers could attend professional development , and a part - time reading specialist was hired .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

greene county tech school district paragould , ar 72450 award amount: $345,010 greene county tech school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve student achievement by updating technology and providing supplies .

these funds supported the district's five schools that serve approximately 3,600 students .

specifically , the funds were used to update technology and purchase supplies , which assisted with remediation efforts for state achievement tests .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve student achievement on the state tests and improve graduation rates .

they indicated that their recovery act award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

gurdon school district gurdon , ar 71743 award amount: $157,722 gurdon school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve technology in classrooms and provide instruction for teachers .

these funds targeted three schools and affected approximately 750 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain one teacher , hire a classified instructional staff member and purchase 56 multimedia classroom sets .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain its student - teacher ratio and expects student scores to increase 15 percent .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

hillsborough county public schools tampa , fl 33602 award amount: $36,169,731 hillsborough county public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide professional development , early intervention activities , curriculum support for academic achievement , instructional technology , and career and college ready support .

these funds supported 125 title i schools serving approximately 80,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide additional guidance services to high - need elementary schools , hire additional tutors to work with students at level 1 and 2 on the state assessment , establish a robotics pilot at 24 schools to support math and science at stem feeder schools , and hire additional reading coaches at high - poverty elementary schools .

the funds were provided to participating private schools to support additional services to title i eligible students .

title i funds were also used to provide additional performance pay at the district's highest - poverty schools in order to better recruit and retain instructional staff , provide professional development in content and pedagogical areas for teachers , upgrade instructional technology and hardware , establish a parent involvement pilot in the district's urban core to better engage parents in the education of their children , and purchase instructional materials to support early childhood programs .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve academic achievement for students on state - administered assessments .

they indicated that their recovery act title i activities were 50 percent or more completed .

imagine charter elementary at camelback , inc. phoenix , az 85053 award amount: $57,864 imagine charter elementary at camelback , inc. , reported that it used its recovery act title i award to install technology to aid in tutoring activities for at - risk students .

these funds targeted 60-70 students per week at one location .

specifically , the funds were used to install six interactive whiteboards in title i pull - out rooms and title i tutoring rooms .

the funds were also used to provide professional development for teachers providing the tutoring services .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that they hope to see an increase in their standardized testing .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were fully completed .

integrated design electronics academy washington , dc 20019 award amount: $228,868 integrated design electronics academy reported that it used its recovery act title i award to retain staff .

these funds targeted one school with 450 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain teachers .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the school was able to save 12 instructional positions and maintain the current student - teacher ratio .

they also said that the funds resulted in improved scores on standardized tests and increased graduation rates .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

irvington community school indianapolis , in 46219 award amount: $251,501 irvington community school reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve student achievement in computation skills and comprehension of nonfiction texts and writing skill , and to provide intensive , targeted interventions to students in all grade levels in order to improve achievement in all academic areas .

these funds supported four staff positions at the k - 8 building , which serves approximately 420 students and one staff position at the high school which serves approximately 280 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain two current staff members , and ics's lead teacher and math coach and hire three new staff members , a math aide , a literacy aide , and an aide at the high school .

these title i funds were also used to support programs and services including parental involvement , professional conferences for teachers , assessment materials , and curriculum materials for use by the title i team .

two “family nights” were hosted in order to get parents involved in literacy and math activities , and the fountas and pinnell diagnostic system was purchased to use in assessing students' reading abilities and plan instruction .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to implement a response to intervention program to address the individual needs of each student .

the school also expects to increase student achievement on standardized and norm - referenced tests , improve student performance in classrooms , reduce retention rates , and achieve and maintain an acceptable graduation rate for their students .

officials also said that use of the funds is intended to improve teacher performance , provide teachers with a variety of instructional strategies for differentiated instruction , provide parents with additional resources for supporting their children's education at home , and bridge the home - school connection .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

jefferson county public schools louisville , ky 40232 award amount: $33,736,253 jefferson county public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to move students to proficiency in reading and math .

these funds supported 97 schools serving approximately 49,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain full - time staff and / or hire part - time staff ; purchase technology items , such as smartboards ; and purchase books or other reading and math items .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save over 31 teacher positions , and 11 instructional assistant positions , and hire over 44 retired teachers to work with students in small groups .

they also expect scores on standardized tests to improve .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

katy independent school district katy , tx 77492 award amount: $2,914,931 katy independent school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve student performance , build capacity of instructional staff , enhance digital learning , and maintain high - quality english as a second language / bilingual staff and a safe , comfortable learning environment .

these funds supported 20 campuses that serve approximately 13,429 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide professional development and purchase technology and instructional materials .

the funds were also used for supplemental tutorials , parent involvement activities , and staff retention .

as a result of these title i funds , officials said that the district was able to increase student achievement and parent involvement .

they also said that these funds resulted in highly effective teachers , more teachers who were trained for english language learners , increased use of digital tools to enhance instruction , and an improvement in program effectiveness and the quality of services .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

kipp austin public schools , inc. austin , tx 78724 award amount: $154,743 kipp austin public schools , inc. , reported that it used its recovery act title i award to add staff , provide professional development , and purchase technology .

these funds supported three schools and approximately 630 students .

specifically , the funds were used to create two instructional coaching positions in math and science and purchase a new software platform for collecting and analyzing student data .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the school was better able to access data .

they also said these funds resulted in improved results on state and national assessments .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

lakeview community schools columbus , ne 68601 award amount: $65,274 lakeview community school reported that it used its recovery act title i award to retain the reading coach position in the district .

these funds supported the reading coach , who serves both elementary schools and approximately 300 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain the reading coach at the elementary level .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain and improve upon their reading skills for all students , especially for those students who are english language learners .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

legacy education group mesa , az 85207 award amount: $56,622 legacy education group reported that it used its recovery act title i award to increase technology and classroom teaching materials .

these funds supported one k - 8 charter school .

specifically , the funds were used to create a position that is responsible for data - driven decision - making processes .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve student performance .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

medford school district 549c medford , or 97501 award amount: $2,185,314 medford school district 549c reported that it used its recovery act title i award to retain teaching staff and other resources to continue serving children's educational programs and needs .

these funds supported seven elementary schools in the district serving approximately 3,500 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain teaching personnel .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain approximately 77 full - time - equivalent positions , roughly maintain student - teacher ratios , and limit the number of budget - cut days for the 2010 school year .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

memphis city school district memphis , tn 38112 award amount: $57,244,262 memphis city school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve academic achievement .

these funds supported approximately 100,000 students in over 175 schools .

specifically , the funds were used for intervention initiatives , to retain and hire staff , provide professional development for instructional staff , and purchase student instructional materials for project base learning .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain more than 180 pre - k positions and more than 35 district - level instructional support positions .

they also said that the funds resulted in improved student scores on standardized tests by adding more than 120 staff positions for academic intervention .

district officials reported that their recovery act title i activities were less than 50 percent completed .

milford exempted village school district milford , oh 45150 award amount: $346,795 milford exempted village school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve student achievement , particularly in reading and math .

these funds supported approximately 1,000 at - risk students , but could affect all 6,400 students in the district .

specifically , the funds were used to add instructional staff and purchase materials and software for the at - risk students .

the funds were also used to provide professional development in reading and math strategies .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to create one part - time reading coach position and four part - time teacher positions .

they also said they expect improvement in achievement scores for all student subgroups in reading and math .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

milford school district milford , ct 06460 award amount: $377,262 milford school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to enhance student achievement at the middle school level in math and english .

these funds supported approximately 10 percent of the student enrollment .

specifically , the funds were used to hire morning and afternoon staff to provide math and english instruction through morning and afternoon programs to students who were not proficient .

as a result of title i funds , officials reported that they expect results on the connecticut mastery test to improve , with more students achieving proficiency .

district officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

muncie community schools muncie , in 47304 award amount: $2,496,075 muncie community schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to save and create staff positions , purchase technology , and fund professional development .

these funds supported seven elementary schools serving approximately 2,940 students in grades k through 5 .

specifically , the funds were used for professional development and supplies to implement the school improvement initiative .

funds were also used to purchase technology , such as computers and smartboards .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save and create a total of four positions that include an interventionist and three data coaches .

they also said that the funds resulted in improved student achievement .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

neenah school neenah , wi 54956 award amount: $376,149 neenah school reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide professional development for teaching staff , create an instructional coach position , provide time for staff to analyze data , and hire a facilitator to assist in the analysis .

these funds targeted six campuses , but because of the nature of the fund use , all or nearly all 6,500 students in the district were directly or indirectly affected .

specifically , the funds were used to create one response to intervention ( rti ) instructional coach position , provide rti professional development for instructional staff , and contract with a personal services facilitator to help with the data analysis and interpretation .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve its approaches to and techniques for teaching , which should have a positive impact on student achievement .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed new foundations charter school philadelphia , pa 19136 award amount: $401,559 new foundations charter school reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve science , technology , and special education .

these funds supported approximately 575 students at one school .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase technology , such as smartboards for classrooms , graphing calculators , and a software program called read 180 .

additionally , the funds were used to hire technology support personnel , provide professional development , and purchase instructional materials , such as foss ( full option science system ) science materials .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve student outcomes on standardized tests and hire one technology support personnel .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

northeastern clinton central school district champlain , ny 12919 award amount: $119,554 northeastern clinton central school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve literacy instruction and enhance state test results .

these funds supported three schools in a 1,400-student district .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to create a new position when a current employee became the literacy coach and hire a replacement .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

orange county public schools orlando , fl 32801 award amount: $29,879,628 orange county public schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to provide supplemental services to students to ensure they make continuous academic improvement .

these funds supported all 70 title i schools and approximately 42,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain reading coaches at all 70 schools , 50 math and science coaches , 19 social workers , 11 student assistance family empowerment coordinators at middle schools , and a guidance counselor at the juvenile assessment center .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district expects increased student performance on standardized reading , math and science exams and anticipates improved graduation rates .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were fully completed .

paintsville independent schools paintsville , ky 41240 award amount: $240,013 paintsville independent schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to improve student services and instruction .

these funds supported one school with 400 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff and programs , add technology to classrooms , and provide professional development to staff .

as a result of these title i funds , officials said the district was able to save four title i teacher positions , improve instruction , and improve student academic results .

district officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

san antonio can ! .

high school dallas , tx 75208 award amount: $2,099,018 san antonio can ! .

high school reported that it used its recovery act title i award for retaining instructional positions schoolwide that would have been lost without these funds .

specifically , the funds were used to retain one instructional staff position .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the school was able to maintain its low student - teacher ratio and increase the number of graduates by 12 .

they also said that they are expecting additional graduates after the july texas assessment of knowledge and skills ( taks ) administration .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were less than 50 percent completed .

san leandro unified school district san leandro , ca 94579 award amount: $607,453 san leandro unified school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to hire staff , get intervention opportunities , purchase materials and equipment to accelerate support for student learning , and fund programs to increase adequate yearly progress in all significant subgroups .

these funds supported approximately 1,300 title i students at five elementary sites .

specifically , the funds were used to retain and hire staff , provide professional development , and purchase instructional materials .

as a result of these funds , officials said the district was able to increase standardized test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

santa ana unified school district santa ana , ca 92701 award amount: $11,429,961 santa ana unified school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to maintain positions and staff development programs .

these funds supported 62 schools with approximately 54,000 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain staff both certificated and classified and to pay for the salaries of teachers on special assignments who support teachers through staff development , demonstration lessons , and the coordination of instructional materials .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to maintain 62 special assignment teachers .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were fully completed .

wiggins school district re - 50j wiggins , co 80654 award amount: $57,733 wiggins school district re - 50j reported that it used its recovery act title i award to hire a math coach .

these funds supported 55 students in the middle school in addition to teachers the math coach worked with .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that they expect to see student math test scores improve .

they indicated that their recovery act title i activities were more than 50 percent completed .

scottsdale unified district phoenix , az 85018 award amount: $2,352,308 scottsdale unified district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to strategically fund positions , activities , and items that will help all students to improve academically .

these funds supported over 5,500 title i students in seven schoolwide and two targeted title i programs .

specifically , the funds were used to fund academic intervention specialists at several title i schools , provide funding for items needed to expand title i pre - k programs , and purchase instructional materials , supplies , and software to support interventions at title i schools .

funds were also used to support ongoing professional development by funding instructional coaches at several title i schools and by funding the registration and travel fees associated with title i teachers and administrators attending professional development workshops .

as a result of these funds , officials reported they expect to see improvement in student academic achievement and see increases in student state test scores .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

somerset independent schools somerset , ky 42502 award amount: $427,661 somerset independent schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to serve students in middle grades , where services were not provided previously .

these funds targeted one middle school that serves approximately 350 students .

specifically , the funds were used to retain a math resource teacher , a reading resource teacher , and an instructional assistant and to provide response to intervention ( rti ) services .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to save three positions that would have been lost .

they also said they expect an increase in scores on state tests .

officials indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

summit academy of alt learners akron , oh 44305 award amount: $59,898 summit academy of alt learners reported that it used its recovery act title i award to upgrade its instructional materials .

these funds covered a complete replacement and replenishment of instructional materials for all learners .

specifically , the funds were used to purchase new literacy , math , science and social studies materials , which are fully integrated with computer support .

as a result of these title i funds , officials reported that they expect to see improved scores on state tests , improved attainment of individualized education programs ( iep ) goals , and more engagement on the part of their reluctant learners .

school officials reported that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed susquehanna township school district harrisburg , pa 17109 award amount: $225,856 susquehanna township school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award to purchase new materials , add additional courses , and provide staff development .

these funds supported two schools with a total of 112 teachers and 1,257 students .

specifically , the funds were used to provide additional staff development to the teachers in positive discipline and instructional strategies .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to improve scores on standardized tests , decrease problems with student discipline , and increase student attendance .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

texas school for the deaf austin , tx 78704 award amount: $72,743 texas school for the deaf reported that it used its recovery act title i award to enhance instructional and student support services for its deaf and hard - of - hearing students , increase the number of parents and teachers that have access to school data , and increase the number of teachers receiving professional development .

these funds covered 165 professional development workshops for teachers and targeted the parents of the 552 students and 427 teachers and staff .

specifically , the funds were used to provide additional assistive technology equipment , such as adaptive keyboards and touch screen monitors , as well as graphing calculators for high school students , and instructional hardware and software .

the school has also purchased internal student information system software for individualized education program management .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the school was able to improve parent and staff access to instructional information and improve the number of highly qualified staff .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

volusia county schools deland , fl 32720 award amount: $15,267,330 volusia county schools reported that it used its recovery act title i award to increase the capacity for schools to close the achievement gap between subgroups .

these funds supported all students at 65 schools consisting of 37 elementary schools , 9 middle schools , 1 middle / high school , 3 high schools , 11 alternative schools , and 4 charter schools .

specifically , the funds were used for academic coaches for staff development on best practices identified by the state , the expansion of the avid ( advancement via individual determination ) program in secondary schools , dedicated teaching professionals for intervention and intensive instruction for low - performing students , expanded classroom libraries , and supplemental educational materials to enhance the core instruction .

as a result of these funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain or create 427 jobs to direct every avid student toward the appropriate path to graduation .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

yuma 1 school district yuma , co 80759 award amount: $97,899 yuma 1 school district reported that it used its recovery act title i award for teacher retention and the purchase of intervention materials and computers .

these funds were spread across three schools serving approximately 350 students who had poor math or reading scores .

specifically , the funds were used to retain an intervention teacher and purchase two computers .

as a result of title i funds , officials reported that the district was able to retain one intervention specialist position and prevent larger intervention class sizes at the middle school .

they indicated that their recovery act title i award activities were 50 percent or more completed .

to understand how the office of management and budget ( omb ) and education facilitated implementation of recovery act requirements for recipients to describe the use of funds , we reviewed the act for reporting requirements .

we also reviewed reporting guidance established by omb , the recovery board , and any supplemental guidance and technical assistance developed by education for the three programs covered in our review .

we met with omb , education , and recovery board officials to gain an understanding of the reporting requirements and systems .

to assess the extent to which descriptions of awards transparently described how funds were being used , we utilized a gao transparency assessment methodology developed for our may 2010 report on recovery act transparency .

this assessment was based on the requirements of the recovery act ; omb's guidance , including omb's recipient reporting data model ; the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ; and professional judgment .

we considered descriptions of awards transparent if they conveyed , in a manner understandable to the general public , a basic understanding of the activities to be carried out and the expected outcomes .

this effort was meant to be an assessment of transparency only with regard to the specific reporting fields we reviewed , not to recovery.gov as a whole or to the administration's efforts to make this information available frequently and in a timely manner .

in assessing transparency , we reviewed all prime recipient award records on recovery.gov as of april 30 , 2010 , for the three education programs covered in this review .

similar to the transparency review we conducted in may 2010 , we reviewed the required fields on recovery.gov that describe the uses of recovery act funds , including project name , award description , and quarterly activities / project description .

in addition to these fields , we reviewed the description of jobs created field .

for this field , prime recipients were advised by education to briefly describe the types of jobs created or retained .

education officials told us that this field may contain important information that would help the public understand how states are using their recovery act funds .

in addition , as reported in our december 2009 bimonthly report , we found that creating and retaining jobs was the top use of funds for all three of the programs we reviewed .

finally , because the education programs in our review provide states with formula grants that state education agencies ( sea ) pass through to leas , we also reviewed the number , location , and award amount of subawards reported on recovery.gov by prime recipients .

to apply our transparency criteria , we discerned if the information on recovery.gov contained the following specific attributes: general purpose of the award ( eg , retaining funding for k - 12 schools or nature of activities being conducted ( eg , purchases of educational technology and training of instructional support staff ) , location ( where award activities are being conducted ; eg , school district or city ) , status ( percentage complete ) , outcome ( what is expected to be achieved ; eg , increased student achievement reflected by higher test scores ) , and scope ( i.e. , number of schools or students covered by project ) .

using these seven attributes and our professional judgment , we assessed information in the selected data fields for understandability , clarity , and completeness .

two analysts independently reviewed information on each award from the selected fields and then compared results to reach a consensus on whether the description fully met , significantly met , partially met , or did not meet the transparency criteria .

if they could not agree , a third analyst reviewed the award information without regard to the original determinations and made a deciding assessment .

descriptions that were understandable , clear , and complete met our transparency criteria .

descriptions that contained information for almost all the attributes cited above ( purpose , nature of activities , location , and so on ) “significantly met” our transparency criteria , while those that contained some information were considered to “partially meet” our transparency criteria .

descriptions that contained little or no information did not meet our transparency criteria .

finally , for the recipient reports we reviewed , we performed a number of electronic edit checks on the awards for the prime recipients , including any associated subrecipients , to determine whether there were possible anomalies in the award information .

we also discussed data reliability issues with omb and education to ensure data quality .

in addition to the review described above , we met with federal officials and state and local officials responsible for recipient reporting in 15 states and the district of columbia included in our bimonthly review to discuss the procedures for compiling and reporting information on recovery act funds and how information on awards is made available to the public .

to obtain national - level information for our bimonthly review on how recovery act sfsf education stabilization funds ; esea title i , part a funds ; and idea part b for school - aged children funds were used at the local level , we designed and administered a web - based survey of local educational agencies ( leas ) in the 50 states and the district of columbia .

we surveyed school district superintendents across the country to learn how recovery act funding was used and what impact these funds had on school districts .

given that few descriptions fully met our transparency assessment , we included on this survey several questions related to how leas were using funds from these three programs .

we conducted our survey between march and april 2010 , with a 78 percent final weighted response rate .

we selected a stratified random sample of 575 leas from the population of 16,065 leas included in our sample frame of leas obtained from education's common core of data in 2007-2008 .

we selected a nongeneralizable subsample of 50 leas per education program we reviewed ( 150 leas total ) to provide illustrative information on how leas are using their recovery act funds .

we took steps to minimize nonsampling errors by pretesting the survey instrument with officials in 5 leas in january and february 2010 .

we did not determine whether federal agencies or prime recipients selected the awards discussed in this report to ensure that the awards met the requirements of the act or whether the recipients met the act's eligibility requirements .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2010 through july 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as part of our work , we assessed the reliability of certain recovery act data that were pertinent to our effort .

we determined that the data elements were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

cornelia ashby ( 202 ) 512-7215 or ashbyc@gao.gov .

james ashley , edward bodine , karen brown , jessica botsford , amy buck , karen febey , hedieh fusfield , alexander galuten , bryon gordon , sonya harmeyer , sheila mccoy , jean mcsween , elizabeth morrison , james rebbe , catherine roark , crystal robinson , beverly ross , susan sachs , michelle verbrugge , charles willson , and sarah wood made significant contributions to this report .

recovery act: increasing the public's understanding of what funds are being spent on and what outcomes are expected , gao - 10-581 , washington , d.c.: may 27 , 2010 .

electronic government: implementation of the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 , gao - 10-365 , washington , d.c.: march 12 , 2010 .

recovery act: states' and localities' uses of funds and actions needed to address implementation challenges and bolster accountability , gao - 10- 604 ( washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2010 ) .

recovery act: states' and localities' uses of funds and actions needed to address implementation challenges and bolster accountability ( appendixes ) , gao - 10-605sp ( washington , d.c.: may 26 , 2010 ) .

recovery act: one year later , states' and localities' uses of funds and opportunities to strengthen accountability , gao - 10-437 ( washington , d.c.: mar .

3 , 2010 ) .

recovery act: status of states' and localities' use of funds and efforts to ensure accountability , gao - 10-231 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 10 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: status of states' and localities' use of funds and efforts to ensure accountability ( appendixes ) , gao - 10-232sp ( washington , d.c.: dec. 10 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: funds continue to provide fiscal relief to states and localities , while accountability and reporting challenges need to be fully addressed ( gao - 09-1016 , washington , d.c.: sept. 23 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: funds continue to provide fiscal relief to states and localities , while accountability and reporting challenges need to be fully addressed ( appendixes ) ( gao - 09-1017sp , washington , d.c.: sept. 23 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: states' and localities' current and planned uses of funds while facing fiscal stresses , gao - 09-829 ( washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: states' and localities' current and planned uses of funds while facing fiscal stresses ( appendixes ) , gao - 09-830sp , washington , d.c.: july 8 , 2009 .

recovery act: states' and localities' current and planned uses of funds while facing fiscal stresses , gao - 09-831t ( washington , d.c.: july 08 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: as initial implementation unfolds in states and localities , continued attention to accountability issues is essential ( gao - 09-580 , washington , d.c.: apr .

23 , 2009 ) .

recovery act: as initial implementation unfolds in states and localities , continued attention to accountability issues is essential ( gao - 09-631t , washington , d.c.: apr .

23 , 2009 ) .

