the federal government obligated approximately $507 billion on contracts and awarded about 537,000 new contracts to over 100,000 contractors in fiscal year 2017 .

businesses , including those that receive federal contracts , are responsible for paying their share of taxes including employment and income tax , which results in billions of dollars in tax revenue each year .

some taxes are not paid voluntarily and on time , however , leading to what is known as a “tax gap.” a portion of the tax gap is owed by individuals and businesses receiving payments from the federal government .

in its most - recent estimate , the internal revenue service ( irs ) stated that the average annual gross tax gap was $458 billion for tax years 2008 – 2010 .

the irs estimated that it would eventually collect $52 billion of this amount , leaving a net tax gap of $406 billion in unpaid taxes for each of those 3 years .

in an effort to help close the tax gap , congress gave the irs the authority to collect assets or payments , including federal contract payments , to collect unpaid taxes , and these collections are referred to as a levy .

irs enforcement of tax laws is vital to promote compliance by giving taxpayers confidence that others are paying their fair share .

because of the challenges that the irs faces in its enforcement of tax laws , we continue to include it as a high - risk area .

our prior work , as well as that of the treasury inspector general for tax administration , identified thousands of federal contractors that abused the federal tax system , causing significant loss of tax revenue .

for example , in 2007 we found that thousands of federal contractors had substantial amounts of unpaid federal taxes .

specifically , about 63,000 federal contractors owed approximately $7 billion in unpaid taxes .

at the time of that report , there was no requirement that contracting officers consider most instances of unpaid federal taxes prior to the award .

since as early as 2008 , under the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , certain prospective contractors have been required to report delinquent federal tax .

furthermore , since fiscal year 2015 , appropriations statutes have included a government - wide provision prohibiting federal agencies , under certain circumstances , from using appropriated funds to enter into contracts with corporations that have certain federal tax debts .

specifically , fiscal years 2015 and 2016 appropriations statutes contain a government - wide provision stating that funds may not be used to enter into a contract with any corporation that has any unpaid federal tax liability ( 1 ) that has been assessed , ( 2 ) for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed , and ( 3 ) that is not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax liability , when the awarding agency is aware of the unpaid tax liability , unless a federal agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and has made a determination that further action is not necessary to protect the interests of the government .

to implement the appropriations requirement and avoid misuse of appropriated funds , in 2016 the far was revised to require contracting officers to include a new tax debt – related provision in all solicitations regardless of contract value .

further , the revised regulation required that prospective contractors respond to this tax provision in the system for award management ( sam ) as part of their annual representations and certifications .

you asked us to review issues related to federal contractors and tax debt .

this report first examines the extent to which , in calendar years 2015 and 2016 , ( 1 ) selected federal agencies had control activities that ensured contractors' reported federal tax debts were considered before contract award .

the remainder of the report assesses the same period ; however , it focuses on all executive - branch agencies and examines the extent to which ( 2 ) federal contracts were awarded to contractors with federal tax debt , including the characteristics of those contracts and contractors , and ( 3 ) the irs identified selected federal contractors' payments for levy .

to identify the extent to which selected federal agencies had control activities that ensured contractors' reported federal tax debts were considered before contract award ( including task orders ) , we analyzed contract obligation information from the federal procurement data system – next generation ( fpds - ng ) and selected for our review the five agencies with the highest contract obligations associated with contract awards for 2015 and 2016 .

we selected this 2-year period because it included the most - recent contract award data available at the time of our review and covered a period in which the newest far tax - debt provision was implemented .

specifically , we selected the three civilian agencies with the highest obligations — the departments of energy ( doe ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) — and , within the department of defense , the two agencies with the highest obligations — the departments of the army and navy .

the results of our review of these five selected agencies are not generalizable to all federal agencies .

however , these five selected agencies awarded about 51 percent of contract obligations associated with contract awards for 2015 and 2016 .

we reviewed the selected agencies' policies and procedures related to awarding contracts to prospective contractors that report they owe certain tax debts and we met with agency officials to discuss how their agencies consider contractors' reported federal tax debt before awarding a federal contract .

specifically , we met with agency officials who supervise contracting officers , such as the head of contracting activity , director of contracts , or other contracting managers , policy and procurement officials , and suspension and debarment officials ( sdo ) from the selected agencies .

additionally , we reviewed and analyzed applicable laws , regulations , and policy memorandums , as well as applicable policies and procedures , from doe , hhs , va , the navy , and the army for considering contractors' reported federal tax debt when awarding federal contracts .

we interviewed officials from the office of management and budget's office of federal procurement policy , the interagency suspension and debarment committee , and the civilian agency acquisition council to obtain an understanding of how the law is implemented through the far .

we also met with the general services administration ( gsa ) to obtain an understanding of sam , including the registration of prospective contractors and their reporting of certain federal tax debt pursuant to the representation requirement of far § 52.209-11 and the certification requirement of § 52.209-5 .

as part of this work , we analyzed fpds - ng contract award and sam contractor registration data to identify instances where contractors reported having certain federal tax debt and received a contract award .

specifically , we electronically matched fpds - ng contract award data from 2015 and 2016 to the relevant contractors' sam registration .

we then analyzed the relevant contractors' representations and certifications most recently updated in sam before the relevant contract award to identify all instances where contractors reported that they had a federal tax debt as defined in far § 52.209-11 or § 52.209-5 within our time frame .

from the resulting list , we identified the contracts that selected agencies awarded to contractors that reported these federal tax debts .

in addition , we reviewed a nongeneralizable sample of 15 contract awards from the five selected agencies to provide illustrative examples of the extent to which these agencies' control activities ensured required actions were taken before contract award .

these 15 contract awards were selected based on numerous criteria , including the prospective contractors' ( 1 ) responses under far § 52.209-11 or § 52.209-5 in sam and ( 2 ) having tax debts as of december 15 , 2016 , that were not in a repayment agreement with the irs .

further , when selecting contract awards that had a § 52.209-5 certification we considered only contractors having at least $3,500 in tax debts as of december 15 , 2016 .

we reviewed seven contract awards made to contractors that reported that they had certain tax debts and eight contract awards made to contractors that reported that they did not have certain tax debts as part of their § 52.209-11 representations and § 52.209-5 certifications in sam .

for these 15 contract awards , we reviewed pre – contract award documentation and copies of historical tax transcripts and other records , such as revenue officers' notes obtained from the irs .

to determine the extent to which executive - branch agency contracts were awarded in 2015 and 2016 to federal contractors with federal tax debt and characteristics of those contract awards and contractors , we electronically matched data from fpds - ng on contract awards with ( 1 ) data from sam on contractors' representations and certifications of their tax debt and ( 2 ) data from the irs on tax debts owed by these contractors .

our analysis included all of the executive - branch agencies .

further , our analysis describes some characteristics of these debts , including the total amount of debt outstanding and whether or not contractors had unpaid taxes that were timely paid or appeared to be finally determined as of december 15 , 2016 , which was the time of our data extract .

we also analyzed whether contractors that were assessed unpaid taxes in the irs data reported having certain tax debts as part of their § 52.209-11 representations and § 52.209-5 certifications in sam .

we reviewed the most - recent § 52.209- 11 representation and § 52.209-5 certification prior to the relevant contract award .

to determine the extent to which the irs identified selected federal contractors' payments for levy in 2015 and 2016 , we identified the population of contractors that owed taxes at the time they received a contract award during our period by matching fpds - ng , sam , and irs unpaid assessment data , as described above .

we then determined whether the tax debt had ever been identified for levy by the federal payment levy program ( fplp ) as of december 15 , 2016 , according to irs data .

we also interviewed irs officials about levying federal contractor payments and reviewed internal revenue manual sections and other relevant documents from the irs .

we assessed the reliability of fpds - ng , sam , and irs unpaid assessment data by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials , and performing electronic testing to determine the validity of specific data elements in the databases and determined that these databases were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

for additional details on our scope and methods , see appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2017 to april 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the far , among other things , sets forth requirements that must be met before agencies can award contracts to prospective contractors .

beginning february 26 , 2016 , contracting officers are required to include a provision in all contract solicitations that require contractors to report information about unpaid federal taxes regardless of the contract value .

specifically , far § 52.209-11 incorporates the language from the fiscal years 2015 and 2016 appropriations acts that prohibits the government from entering into contracts with corporations with unpaid federal taxes that have been assessed , for which all judicial and administrative remedies have been exhausted or have lapsed , and that are not being paid in a timely manner pursuant to an agreement with the authority responsible for collecting the tax liability , where the awarding agency is aware of the unpaid tax liability , unless an agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and made a determination such action is not necessary to protect the interests of the government .

if the prospective contractor reports having unpaid federal taxes under this provision , the contracting officer must request additional information from the prospective contractor ; in accordance with agency procedures , notify the officials responsible for debarment and suspension actions , commonly referred to as the suspension and debarment officials ( sdo ) ; and not award to the corporation unless an agency sdo has considered suspension or debarment of the corporation and has made a determination that suspension or debarment is not necessary to protect the interests of the government .

additionally , the far requires that contracting officers include in certain contract solicitations another provision for prospective contractors to report delinquent taxes .

specifically , contracting officers are also required to include far § 52.209-5 in contract solicitations in which the contract value is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold , which was generally $150,000 at the time of our review , under which prospective contractors report delinquent federal taxes owed .

this requirement has been in place since 2008 .

under this provision , the prospective contractor must report whether it or any of its principals have , within the preceding 3-year period , been notified of “delinquent federal taxes” in an amount that exceeds $3,500 .

for purposes of this provision , “delinquent federal taxes” are those for which the tax liability is finally determined and assessed , with no pending administrative or judicial challenge , and all judicial appeal rights are exhausted ; and the taxpayer is delinquent in making payment , unless enforced collection action is precluded ( the taxpayer is not delinquent if the taxpayer has entered into an installment agreement and is making timely payments in compliance with the agreement terms ) .

if the prospective contractor reports having federal tax debt under this provision , the contracting officer must ( 1 ) request additional information from the prospective contractor and ( 2 ) in accordance with agency procedures notify the officials responsible for debarment and suspension actions .

further , the contracting officer is not required to receive a suspension and debarment determination before contract award for tax debt reported under this certification .

in addition , the far generally requires prospective contractors to register in sam before a contract can be awarded .

as part of registering in sam , prospective contractors must make up to 54 representations and certifications , which must be updated as necessary but at least annually .

included among these is the federal tax debt far § 52.209-11 representation and § 52.209-5 certification .

the representations and certifications in sam must be kept current , accurate , and complete .

unpaid federal tax debts reported under far § 52.209-11 and delinquent federal taxes reported under § 52.209-5 do not automatically disqualify the prospective contractor from receiving a contract , but rather are used as part of the contracting officer's responsibility determination of the prospective contractor .

contracting officers rely on the contractors' representations and certifications in sam to identify qualifying federal tax debts .

federal tax law generally prohibits the irs from disclosing taxpayer data to other federal agencies for the purpose of determining whether potential contractors owe qualifying federal tax debt .

as a result , contracting officers cannot verify a contractor's tax - debt status by obtaining taxpayer information directly from the irs without the contractor's prior consent .

in general , the federal pre – contract award process consists of the agency identifying its needs for goods and services , creating an acquisition plan , posting a solicitation that allows interested contractors to submit bids or proposals , and assessing and selecting a prospective contractor to meet its needs .

agency contracting personnel have a variety of pre – contract award responsibilities .

as one of these responsibilities , the contracting officer is to identify the far provisions and clauses required to be included in contract solicitations based on various criteria , such as the contract type and contract value .

for example , contracts expected to be above the simplified acquisition threshold are required to include § 52.209-5 in the solicitation .

after the solicitation is issued and prospective contractors' offers are obtained , the contracting officer , among other tasks , generally must verify that the prospective contractor is registered in sam , and that the contractor is not suspended or excluded from doing business with the federal government prior to contract award .

the contracting officer must also determine whether the prospective contractor is “responsible.” far § 9.104-1 requires that to be determined responsible , prospective contractors must have adequate financial resources to perform the contract , or the ability to obtain them ; have a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics ; and be otherwise qualified and eligible to receive an award under applicable laws and regulations , among other things .

as part of the responsibility determination , the contracting officer must also access , review , and document the prospective contractor's applicable representations and certifications , including qualifying federal tax debt reported under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 .

see figure 1 for an overview of the pre – contract award requirements related to tax debt .

the irs , which is located in the department of the treasury ( treasury ) and led by a commissioner , may collect assets or payments , including federal contract payments to collect unpaid taxes , and these collections are referred to as a “levy.” the irs will usually levy only after notifying the taxpayer in writing of the amount of the unpaid tax and the right of the taxpayer to request a hearing within a 30-day period before the levy occurs .

however , if the taxpayer is a federal contractor , the taxpayer is given the opportunity for the hearing within a reasonable period after the levy .

one way the irs levies federal contractor payments is through the fplp , which is an automated program that can collect overdue taxes through a continuous levy on certain federal payments processed by treasury's bureau of the fiscal service ( fiscal service ) .

in addition to the fplp , the irs can also levy federal contractors manually .

specifically , the irs may levy federal contractor payments directly from federal agencies to collect unpaid taxes .

the five selected agencies we examined have established control activities to varying degrees to help contracting officers comply with federal laws and regulations related to identifying prospective contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt .

these control activities include the following: class deviations: the five agencies issued class deviations from the far to implement the tax debt – related appropriations restriction prior to february 26 , 2016 .

these class deviations generally required contracting officers to include an alternative provision in solicitations and , if a contractor reported having qualifying tax debt , to not award the contract without a written suspension and debarment determination from an agency sdo .

for example , the department of defense , doe , hhs , and va issued class deviations as early as 2012 that required contracting officers to take two actions: ( 1 ) insert an alternate provision when issuing solicitations using appropriated funds and ( 2 ) obtain an sdo determination that suspension or debarment is not necessary to protect the interests of the government before awarding a contract to a contractor who reported qualifying tax debts .

policies and procedures: va , doe , and hhs issued policies and procedures to varying degrees that generally direct contracting officers to the relevant sections of the far when assessing contractor responsibility .

for example , both va and doe issued policies or guidance on determining contractor responsibility and including § 52.209-5 in solicitations where the value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold .

in addition , agency officials who supervise contracting officers told us that contracting officers use contractors' representations and certifications in sam to identify qualifying federal tax debts and document their review of the information when determining contractor responsibility before contract award .

for example , one of the navy's responsibility - determination templates requires contracting officers to notate that they verified , in sam , that the prospective contractor did not report qualifying federal tax debts under far § 52.209-5 .

further , the five agencies have also issued procedures outlining the sdo suspension and debarment referral and review process , as required by federal regulations .

for example , hhs issued guidance on suspension and debarment that includes ( 1 ) relevant contact information , ( 2 ) required or optional documentation to include , and ( 3 ) potential causes for suspension or debarment , such as the contractor reported qualifying federal tax debt .

both the army and navy issued policy alerts informing contracting officers of the february 26 , 2016 , effective date of far § 52.209-11 and the requirement that an sdo determine that suspension or debarment is not necessary to protect the interests of the government before awarding a contract to a contractor who reported having tax debts under this provision .

contract - file compliance tools: the five agencies told us that contracting officers have tools available that help ensure required information , including information related to federal tax debt , is reviewed and documented in contract files .

for example , contracting officer supervisors and policy officials at these agencies told us that contracting officers use agency contract - writing systems to assist with identifying and inserting required far provisions and clauses in the contract solicitation .

hhs and va contracting officer supervisors also told us contracting officers use contract - file checklists to ensure required far provisions and clauses are included in the contract solicitation .

in addition , some of the five selected agencies' contract - file checklists or memorandums we reviewed generally document that the contracting officer verified the prospective contractor's sam registration , and suspension and debarment status , and retrieved the relevant sam representations and certifications before contract award .

further , some va and doe contract checklists we reviewed also document that the contracting officer considered tax debts reported under § 52.209-5 or federal tax debt in general ( see fig .

2 ) .

periodic compliance reviews of samples of contracts: the five agencies' policy officials and contracting officer supervisors we interviewed told us they generally conduct compliance reviews on a sample of contract files before and after contract award to ensure that the required far provisions and clauses are inserted in contract solicitations , including peer - to - peer , management , and legal compliance reviews .

agency officials also told us this includes verifying that the contracting officer considered and documented the prospective contractors' sam representations and certifications before contract award .

for example , the army's procurement management review program is designed to ensure regulatory and policy compliance , among other things , via oversight by a multilevel program that reviews each contracting activity every 3 years .

training: doe and va provide training that generally discusses contractor responsibility determinations and references the requirement that contracting officers inform the sdo when prospective contractors report that they have qualifying federal tax debt before contract award .

the department of defense provides training on the causes for suspension , and the navy sdo also provides training discussing the requirement to notify the sdo when prospective contractors report qualifying federal tax debt .

hhs suspension and debarment staff we interviewed told us that they provide general suspension and debarment training that includes causes for suspension and debarment referrals , such as tax debt .

further , one navy contracting office also provides training on inserting the tax - debt provision in all contract solicitations .

we identified 1,849 contracts awarded by the five selected agencies in 2015 and 2016 to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt that potentially should have resulted in these agencies taking required follow - up actions before contract award , such as notifying the agency sdo of these tax debts .

specifically , according to our analysis of fpds - ng and sam data for this period , the five selected agencies potentially should have notified an sdo prior to awarding 1,849 contracts to contractors that reported having qualifying federal tax debt under their § 52.209-11 representation or § 52.209-5 certification , which we discuss further below .

however , none of the five selected agencies' sdos we interviewed were notified of any instances in which a contracting officer identified a prospective contractor with these reported qualifying federal tax debts , and they did not receive any tax debt - related referrals within this period .

agency officials we interviewed were unable to explain why the sdos were not notified without reviewing each of the 1,849 contract files .

because referrals were not made to an sdo before awarding the contract , agencies' control activities do not appear to have operated effectively to identify contractors' reported tax debt and to consider suspension and debarment when required .

as a result , these contracts may have been awarded without required actions being taken — a potential violation of federal regulations and , in some cases , the antideficiency act .

in addition , we reviewed a nongeneralizable sample of seven contracts where prospective contractors reported qualifying tax debts before receiving contract awards and identified two illustrative examples where agency control activities did not ensure regulatory compliance .

the tax debts for these contractors were collectively more than $250,000 , and historical irs tax records include instances where the irs had assessed a trust fund recovery penalty ( tfrp ) , indicating willful failure to collect , account for , or pay taxes owed .

nonetheless , the contracting officers awarded these two contracts without taking required follow - up actions for these awards .

these contractors were awarded more than $510,000 in contract obligations in total , in 2015 and 2016 .

in our analysis of the five selected agencies , we identified 143 contracts at four of the agencies that were awarded to contractors who reported qualifying federal tax debt in sam under § 52.209-11 from february 26 , 2016 , through december 31 , 2016 .

table 1 shows the number of contract awards to contractors who reported qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 from february 26 , 2016 , through december 31 , 2016 , by selected agency .

we did not identify contracts awarded by doe during this period to similar contractors , and thus did not assess the operational effectiveness of the agency's controls activities for compliance with its relevant class deviation .

however , none of the four agencies that awarded these 143 contracts took required follow - up actions that potentially should have resulted from the contractor's reporting qualifying tax debt before contract award .

as mentioned earlier , when prospective contractors report having qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 , the far requires that contracting officers ( 1 ) request that the contractor provide such additional information as the contractor deems necessary in order to demonstrate responsibility ; ( 2 ) notify , in accordance with agency procedures , the sdo of the contractor's reported qualifying federal tax debt , before award , for suspension and debarment review ; and ( 3 ) not award the contract unless an sdo determines that further action is not required to protect the interest of the government .

the far also requires that contracting officers possess or obtain information sufficient to determine whether the prospective contractor is responsible .

as mentioned above , qualifying federal tax debts reported under this representation do not automatically disqualify the prospective contractor from receiving a contract , but rather are used as part of the contracting officer's responsibility determination of the prospective contractor .

in our review of contract - file documentation for seven contract awards to contractors that reported they had qualifying tax debt under either provision , we could determine for one case under this representation that the contracting officer did not take required follow - up actions to ensure compliance with federal regulations .

we highlight this example in the sidebar to the left .

agency contracting officer supervisors we interviewed from the four selected agencies that awarded the 143 contracts discussed earlier told us that they were not aware of any instances in which a contracting officer identified a prospective contractor's reported qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 and notified the sdo during this period .

as mentioned , the sdos we interviewed at these four agencies told us that they did not receive , nor were they aware of , any notifications to review prospective contractors that reported having qualifying federal tax debt during this period .

all four of these sdos told us that they track notifications to the sdo manually or via a case - management tracking system .

further , none of the agency officials we interviewed at the selected agencies were able to identify specific reasons a contracting officer would not notify an sdo of reported qualifying federal tax debt as required .

our analysis of the five selected agencies also identified 1,706 contracts awarded in 2015 and 2016 to contractors that reported having qualifying federal tax debt in sam under § 52.209-5 .

table 2 shows the number of contract awards to contractors that reported having qualifying tax debt under § 52.209-5 in 2015 and 2016 , by selected agency .

however , none of the five agencies that awarded these 1,706 contracts took required follow - up actions that potentially should have resulted from the contractor's reporting qualifying tax debt before contract award .

as mentioned above , as early as 2008 , contractors were required to certify whether they had qualifying federal tax debt if , within the preceding 3-year period , they or any of their principals had been notified of “delinquent federal taxes” in an amount that exceeds $3,500 for which the liability remained unsatisfied .

also as previously mentioned , tax debts must only be reported under this provision if the tax liability is finally determined with no pending administrative or judicial challenge , all judicial appeal rights have been exhausted , enforcement action is not precluded , and the taxpayer is not in compliance with an installment repayment agreement .

qualifying federal tax debts reported under this certification do not automatically disqualify the prospective contractor from receiving a contract , but rather are used as part of the contracting officer's responsibility determination .

further , contracting officers are to insert this far provision in solicitations where the value of the contract is expected to be greater than the simplified acquisition threshold .

if a prospective contractor reports qualifying tax debt , contracting officers must request such additional information as the contractor deems necessary in order to demonstrate responsibility , and , prior to proceeding with the award , notify the agency's sdo in accordance with agency procedures .

while we cannot readily determine whether all 1,706 contract awards were out of compliance with federal regulations due to limitations in the data , as discussed earlier , our review of seven contract awards with reported qualifying tax debt under either provision identified an instance under this certification where we confirmed that the solicitation was above the simplified acquisition threshold and the contracting officer did not take follow - up actions to ensure compliance with federal regulations ( see sidebar to the left ) .

as mentioned , agency contracting officer supervisors we interviewed from the five agencies told us that they were not aware of any instances in which a contracting officer identified a prospective contractor's reporting qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-5 and notified the sdo during this period .

further , sdos we interviewed at these five agencies told us that they did not receive , nor were they aware of , any notifications identifying prospective contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under this far provision during this period .

as mentioned earlier , four out of the five sdos told us that they track sdo notifications , and none of the agency officials we interviewed identified specific reasons a contracting officer would not notify an sdo as required .

when discussing these 1,849 contracts with agency officials , they were unable to explain whether or why their control activities did not operate effectively to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations .

to do so , some of these officials told us that they would need to review the contract files for each of the 1,849 instances of potential noncompliance we identified .

specifically , the agency must confirm that ( 1 ) a solicitation was issued , and ( 2 ) the estimated value of the contract award was above the simplified acquisition threshold , when applicable , to determine whether the regulatory requirements applied .

if the regulatory requirement applied to the contract award , the agency must then determine why their control activities did not operate effectively to ensure compliance .

we plan to refer these contract awards to the appropriate agency's inspector general for review , and share them with the agencies at that time as well .

understanding why existing control activities potentially did not operate effectively will help these agencies ensure they are taking necessary steps to protect the interests of the government and avoid the misuse of appropriated funds in the future .

the five selected agencies told us , in response to our review , they plan to take actions to improve control activities to identify contractors' federal tax debts reported under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 .

these planned actions include issuing new guidance , providing additional training , verifying that contracting officers considered reported tax debts in postaward compliance reviews , and updating preaward contract - file checklists to ensure compliance with federal laws and regulations .

some of the selected agencies also noted that the far requirements apply to all executive agencies and that a broader solution to accessing , identifying , and reviewing qualifying federal tax debt reported in sam representations and certifications could be useful .

agency officials explained that contracting officers have to individually identify and review each relevant representation and certification — up to 54 representations and certifications — to become aware of the prospective contractor's response before contract award .

further , agency officials told us that contractors' responses are not easily identifiable in sam and contracting officers can miss the contractor's reported qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 .

as mentioned earlier , accessing , reviewing and documenting the sam representations and certifications is one part of the preaward contracting process and is one of the actions contracting officers are required to take as part of the contract award process .

the sam tax - related representations and certifications that must be reviewed before contract award are determined by various factors , including contract award value .

see figure 3 for an overview of the general process to access , review , and identify prospective contractors' qualifying tax debts reported in sam .

as mentioned earlier , gsa manages sam , and while the gsa official we interviewed acknowledged the challenges raised by the selected agencies , this official noted that sam representation and certification data are accessible to contracting officers for the purpose of reviewing qualifying federal tax debt reported by prospective contractors and taking any required follow - up actions .

nevertheless , this official noted that gsa is in the process of upgrading sam , which may include changes to the representations and certifications .

standards for internal control in the federal government state that management should use high - quality information to achieve its objectives and that management should consider the accessibility of information and make revisions when necessary so that the necessary information is accessible .

as gsa makes planned upgrades to sam , it is in a position to consider improvements to sam users' experience with representations and certifications that may help executive - branch agency contracting officers more easily identify contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 .

of the 120,000 federal contractors that were awarded contracts in 2015 and 2016 , our analysis found that over 4,600 of them had unpaid taxes at the time they received the award .

these contractors collectively owed $1.8 billion in unpaid taxes as of december 15 , 2016 , and received contract award obligations totaling $17 billion .

we could not confirm , however , whether at the time of the contract awards these contractors' unpaid taxes met the relevant legal definitions of qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 due to limitations in the data .

however , we were able to determine which debts likely met the definition of qualifying tax debt , and to determine those that did not meet the definition , as of december 15 , 2016 — a date after the contract award .

specifically , over 2,700 of these contractors had unpaid taxes that were all likely qualifying federal tax debt as of december 15 , 2016 .

in addition , about 1,900 had unpaid taxes that were not qualifying federal tax debt .

as previously noted , agencies are required by the far to consider contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt before awarding contracts .

generally , as mentioned earlier , agencies are not restricted from awarding contracts to contractors that report having qualifying federal tax debt if an agency sdo determines suspension and debarment of the contractor is not necessary to protect the interests of the government .

we describe characteristics of the unpaid taxes and contract awards for these 4,600 contractors with unpaid taxes below .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

we identified over 4,600 federal contractors that had unpaid taxes at the time they received a contract award in 2015 and 2016 .

however , we could not confirm whether these contractors' unpaid taxes met the relevant legal definitions under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 at the time of the contract award due to limitations in the data we obtained , as previously described .

these 4,600 contractors received about $17 billion in contract awards and owed $1.8 billion in unpaid taxes as of december 15 , 2016 .

the characteristics of these 4,600 federal contractors with unpaid taxes in december 15 , 2016 , are discussed below: average and total debt associated with contractors with unpaid taxes: about 1,000 contractors had unpaid taxes of at least $51,000 each .

these contractors collectively owed about 98 percent of the $1.8 billion in unpaid taxes we identified .

about 1,900 contractors each had unpaid taxes between $3,500 and $51,000 .

they collectively owed about $30 million in taxes .

about 1,700 contractors each had unpaid taxes over $100 but less than $3,500 .

they collectively owed about $2 million in taxes .

chief financial officers ( cfo ) act agencies associated with contractors with unpaid taxes: the 4,600 contractors with unpaid taxes as of december 15 , 2016 , received contract awards in our 2- year period from one or more of all 24 cfo act agencies .

almost 1,500 contractors received contract awards from more than one agency .

these contractors owed almost $600 million in unpaid taxes as of december 15 , 2016 ( see sidebar to the left ) .

although , as discussed above , we reviewed the control activities of five agencies , all executive - branch agencies are required by the far to consider the qualifying federal tax debt of prospective contractors before making an award .

if a contractor is receiving awards from multiple federal agencies , the suspension and debarment determination of any agency sdo is relevant to other agencies considering the same contractor for an award .

for example , as discussed earlier , we identified 1,849 contract awards by five selected agencies to contractors that reported qualifying tax debt before contract award , and none of these agency sdos were notified .

there were some instances where more than one agency made a contract award to the same contractor that reported having qualifying tax debts .

these obligations might not have been made by multiple agencies if one of these agencies' sdos had been notified of the reported tax debt as required .

contractors with unpaid taxes and associated with tfrp: we also identified about 600 contractors whose tax records indicate the irs assessed a tfrp to the owner or officers associated with the contractor , as shown in the sidebar to the left .

as mentioned previously , a tfrp indicates willful failure to collect , account for , or pay certain taxes owed .

these 600 contractors had $200 million in unpaid taxes in december 2016 .

having a tfrp does not disqualify a contractor from obtaining a contract , but it can be considered when the agency determines a prospective contractor's responsibility under the far , according to agency contracting and suspension and debarment officials ( sdo ) we spoke with .

we found that over 2,700 contractors owed about $350 million in unpaid taxes that likely met the relevant legal criteria for qualifying federal tax debt on december 15 , 2016 .

however , few of those contractors reported having qualifying tax debts in sam .

because the contracts were awarded before december 2016 , we cannot determine whether these unpaid taxes met the relevant legal criteria under § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 for qualifying federal tax debt at the time of the contract award .

however , because these tax debts were unpaid as of december 15 , 2016 , we determined they were likely qualifying tax debts because they were not being timely paid consistent with a collection agreement and appeared to be finally determined .

these tax debts amounted to about 20 percent of the $1.8 billion in unpaid taxes we identified .

the 2,700 contractors received almost $5 billion of the $17 billion in federal contract obligations for awards made to contractors with unpaid taxes .

we examined the sam § 52.209-11 representations and § 52.209-5 certifications for these over 2,700 contractors to determine whether they reported this debt as qualifying federal tax debt .

we identified about 2,000 contractors that had completed a representation or certification , and , when applicable , met the tax - debt threshold for § 52.209-5 .

of those 2,000 , 93 percent ( 1,848 ) did not report their debt as qualifying federal tax debt , compared to fewer than 150 who did report qualifying federal tax debt under one or both tax - debt provisions ( see sidebar to the left ) .

specifically: over 1,300 contractors completed the § 52.209-11 representation in sam ( which took effect on feb. 26 , 2016 ) , and less than two dozen of these contractors reported having qualifying federal tax debt under § 52.209-11 before receiving contract awards .

nearly 1,400 contractors completed the § 52.209-5 certification in sam and as of december 15 , 2016 , had unpaid taxes over the certification threshold .

fewer than 140 of these contractors reported under § 52.209-5 that they had been notified of qualifying federal tax debt above $3,500 before receiving a contract award .

the accuracy of contractors' reported tax - debt status in sam is critical to federal agencies' ability to identify reported qualifying federal tax debt owed by prospective contractors .

as described earlier , contracting officers generally rely on the contractors' representations and certifications in sam to identify qualifying federal tax debts .

contracting officers generally cannot verify a contractor's tax - debt status by obtaining taxpayer information directly from the irs without the contractor's prior consent , because federal tax law generally prohibits the irs from disclosing taxpayer data for this purpose .

while contracting officers cannot independently verify whether federal contractors accurately report qualifying federal tax debt , any qualifying federal tax debt may be available for levy by the irs , as discussed further below .

we found that about 1,900 contractors had about $1.4 billion in unpaid taxes that did not meet the relevant criteria for qualifying federal tax debt on december 15 , 2016 , a date after which their contracts were awarded .

specifically , these unpaid taxes were not finally determined or were being paid in a timely manner consistent with a collection agreement as of december 15 , 2016 .

if the status of these debts was the same at the time of contract award , then the contractors did not need to report them during the contracting process and agencies were not required to consider the debts before awarding the contract .

although we were able to determine that these unpaid taxes did not meet the legal definitions of qualifying federal tax debt as of december 15 , 2016 , we could not determine whether this was also the case at the time of the contract award .

federal agencies obligated $12 billion to these 1,900 contractors between 2015 and 2016 , for awards made while the contractors owed taxes .

of these 1,900 contractors , about 1,400 owed $1.3 billion in unpaid taxes that were not finally determined on december 15 , 2016 .

about 700 contractors owed $90 million in unpaid taxes that were being timely paid consistent with a collection agreement in december 15 , 2016 , due to installment agreements or offers - in - compromise accepted by the irs .

through its fplp , the irs identified for levy most contractors we found to have likely qualifying federal tax debt , according to our analysis of irs data .

specifically , of the over 2,700 executive - branch agency contractors with likely qualifying federal tax debt as of december 15 , 2016 , discussed above , the irs identified over 2,000 for levy through the fplp , a program administered by treasury's fiscal service .

these 2,000 contractors collectively owed about $300 million of the roughly $350 million in likely qualifying federal tax debt .

according to irs data , the fplp did not identify almost 700 of the 2,700 contractors we found to have likely qualifying federal tax debt as of december 15 , 2016 .

these 700 contractors owed about $50 million in likely qualifying federal taxes .

irs officials responsible for the fplp told us that they would need to review these instances to determine whether the contractors were eligible for levy as of december 15 , 2016 , and if so why they were not identified by the fplp .

we plan to share these cases with the irs to determine whether the contractors were eligible for levy at that time and take any appropriate enforcement action .

it is possible that the irs did not identify these 700 contractors for levy through the fplp because the irs did not have access to their payments .

the fplp was developed as an automatic and efficient means for the irs to collect delinquent taxes as payments were processed through the fiscal service .

accordingly , the fplp can only levy federal agency payments processed by the fiscal service , but not all federal agencies process their payments through the fiscal service .

as a result , payments disbursed by other means — such as payments that agencies make directly to contractors — are not included in the fplp , although they can be levied by the irs through other manual methods ( see fig .

5 ) .

the irs cannot readily identify which payments are made outside of the fiscal service , and such payments cannot be levied through the fplp .

while the irs receives some information about contractor payments from agencies , it does not receive information that would allow it to comprehensively determine which payments are processed by the fiscal service and can be levied through the fplp and which payments are not and must be levied manually .

specifically , executive - branch agencies , including those that do and do not process payments through the fiscal service , are required to report information to the irs about some federal contracts through the irs form 8596 information return .

reporting agencies identify themselves on the form 8596 , and the irs uses data from this form to identify federal contractors for potential levy .

however , the form 8596 information return lacks information on whether payments to federal contractors are processed by the fiscal service or through some other means .

without visibility into the payments made outside the fiscal service , the irs is limited in its ability to identify nonparticipating agencies for outreach about the efficiencies of leveraging the fplp to collect contractors' unpaid taxes , as opposed to manual levies .

further , without information on agencies' payment methods , the irs cannot quickly identify payments that must be levied through manual methods .

expanding form 8596 to include payment - method information could help the irs identify which agencies to target for outreach and avoid delays in identifying contractor payments requiring manual levy .

irs officials told us the irs has the legal authority to expand form 8596 reporting requirements and would have to determine whether a change to add information on fiscal service processing of agency payments was warranted .

in addition , we found the irs is missing an opportunity to further enhance the fplp levy process for certain contractor payments .

within the fplp , the irs has an expedited process to levy federal contractors and , as noted above , the irs uses data from form 8596 to identify federal contractors for potential levy .

however , form 8596 reporting requirements do not apply to federal contracts for which the amount obligated is $25,000 or less .

when form 8596 reporting requirements were initially established , this threshold was consistent with federal procurement data system ( fpds ) contract reporting requirements for agencies at the time .

however , subsequent far amendments revised the reporting threshold from contracts over $25,000 to contracts over the micropurchase amount , which is currently set at $10,000 .

because the form 8596 reporting threshold is higher than fpds reporting requirements , information about contracts in the $10,000 to $25,000 range is available in fpds , but is not required to be shared with the irs .

such information could help the irs identify and use expedited levy procedures on federal contractors with contract obligations in the $10,000 – $25,000 range .

according to the irs , an amendment to its regulations would be needed to align the form 8596 reporting threshold with fpds reporting requirements .

standards for internal control in the federal government state that management should use high - quality information to achieve the entity's objectives .

to do this , management obtains relevant data from reliable internal and external sources , processes the obtained data into high - quality information , and uses high - quality information to make informed decisions and evaluate the entity's performance in achieving key objectives .

without additional information about and from the agencies making these payments , the irs may be missing opportunities to identify federal contractors for levy to enhance tax collections .

considering prospective contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt — in accordance with federal regulations — helps ensure federal agencies comply with federal appropriations law , supports the integrity of the contracting process , and protects the interests of the government .

the five federal agencies we reviewed had control activities , such as policies , procedures , and training , to help ensure contracting officers consider prospective contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt before making an award .

however , these controls were not always effective in ensuring that potentially required actions were taken .

determining the reasons the contracts we identified were awarded without appropriate consideration of contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt and taking additional steps to ensure tax debts are appropriately considered in future contract award decisions is necessary to ensure contracting opportunities are appropriately awarded .

improving accessibility of sam representation and certification data to allow contracting officers to more easily identify and consider reported qualifying federal tax debt before contract award can help contracting officers meet required steps , such as referring them to the sdo .

federal tax law generally prohibits the irs from disclosing taxpayer data to other federal agencies for the purpose of determining whether potential contractors owe qualifying federal tax debt .

consequently , federal agencies generally rely on contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debt to detect any tax debt owed by their potential contractors .

however , agencies cannot independently verify the accuracy of contractors' reported qualifying federal tax debts when awarding contracts .

this limitation heightens the importance of the irs's levy process for recouping revenue from businesses that have failed to pay their taxes in a timely way but are receiving federal contract dollars , and the recoupment of revenue can help reduce the tax gap .

accordingly , the irs has opportunities to use available data to improve its detection and collection of qualifying federal tax debts owed by federal contractors , which can help enhance revenue collection and compliance .

we are making 12 recommendations — two each to the army , hhs , the navy , and va ; one each to doe and gsa ; and two to the irs .

the senior procurement executive for the department of the army should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-11 and ( 1 ) determine whether the contracting officer was required to consider the contractor's reported tax debt ; if so , ( 2 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and refer these contractors to the sdo before contract award did not operate effectively ; and ( 3 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 1 ) the senior procurement executive for hhs should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-11 and ( 1 ) determine whether the contracting officer was required to consider the contractor's reported tax debt ; if so , ( 2 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and refer these contractors to the sdo before contract award did not operate effectively ; and ( 3 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 2 ) the senior procurement executive for the department of the navy should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-11 and ( 1 ) determine whether the contracting officer was required to consider the contractor's reported tax debt ; if so , ( 2 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and refer these contractors to the sdo before contract award did not operate effectively ; and ( 3 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 3 ) the senior procurement executive for va should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-11 and ( 1 ) determine whether the contracting officer was required to consider the contractor's reported tax debt ; if so , ( 2 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and refer these contractors to the sdo before contract award did not operate effectively ; and ( 3 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 4 ) the senior procurement executive for the department of the army should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-5 .

specifically , the senior procurement executive should determine whether each contract value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold when the solicitation was issued and , if so , ( 1 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and notify the sdo of these contractors before contract award did not operate effectively and ( 2 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 5 ) the senior procurement executive for doe should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-5 .

specifically , the senior procurement executive should determine whether each contract value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold when the solicitation was issued and , if so , ( 1 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and notify the sdo of these contractors before contract award did not operate effectively and ( 2 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 6 ) the senior procurement executive for hhs should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-5 .

specifically , the senior procurement executive should determine whether each contract value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold when the solicitation was issued and , if so , ( 1 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and notify the sdo of these contractors before contract award did not operate effectively and ( 2 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 7 ) the senior procurement executive for the department of the navy should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-5 .

specifically , the senior procurement executive should determine whether each contract value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold when the solicitation was issued and , if so , ( 1 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and notify the sdo of these contractors before contract award did not operate effectively and ( 2 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 8 ) the senior procurement executive for va should review the contracts we identified as being awarded to contractors that reported qualifying federal tax debt under far § 52.209-5 .

specifically , the senior procurement executive should determine whether each contract value was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold when the solicitation was issued and , if so , ( 1 ) determine the reasons controls to identify and notify the sdo of these contractors before contract award did not operate effectively and ( 2 ) design or modify controls to help ensure compliance with applicable regulations .

 ( recommendation 9 ) the administrator of gsa should coordinate with the appropriate sam users , such as agency procurement officials , to identify potential updates to facilitate contracting officers' identification of contractors that report qualifying federal tax debt under the § 52.209-11 representation and § 52.209-5 certification .

 ( recommendation 10 ) the commissioner of the irs should evaluate options to identify which contract payments federal agencies expect to be processed by the fiscal service , including amending the reporting requirements for form 8596 to require federal agencies to include information about whether contractor payments are expected to be processed by the fiscal service .

if the irs amends form 8596 reporting requirements , the irs should ( 1 ) systematically note this information on taxpayer accounts to help the irs identify which payments may be available for levy through the fplp and which payments may be available for other ( i.e. , manual ) levies and ( 2 ) analyze these data to help identify agencies that do not participate in the fplp and inform its efforts to expand the number of agencies participating in the fplp .

 ( recommendation 11 ) the commissioner of the irs should evaluate options to obtain comprehensive contract payment data above the existing fpds - ng reporting threshold of $10,000 , including assessing the costs and benefits of changing the current threshold for contracts that agencies are required to report to the irs through form 8596 information returns to be consistent with the existing reporting threshold for fpds - ng , determine whether regulatory revisions are necessary , and change the reporting threshold , if appropriate .

 ( recommendation 12 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense ( for the army and navy ) , hhs , va , doe , gsa , the irs and the office of management and budget for review and comment .

in written comments ( reproduced in appendixes ii – vi ) , the department of defense , hhs , va , doe , and gsa agreed with our recommendations .

the irs generally agreed with our recommendations ( see appendix vii ) .

the office of management and budget had no comments .

hhs and the navy provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

the department of defense , hhs , va , and doe noted that they plan to review the contract awards identified in our review .

in addition , several agencies described steps they will be taking to address our recommendations .

for example , the department of defense noted that it plans to take corrective actions or add controls as necessary .

hhs noted that it will assess internal controls and take appropriate action .

va noted that it will provide an action plan .

doe noted that it will design or modify controls for regulatory compliance , if necessary .

gsa noted that it will work with the procurement community through established governance channels to identify potential approaches for drawing contracting officers' attention to qualifying federal tax - debt information reported in sam .

the irs noted its commitment to obtaining accurate information on potential levy sources and , accordingly , indicated it will review the benefits of expanding the information included on its form 8596 , along with other alternatives , to determine their feasibility , effectiveness , and relative burden .

the irs further noted that it will review the potential benefits and costs that would result from changing the current reporting threshold for contract payments , and submit its findings to the office of irs chief counsel to consider this addition to the irs priority guidance plan .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , the secretary of veterans affairs , the secretary of defense , the secretary of the navy , the secretary of the army , the secretary of energy , the administrator of gsa , the commissioner of internal revenue , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or shear@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix viii .

this report first examines the extent to which , in calendar years 2015 and 2016 , ( 1 ) selected federal agencies had control activities that ensured contractors' reported federal tax debts were considered before contract award .

the remainder of the report assesses the same period ; however , it focuses on all executive - branch agencies and examines the extent to which ( 2 ) federal contracts were awarded to contractors with federal tax debt , including the characteristics of those contracts and contractors , and ( 3 ) the internal revenue service ( irs ) identified selected federal contractors' payments for levy .

to identify the extent to which selected federal agencies had control activities that ensured contractors' reported federal tax debts were considered before contract award ( including task orders ) , we analyzed contract obligation information from the federal procurement data system – next generation ( fpds - ng ) and selected for our review the five agencies with the highest contract obligations associated with contract awards for 2015 and 2016 , which is the period when contract award data were available at the time of our review .

in addition , the revised far tax - debt provision went into effect during this period .

specifically , we selected the three civilian agencies with the highest obligations — the departments of energy ( doe ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) — and , within the department of defense , the two agencies with the highest obligations — the departments of the army and navy .

the results of our review of these five selected agencies are not generalizable to all federal agencies .

however , these five selected agencies awarded about 51 percent of contract obligations associated with contract awards for 2015 and 2016 , which were the most - recent contract award data available at the time of our review , and during this period the newest federal acquisition regulation ( far ) tax - debt provision was implemented .

we reviewed selected agencies' policies and procedures related to awarding contracts to prospective contractors that report they owe certain tax debts and met with agency officials to discuss how their agencies consider contractors' reported federal tax debt before awarding a federal contract .

specifically , we met with agency officials who supervise contracting officers , such as the head of contracting activity , director of contracts , or other contracting managers , policy and procurement officials , and suspension and debarment officials from the selected agencies .

additionally , we reviewed and analyzed applicable laws and regulations , as well as applicable policies and procedures from doe , hhs , va , the navy , and the army for considering contractors' reported federal tax debt when awarding federal contracts .

in addition , we interviewed staff from the office of management and budget's office of federal procurement policy and officials from the interagency suspension and debarment committee , and the civilian agency acquisition council to obtain an understanding of how the law is implemented through the far .

we also met with the general services administration ( gsa ) to obtain an understanding of the system for award management ( sam ) , including the registration of prospective contractors and their reporting of certain federal tax debt to the representation requirement of far § 52.209-11 and the certification of § 52.209-5 .

as part of this work , we analyzed fpds - ng contract award and sam contractor registration data to identify instances where contractors reported having certain qualifying federal tax debt and received a contract award ( including task orders ) .

specifically , we electronically matched fpds - ng contract award data from 2015 and 2016 to the relevant contractors' sam registration .

we then analyzed the relevant contractors' representations and certifications most recently updated in sam before the relevant contract award to identify all instances where contractors reported that they had a federal tax debt as defined in far § 52.209-11 or § 52.209-5 within our time frame .

from the resulting list , we identified the contracts that selected agencies awarded to contractors that reported these qualifying federal tax debts .

in addition , we reviewed a nongeneralizable sample of 15 contract awards selected from the five selected agencies to provide illustrative examples of the extent to which these agencies' control activities ensured required actions were taken before contract award .

these 15 contract awards were selected based on numerous criteria , including the prospective contractors' ( 1 ) responses under far § 52.209-11 or § 52.209-5 in sam before the new contract award , and ( 2 ) having tax debts as of december 15 , 2016 , that were not in a repayment agreement with the irs .

further , when selecting contract awards that had a § 52.209-5 certification , we considered only contractors having at least $3,500 in tax debts as of december 15 , 2016 .

we identified the relevant contractor population and then considered the following factors simultaneously to select the 15 case examples: unique contractor taxpayer identification number across selected agency contracting office locations , the amount of tax debt owed by the prospective contractor , the amount of award obligations , and irs assessment of a trust fund recovery penalty ( tfrp ) .

we selected case examples that represent a variety of these factors .

we reviewed seven contract awards made to contractors that reported that they had certain tax debts and eight contract awards made to contractors that reported that they did not have certain tax debts as part of their § 52.209-11 representations and § 52.209-5 certifications in sam .

for these 15 contract awards , we reviewed pre – contract award documentation , which included tax debt – related representations and certifications retrieved by the selected agencies from sam , and copies of historical tax transcripts and other records , such as revenue officers' notes obtained from the irs .

for the case examples presented in this report , we rounded tax debt and contract obligation amounts , did not identify the awarding agency , and did not meet with awarding agency officials to discuss each contract award to protect sensitive taxpayer information .

to determine the extent to which executive - branch agency contracts were awarded in 2015 and 2016 to federal contractors with federal tax debt , and characteristics of those contract awards and contractors , we electronically matched data from fpds - ng on contract awards ( including task orders ) for all executive agencies with ( 1 ) data from sam on contractors' representations and certifications of their tax debt , and ( 2 ) data from the irs on tax debts owed by these contractors .

specifically , we used the data universal numbering system number to match data from fpds - ng with contractor registration data from sam to obtain additional information on these contractors , such as the contractors' taxpayer identification numbers and their representations and certifications of tax debt .

using the contractor taxpayer identification number from sam , we then matched our list of contractors with irs data to identify our population of contractors that received a contract award and had unpaid federal tax debts .

our analysis included all of the executive - branch agencies .

further , our analysis describes some of characteristics of these debts , including the total amount of unpaid taxes , whether the contractors had a tfrp , and whether or not contractors had unpaid taxes that were timely paid or appeared to be finally determined , as of december 15 , 2016 , which was the time of our data extract .

we also analyzed whether contractors that were assessed unpaid taxes in the irs data reported having certain tax debts as part of their § 52.209- 11 representations and § 52.209-5 certifications in sam .

we reviewed the most - recent § 52.209-11 representation and § 52.209-5 certification prior to the relevant contract award .

our analysis may understate the population of contractors with tax debt to the extent that contractors repaid their tax debts before the timing of our data extract .

specifically , our analysis does not include any contractors that may have owed federal taxes at the time of a new contract award during this period , but that paid or otherwise resolved their tax debts before december 15 , 2016 .

additionally , our analysis focuses on contract awards made in 2015 and 2016 , and not contract modifications made during this period .

in 2015 and 2016 , federal agencies obligated $400 billion in modifications to contracts made in 2014 or earlier , almost half of all federal contract obligations in this period .

we identify contractors who potentially may have had federal tax debt meeting the definitions of tax debt under far § 52.209-11 and § 52.209-5 before the contract award , but cannot verify whether that was the case .

to determine the extent to which the irs identified selected federal contractors' payments made for levy in 2015 and 2016 , we identified the population of contractors that owed taxes at the same time they received a contract award during our period by matching fpds - ng , sam , and irs unpaid assessment data , as described above .

we then determined whether the tax debt had ever been levied or blocked by the federal payment levy program ( fplp ) as of december 15 , 2016 , according to irs data .

we also interviewed irs officials about levying federal contractor payments and reviewed internal revenue manual sections and other relevant documents from the irs .

we assessed the reliability of fpds - ng , sam , and irs unpaid assessment data by reviewing relevant documentation , interviewing knowledgeable agency officials , and performing electronic testing to determine the validity of specific data elements in the databases .

we determined that these databases were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

in additional to the individual named above , jonathon oldmixon ( assistant director ) , gloria proa ( analyst - in - charge ) , jennifer felder , and albert sim made significant contributions to this report .

also contributing to this report were scott hiromoto , barbara lewis , heather miller , james murphy , and elizabeth wood .

