thank you for the opportunity to discuss our ongoing work on the f - 35 joint strike fighter ( f - 35 ) , also known as the lightning ii .

with estimated acquisition costs approaching $400 billion , the f - 35 is the department of defense's ( dod ) most costly acquisition program .

through this program , dod is developing and fielding a family of strike fighter aircraft , integrating low observable ( stealth ) technologies with advanced sensors and computer networking capabilities for the united states air force , navy , and marine corps , as well as eight international partners .

the f - 35 family is comprised of the f - 35a conventional takeoff and landing variant , the f - 35b short takeoff and vertical landing variant , and the f - 35c carrier - suitable variant .

over time , the program has made a number of changes affecting the planned quantities and associated costs .

according to current projections , the u.s. portion of the program will require acquisition funding of $12.7 billion a year , on average , from now through 2038 to complete development and procurement of 2,457 aircraft .

dod also estimates that the f - 35 fleet will cost around $1 trillion to operate and support over its lifetime , which poses significant long - term affordability challenges for the department .

as we have previously reported , the f - 35 program's significant cost , schedule , and performance problems can largely be traced to ( 1 ) decisions made at key junctures without adequate product knowledge ; and ( 2 ) a highly concurrent acquisition strategy with significant overlap among development activities , flight testing , and production .

this testimony is based on preliminary observations from our latest annual review of the overall f - 35 program .

our work for the ongoing review is being conducted in response to a provision of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , for gao to review the f - 35 acquisition program annually until the program reaches full - rate production .

this statement , similar to our ongoing work , assesses: ( 1 ) future modernization ; ( 2 ) program cost and affordability ; ( 3 ) remaining development and testing ; and ( 4 ) ongoing manufacturing including supply chain performance .

we plan to issue our final report in april 2016 .

for our ongoing work , we reviewed budget documents to identify costs associated with the future modernization effort and collected and analyzed information regarding capability and oversight plans .

we reviewed and analyzed best practices identified by gao and reviewed relevant dod policies and statutes .

to assess cost and affordability , we reviewed and analyzed program funding requirements through 2038 and compared cost information as of march 2016 to prior years .

to assess ongoing development and testing we reviewed and analyzed test data and results , program briefings , and internal program analyses .

to assess ongoing manufacturing and supply chain performance , we collected and analyzed manufacturing and supply chain performance data from lockheed martin , pratt & whitney , and dod .

we assessed the reliability of the cost , schedule , and performance data by reviewing supporting documentation and interviewing knowledgeable officials .

based on these steps , we determined that all of the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

we discussed the information in this statement with dod officials and incorporated their comments as appropriate .

the ongoing work on which this statement is based is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in brief , our preliminary results indicate that dod plans to manage f - 35 modernization as part of the existing program baseline , which has oversight implications .

dod has begun planning and funding significant new development work to add to the f - 35's capabilities , known as block 4 .

the funding needed for this effort is projected to be nearly $3 billion over the next 6 years , which would qualify it as a major defense acquisition program in its own right .

dod does not currently plan to manage block 4 as a separate program with its own acquisition program baseline but rather as part of the existing baseline .

as a result , block 4 will not be subject to key statutory and regulatory oversight requirements , such as providing congress with regular , formal reports on program cost and schedule performance .

a similar approach was initially followed on the f - 22 raptor modernization program , making it difficult to separate the performance and cost of the modernization from the baseline program .

best practices recommend an incremental approach in which new development efforts are structured and managed as separate acquisition programs with their own requirements and acquisition program baselines .

the f - 22 eventually adopted this approach .

if the block 4 effort is not established as a separate acquisition program , transparency will be limited .

therefore , it will be difficult for congress to hold dod accountable for achieving its cost , schedule , and performance requirements .

in addition , our ongoing work indicates that although the estimated f - 35 program acquisition costs have decreased since 2014 the program continues to face significant affordability challenges .

dod plans to increase annual spending on f - 35 aircraft procurements over the next 5 years and expects to need more than $14 billion annually for most of the following decade .

moreover , the program's total operating and sustainment costs are estimated to be around $1 trillion which some within the office of the secretary of defense have stated is unaffordable .

currently , the program has around 20 percent of development testing remaining , including complex mission systems software testing , which will be challenging .

the program continues to address technical risks but challenges with the autonomic logistics information system ( alis ) remain .

at the same time , the contractors that build the f - 35 airframes and engines continue to report improved manufacturing efficiency and supply chain performance .

the f - 35 program has begun planning and funding the development of new capabilities , known as follow - on modernization , but our ongoing work indicates that dod's current plan for managing the development of these new capabilities may limit transparency and oversight .

the current f - 35 development program is projected to end in 2017 , when block 3f developmental flight testing is complete , with a total development cost of $55 billion .

the first increment of follow - on modernization , known as block 4 , is expected to add new capabilities and correct deficiencies of 9 capabilities carried over from the current development program such as the prognostics health management system down - link and communication capabilities .

although the requirements are not yet final and no official cost estimate has been developed for block 4 , dod's fiscal year 2017 budget request indicates that the department expects to spend nearly $3 billion on these development efforts over the next 6 years ( see figure 1 ) .

our preliminary analysis indicates that f - 35 block 4 development costs of this magnitude would exceed the statutory and regulatory thresholds for what constitutes a major defense acquisition program ( mdap ) , and it would be larger than many of the mdaps in dod's current portfolio .

however , in august 2015 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics issued an acquisition decision memorandum directing the f - 35 program office to manage block 4 development under the existing f - 35 acquisition program baseline and not as a separate incremental acquisition program .

as a result , dod will not hold a milestone b review — the decision point in which program officials would present a business case in order to initiate system development .

a milestone b review would also set in motion oversight mechanisms including an acquisition program baseline ; nunn - mccurdy unit cost growth thresholds ; and periodic reporting of the program's cost , schedule , and performance progress .

these mechanisms form the basic business case and oversight framework to ensure that a program is executable and that congress and dod decision makers are informed about the program's progress .

best practices recommend an incremental approach in which new development efforts are structured and managed as separate acquisition programs and that a business case should match requirements with resources — proven technologies , sufficient engineering capabilities , time , and funding — before undertaking a new product development .

because dod does not yet have approved requirements and is not planning to hold a milestone b review , its approach for block 4 modernization will not require the program to have such important cost , schedule , and performance reporting and oversight mechanisms in place .

based on our ongoing work , we have concerns about dod's approach to block 4 that are partly rooted in our assessment of a similar case with the f - 22 modernization program .

in march 2005 we found that the air force was managing its multi - billion dollar f - 22 modernization efforts as part of the program's existing acquisition baseline and had not established a separate knowledge - based business case .

as a result , the f - 22 baseline and schedule were adjusted to reflect the new timeframes and additional costs , comingling the funding and some content for the baseline development and modernization efforts — some content that had not been achieved under the baseline program were deferred into the modernization program .

when the content , scope , and phasing of modernization capabilities changed over time , it appeared that the f - 22 program was fraught with new schedule delays and further cost overruns .

the comingling of modernization efforts with the existing baseline reduced transparency and congress could not distinguish the new costs associated with modernization funding from cost growth in the original baseline .

we recommended that the air force structure and manage f - 22 modernization as a separate acquisition program with its own business case — matching requirements with resources — and acquisition program baseline .

eventually , the department separated the f - 22 modernization program from the baseline program with a milestone b review , in line with our recommendation , which increased transparency and better facilitated oversight .

the department has the opportunity to apply similar lessons learned to the f - 35 block 4 program .

although the estimated f - 35 program's total acquisition costs have decreased since 2014 , the program continues to face affordability challenges .

as of march 2016 , dod's estimated total acquisition cost for the f - 35 program is $379 billion , or $12.1 billion less than it reported in 2014 .

the program will require an average of $12.7 billion per year to complete the procurement of aircraft through 2038 ( see figure 2 ) .

the program expects to reach peak production rates for u.s. aircraft in 2022 , at which point dod expects to spend more than $14 billion a year on average for a decade .

at the same time , dod will be operating and sustaining an increasing number of fielded f - 35 aircraft .

dod officials we spoke with for our september 2014 report , stated that the current f - 35 sustainment strategy with cost estimates around $1 trillion is not affordable .

when acquisition and sustainment funds are combined , annual funding requirements could easily approach $30 billion in some years .

our preliminary results indicate that affordability challenges will compound as the program competes with other large acquisition programs including the long range strike bomber , kc - 46a tanker , ohio class submarine replacement and the ddg - 51 class destroyer .

in recent years , affordability challenges , in part , have forced the air force to defer f - 35 aircraft procurements to later years .

since 2014 , the air force has deferred 45 aircraft between 2017 and 2021 to later years .

this will likely require the military service to make unplanned investments in extending the service life of their current fighter aircraft .

the cost of extending the lives of current fighter aircraft and acquiring other major weapon systems , while continuing to produce and field new f - 35 aircraft , poses significant affordability risks in a period of austere defense budgets .

the f - 35 program is nearing the completion of the initial developmental test program with about 20 percent of its flight sciences and mission systems testing remaining ; however our ongoing work indicates that the remaining testing is likely to be challenging as it will require complex missions and stressing environments .

developmental flight testing is separated into two key areas referred to as flight sciences and mission systems .

developmental flight science testing is done to verify the aircraft's basic flying capabilities , while mission systems testing is done to verify that the software and systems that provide warfighting capabilities function properly and meet requirements .

the f - 35 program is nearing the completion of developmental flight testing with only 20 percent of its total planned test points remaining .

before completing the remaining high speed and high altitude flight science testing , lockheed martin officials noted that they will incorporate a pressure relief valve into the aircraft's fuel system to allow the aircraft to fly at altitudes and speeds that are currently restricted due to fuel pressure concerns .

as we have reported in the past , dod is developing , testing , and fielding mission systems capabilities in software blocks ( see figure 3 ) .

the full warfighting capability for the f - 35 is to be attained with the completion of block 3f , the final software block in the current development program .

as indicated by the percent of test points completed , all of the blocks leading up to 3f have been completed , although they experienced delays in getting to this point .

block 3f has completed 18 percent of its test points .

our preliminary findings show that the program completed all of the mission systems software testing planned in 2015 , but completion of block 3f testing could be challenging given the complexity of the missions and the stressing environments that remain to be tested .

program officials believe that the completion of 3f developmental testing could be delayed by about 2-3 months .

as of december 2015 , our preliminary analysis of program data indicated that block 3f testing could be delayed by as much as 6 months if the program performs at the same rate it has in the past and is executed according to the current plan with no additional test point growth .

delays could be exacerbated by the current mission system software stability issues and large number of remaining weapon delivery accuracy events that must take place .

our preliminary work indicates that in 2015 program officials continued to address many of the key technical risks that we have highlighted in the past — including an engine seal and the helmet mounted display — and they identified some new risks .

problems with the engine seal were addressed through a design change that was incorporated into production , and as of september 2015 , 69 of 180 engines had undergone retrofits .

a new helmet — known as the gen iii helmet — that is intended to address shortfalls in night vision capability , among others , was developed and delivered to the program in 2015 .

developmental testing of the new helmet is mostly complete , with final verification testing planned in 2016 .

the program also identified new risks with the ejection seat and cracking in the f - 35c wing structure .

program officials discovered that pilots less than 136 pounds could possibly suffer neck injuries during ejection .

officials noted that although the problem was discovered during testing of the new helmet , the helmet's weight was not the root cause .

the program is exploring a number of possible solutions to ensure pilot safety .

in addition , program officials discovered cracking in the wing structure of the f - 35c structural test aircraft during durability testing .

structural testing was halted for about 3 months , and lockheed martin officials we spoke with stated that a long - term fix had not been identified .

although improvements have been made , alis continues to pose technical risks .

recognizing that a fully functional alis is critical to the program's overall success , in october 2015 , the f - 35 executive program officer testified before congress that alis is one of the most significant technical and schedule risks to the program .

alis is a complex system of systems that supports operations , mission planning , supply - chain management , maintenance , and other processes .

in the past , we have reported that alis software has not been delivered on time and has not functioned as expected when it is delivered .

in addition to continuing software problems , our ongoing work indicates that the f - 35 program faces other key challenges related to alis .

for example , some equipment management data is inaccurate or incomplete and engine health information is not included in the current version of alis .

in addition , the system may not be deployable and does not have a backup in case the hardware system was to fail .

our ongoing work has shown that the f - 35 airframe and engine contractors continue to report improved efficiency and supply chain performance , and program data indicates that reliability and maintainability are also improving .

since 2011 , a total of 154 aircraft have been delivered to dod and international partners , 45 of which were delivered in 2015 .

as lockheed martin continues to deliver more aircraft , the number of hours needed to manufacture each aircraft continues to decline .

although prior to 2015 lockheed martin had only delivered one aircraft on or ahead of its contracted delivery date , the contractor has been making progress and in 2015 the contractor was able to deliver 15 of the 45 aircraft on time or early .

other manufacturing data are also trending in a positive direction .

for example , scrap , rework , and repair hours , and time spent on work conducted out of sequence continue to decrease .

although it has improved , lockheed martin's supply chain continues to deliver parts late to production , resulting in inefficiencies and requiring workarounds .

engine manufacturing deliveries remain steady and 218 engines have been delivered to date .

the labor hours required for assembling engines has remained steady and very little additional efficiency is expected .

as a result , pratt & whitney is looking for additional ways to save cost .

scrap , rework , and repair costs have remained steady over the last year and engineering design changes is relatively low and continues to decrease .

pratt & whitney is conducting production reviews of its supply chain and is managing supplier quality initiatives to address shortfalls , according to officials .

our ongoing work shows that although the program has made progress in improving some reliability and maintainability measures , the program continues to fall short in some measures as shown in figure 4 .

while the metrics in most areas were trending in the right direction , the f - 35 program office's own assessment indicated that as of august 2015 the f - 35 fleet was falling short of reliability and maintainability expectations in 9 of 19 areas .

the program has time to improve .

as of august 2015 , the f - 35 fleet had only flown a cumulative total of 35,940 hours of the 200,000 cumulative flight hours required for system maturity .

similarly , although engine reliability improved significantly in 2015 , the engine was still not performing at expected levels .

in 2014 , pratt and whitney data indicated that engine reliability — measured as mean flight hours between failure ( design controllable ) — was very poor and we reported in april 2015 that the engine would likely require additional design changes and retrofits .

while pratt & whitney has implemented a number of design changes that have resulted in significant reliability improvements , the f - 35a and f - 35b engines are still at about 55 percent and 63 percent , respectively , of where the program expected them to be at this point .

program and contractor officials continue to identify ways to further improve engine reliability .

in conclusion , our preliminary results indicate that , although the f - 35 development program is nearing completion , the program is not without risks .

the remaining significant and complex 3f mission systems software developmental testing , continuing issues with alis , and new issues with the ejection seat and f - 35c wing structures pose ongoing risks .

going forward , the program will likely continue to experience affordability and oversight challenges .

dod expects that beginning in 2022 it will need more than $14 billion a year on average for a decade to procure aircraft .

it is unlikely that the program will be able to receive and sustain such a high level of funding over this extended period , especially given dod's competing resources such as the long range strike bomber and kc - 46a tanker .

dod's plan to manage block 4 under the current acquisition program baseline presents oversight challenges because key reporting requirements and oversight mechanisms will not be initiated ; therefore , the two efforts will be comingled .

without setting up the modernization as a separate program with its own baseline and regular reporting as best practices recommend , it will be difficult for congress to hold dod accountable for achieving f - 35 block 4 cost , schedule , and performance goals .

it also makes it easier to re - categorize work planned for the baseline program as modernization .

in light of our ongoing work , we are not making any recommendations to dod at this time .

we plan to issue our final report in april 2016 .

chairman turner , ranking member sanchez , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have .

we look forward to continuing to work with the congress as we to continue to monitor and report on the progress of the f - 35 program .

for further information on this statement , please contact michael sullivan at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov .

contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this statement are travis masters , peter anderson , jillena roberts , and megan setser .

annual projected cost estimates expressed in then - year dollars reflect inflation assumptions made by a program .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

