thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the general services administration's ( gsa ) use of pre - award and postaward audits in pricing its multiple award schedules contracts .

each year , federal agencies spend billions of dollars to buy commercial products and professional services through gsa's multiple award schedules program .

the program is designed to take advantage of the government's significant buying power when purchasing a wide range of commercially available products — such as office furniture and supplies , personal computers , and tools — and a variety of professional services .

through more than 16,000 contracts , federal agencies can directly purchase more than 8 million products from more than 10,000 commercial vendors .

the multiple award schedules program has grown significantly over the past several years .

in fiscal year 2004 , federal agencies purchased more than $32 billion of products and services through the program .

to get the most out of each taxpayer dollar , gsa seeks to leverage the government's immense buying power by negotiating discounts from the vendor's price list that are equal to or greater than the vendor's most favored customers .

these negotiations have a direct bearing on how economically government agencies procure products and services .

today , my statement will focus on gsa's historic use of two proven negotiation tools to improve the pricing of schedules contracts — pre - award audits and postaward audits of pre - award information .

pre - award audits allow gsa contract negotiators to avoid potential vendor overpricing by verifying pricing information before contracts are awarded .

postaward audits allow negotiators to identify overpricing of awarded contracts and recover overcharges .

in summary , gsa has used these two key price negotiation tools on a limited basis .

when gsa has used pre - award and postaward audits , it has been able to avoid or recover hundreds of millions of dollars in overcharges .

in recent years , however , the use of these pricing tools has declined dramatically — despite dramatic increases in program sales .

consequently , gsa has less assurance that vendor - supplied pricing information is accurate , complete , and current , and its ability to deter overpricing and recover overcharges has been minimized .

by delaying action to address its contract pricing problems , gsa continues to miss opportunities to minimize prices paid for goods and services and save significant sums of federal dollars .

gsa established the federal supply schedule ( fss ) program in 1949 to facilitate federal agencies' purchase of common products and services from commercial vendors through schedule contracts .

the multiple award schedules program , the largest fss program , was designed to provide agencies with a simplified method for purchasing varying quantities of a wide range of commercially available products , such as office furniture and supplies , personal computers , scientific equipment , network support , and various professional services .

the schedules program provides advantages to both federal agencies and vendors .

by using this simplified method of procurement , agencies can avoid using other more time - consuming and administratively costly procurement methods .

vendors receive wider exposure of their commercial products and services and expend less effort to sell them .

in administering the multiple award schedules program , gsa is responsible for ensuring that negotiated prices reflect the government's aggregate buying power .

gsa contracting officials seek discounts from a vendor's price list that are equal to or greater than the vendor's most favored customer's discounts .

gsa awards contracts to multiple vendors supplying comparable commercial products and services .

federal agencies order products and services directly from the vendors that best meet their needs .

prices paid by federal agencies include a fee for gsa to recover program costs , including contract administration and program support .

in the mid - 1990s , gsa had about 5,200 schedules contracts .

by fiscal year 2004 , this number had increased to over 16,000 contracts .

as the number of contracts offering products and services to federal agencies increased , the sales volume skyrocketed .

between fiscal years 1995 and 2004 , program sales increased more than sixfold , from $4.9 billion to about $32.5 billion ( see fig .

1 ) .

because prices that agencies pay for schedule products and services are the result of negotiations between gsa and individual vendors , the pricing of products and services being offered is key to the contract negotiation process .

gsa contracting officials use various tools to analyze vendor offers and establish negotiation objectives .

tools commonly used include market research , sales histories , invoices and references , and competitor price lists .

of all the pricing tools available for contract negotiation , two tools — pre - award audits and postaward audits of pre - award information — are specifically designed to protect the government from overpricing .

pre - award audits enable contract negotiators to verify that vendor - supplied pricing information is accurate , complete , and current before the contract is awarded .

postaward audits serve as a deterrent to overpricing and a primary tool for recovering vendor overcharges .

gsa's use of pre - award audits and postaward audits of pre - award information has been sporadic — a finding we have reported for more than 25 years .

for example , in march 1977 , we reported that although sales from multiple award schedules contracts amounted to $840 million , vendor proposals were rarely independently audited and the veracity of the information submitted was suspect .

we found that sales and discount information submitted on 6 of 15 contract proposals was not accurate , complete , and current .

further , we found that 25 pre - award audits done in fiscal years 1973 and 1974 had resulted in recommendations of $962,000 in savings .

eighteen postaward audits done in the same years resulted in gsa claims of more than $1.4 million .

in 1979 , we again reported that price information submitted by some vendors was unreliable .

also , our comparison of 29 products available through four states' annual contracts , as well as gsa schedules , found that prices were on average 20 percent to 57 percent lower under the state contracts .

we estimated that had gsa obtained the same discounts as did the states , $5.8 million would have been saved in fiscal year 1978 on purchases of calculators , dictating equipment , typewriters , and lamps from the same manufacturers .

moreover , of the 11 audits ( 1 pre - award and 10 postaward ) that had been done during fiscal years 1977 and 1978 , all but 2 found inaccurate sales information had been reported by vendors or the availability of better discounts had not been disclosed .

pricing problems continued throughout the 1980s , and gsa's use of pre - award audits and postaward audits of pre - award information was limited .

for example , in 1986 , we again reviewed gsa's price negotiations for the multiple award schedules program , which at that time consisted of about 3,300 contracts with sales of about $2.3 billion .

our review of 20 contracts found that while the prices gsa obtained appeared to be fair and reasonable , action was needed to obtain better prices .

on one multiple award schedules contract , where the vendor did not offer the government discounts comparable to the most favored customer , a reopening of contract negotiations resulted in an estimated savings of $1.6 million .

we also found that the number of pre - award audits decreased between fiscal years 1984 and 1985 .

the decrease was attributed to reductions in the inspector general's staff , a shift in resources to audits of higher dollar value contracts , and the change from single - year to multiple year contracts .

in response to our concern about the continuing decline in the number of pre - award audits , gsa agreed to take actions to provide adequate audit coverage , including shifting resources from other gsa offices to the inspector general's office , as well as within the office , and an increase in the inspector general's fiscal year 1987 budget .

in the early 1990s , schedules sales remained relatively stable , ranging between $4 billion and $5 billion , annually .

during this period , gsa successfully performed a significant number of pre - award and postaward audits .

for example , from fiscal years 1992 through 1996 , the gsa inspector general conducted 624 pre - award audits — an average of 125 each year .

these pre - award audits resulted in nearly $480 million in negotiated cost savings for gsa's customers .

additionally , from fiscal years 1990 through fiscal year 1994 , the gsa inspector general reported that it recovered an average of $18 million each year in vendor overcharges .

most of these postaward audit recoveries were the result of vendor failure to provide accurate , complete , and current information in the negotiation of their contracts and their failure to report and offer price reductions .

in august 1997 , gsa revised its acquisition regulations to expand access to commercial products and services and implement greater use of commercial buying practices .

as part of this revision , gsa specifically removed language from the examination of records clause that automatically granted postaward audit rights for pre - award pricing information in every schedules contract .

to offset the reduction in these postaward audits , gsa proposed to increase emphasis on the use of pre - award audits .

according to gsa , this approach would provide the contracting officer a mechanism for verifying information submitted by vendors and avoid pricing problems instead of uncovering problems after contract award .

however , recent gsa inspector general and gao reviews have shown that gsa's long - standing pricing problems have continued and the plan to increase the use of pre - award audits never materialized .

in august 2001 , the gsa inspector general reported that while schedules program sales had grown dramatically , certain program fundamentals — including pricing objectives and other pricing tools — had been marginalized .

specifically , the inspector general found that contracting officers were not consistently negotiating most favored customer pricing or adequately performing price analyses .

for example , the inspector general reported that a major distributor of information technology products sold its top 10 gsa - selling models to commercial customers at an average price that was 6 percent lower than the price offered to federal agencies .

the inspector general projected that over the contract's term , gsa customers would pay nearly $40 million more for these products than they should .

in february 2005 , we completed our most recent review of the multiple awards schedules program and found that contract pricing continues to be a problem .

table 1 summarizes the extent of the problems found with 62 contracts in june 2004 .

we found that a gsa review of 62 contract files identified 37 contracts — nearly 60 percent — that lacked sufficient documentation to clearly establish that the contracts were effectively negotiated .

twenty - six of the 62 contracts — roughly 40 percent — lacked adequate price analyses or price negotiation documentation .

between fiscal years 1997 and 2004 , gsa completed only 155 pre - award audits — an average of about 19 each year , compared to the average of 125 pre - award audits annually for the prior 5 years ( see fig .

2 ) .

during this same 8-year period , schedules sales increased nearly five - fold from about $6.6 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $32.5 billion in fiscal year 2004 .

as the number of pre - award audits performed continued to decline , so too did the amount of negotiated cost savings .

between fiscal years 1992 and 1997 , the gsa inspector general reported a total of nearly $496 million in savings — an average of nearly $83 million per year .

between fiscal years 1998 and 2004 , the total savings reported had dropped to about $126 million — an average of only $18 million per year ( see fig .

3 ) .

according to gsa inspector general and contracting officials , the decline in pre - award audits was largely due an organizational culture that stresses making award decisions quickly and because pre - award audits were not emphasized institutionally in gsa .

also , gsa management officials told us that they believe increasing the contract length from 1 year in the mid - 1990s to the 5 years of today has also limited pre - award audits because the number of opportunities for pre - award audits has been reduced .

we believe , however , that the potential for pre - award audits is substantial .

since the mid - 1990s , the number of schedules contracts awarded increased from about 5,200 in fiscal year 1995 to over 16,000 in fiscal year 2004 , significantly increasing the potential for pre - award audits .

while conducting our review , we tested gsa's assertion that longer - term contracts reduced the opportunity for pre - award audits , applying gsa's guidance to contract negotiators on when to request audit assistance .

as we reported in february 2005 , we found that 71 contracts awarded or extended in fiscal year 2003 met the pre - award audit threshold , but gsa only completed 14 pre - award audits — 57 fewer than we identified as potential audits .

in fiscal year 2004 , gsa selected 55 contract offers for pre - award audits .

the gsa inspector general completed 40 of these audits .

in our most recent review , we also found that gsa has not conducted postaward audits of pre - award information since 1997 — when gsa revised its policy on the use of such audits .

the revised policy had the effect of eliminating the use of postaward audits .

with the dramatic increase in sales and the continuing decline in pre - award audits , the potential for significant recoveries of vendor overcharges could be substantial .

in our february 2005 report , we made three recommendations aimed at helping gsa ensure that prices are effectively negotiated for schedules contracts .

we recommended that the gsa administrator ( 1 ) ensure that pre - award audits are conducted when the threshold is met for both new contract offers and contract extensions , ( 2 ) develop guidance to help contracting officers determine when postaward audits are needed , and ( 3 ) direct gsa program management to revise its quality control program to ( a ) determine the underlying causes for contract pricing deficiencies and ( b ) develop appropriate plans to implement corrective actions .

gsa management officials agreed with our recommendations , and stated that gsa would continue to work with the inspector general to increase and improve the number of pre - award audits , publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register to request comments on the role of postaward audit reviews in the acquisition process , and evaluate the results of the fiscal year 2004 contract file review and that this evaluation would involve a discussion and identification of the underlying reasons for any weaknesses .

we believe that gsa's actions are a good first step toward addressing its long - standing pricing problems with multiple award schedules contracts .

however , unless these actions are effectively implemented the risk of pricing problems will continue .

in conclusion , while gsa's schedules program has provided the government with a more flexible and cost - effective approach to buying commercial items , our work has shown that the program has long been fraught with problems of contract overpricing — resulting in millions of taxpayer dollars being wasted .

historically , pre - award and postaward audits have proven their value in deterring overpricing and recovering vendor overcharges .

until gsa takes steps to ensure the appropriate use of available pricing and negotiation tools , it will continue to miss opportunities to save the government hundreds of millions of dollars in the procurement of goods and services .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i will be happy to address any questions you may have at this time .

for further information , please contact david e. cooper at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at cooperd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include james fuquay , sanford reigle , victoria klepacz , karen sloan , and sylvia schatz .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

