i am pleased to appear today to discuss ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. food aid .

the united states is the largest provider of food aid in the world , accounting for over half of all global food aid supplies intended to alleviate hunger and support development in low - income countries .

since its last reauthorization of the farm bill in 2002 , congress has appropriated an average of $2 billion per year in annual and supplemental funding for u.s. international food aid programs , which delivered an average of 4 million metric tons of agricultural commodities per year .

in 2006 , the largest u.s. food aid program , title ii of public law 480 , benefited over 70 million people through emergency and development - focused projects .

however , about 850 million people in the world are currently undernourished — a number that has remained relatively unchanged since the early 1990s , according to united nations ( un ) food and agriculture organization ( fao ) estimates .

furthermore , the number of food and humanitarian emergencies has doubled from an average of about 15 per year in the 1980s to more than 30 per year since 2000 , due in large part to increasing conflicts , poverty , and natural disasters around the world .

despite the growing demand for food aid , rising transportation and business costs have contributed to a 52 percent decline in average tonnage delivered from 2001 to 2006 .

for the largest u.s. food aid program , these noncommodity costs now account for approximately 65 percent of program expenditures , highlighting the need to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. food aid .

my testimony is based on a report that we issued on april 13 , 2007 .

today , i will focus on the need to ( 1 ) increase the efficiency of u.s. food aid programs in terms of the amount , timeliness , and quality of food provided ; and ( 2 ) ensure the effectiveness of u.s. food aid so that it reaches the most vulnerable populations and does not cause negative market impact .

we define efficiency as the extent to which a program is acquiring , protecting , and using its resources in the most productive manner .

we define effectiveness as the extent to which u.s. food aid programs are being used to achieve their goals and objectives .

in preparing this testimony , we relied on our completed review of the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. food aid .

to address our objectives , we analyzed food aid procurement and transportation data provided by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) kansas city commodity office ( kcco ) ; reviewed food aid proposals and funding data provided by usda and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) ; conducted interviews with u.s. agencies , u.s. - and foreign - flag ocean carriers , nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) , freight forwarders , and agricultural commodity groups ; conducted fieldwork in rome , ethiopia , kenya , and zambia ; and visited ports in texas , south africa and kenya , as well as prepositioning sites in louisiana and dubai .

we also discussed our preliminary findings with a roundtable of 15 food aid experts and practitioners .

we conducted the work for our report and this testimony between may 2006 and march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

countries provide food aid through either in - kind donations or cash donations .

in - kind food aid is food procured and delivered to vulnerable populations , while cash donations are given to implementing organizations to purchase food in local , regional , or global markets .

u.s. food aid programs are all in - kind , and no cash donations are allowed under current legislation .

however , the administration has recently proposed legislation to allow up to 25 percent of appropriated food aid funds to purchase commodities in locations closer to where they are needed .

other food aid donors have also recently moved from providing primarily in - kind aid to more or all cash donations for local procurement .

despite ongoing debates as to which form of assistance are more effective and efficient , the largest international food aid organization , the united nations ( un ) world food program ( wfp ) , continues to accept both .

the united states is both the largest overall and in - kind provider of food aid to wfp , supplying about 43 percent of wfp's total contributions in 2006 and 70 percent of wfp's in - kind contributions in 2005 .

other major donors of in - kind food aid in 2005 included china , the republic of korea , japan , and canada .

in fiscal year 2006 , the united states delivered food aid through its largest program to over 50 countries , with about 80 percent of its funding allocations for in - kind food donations going to africa , 12 percent to asia and the near east , 7 percent to latin america , and 1 percent to eurasia .

of the 80 percent of the food aid funding going to africa , 30 percent went to sudan , 27 percent to the horn of africa , 18 percent to southern africa , 14 percent to west africa , and 11 percent to central africa .

over the last several years , funding for nonemergency u.s. food aid programs has declined .

for example , in fiscal year 2001 , the united states directed approximately $1.2 billion of funding for international food aid programs to nonemergencies .

in contrast , in fiscal year 2006 , the united states directed approximately $698 million for international food aid programs to nonemergencies .

u.s. food aid is funded under four program authorities and delivered through six programs administered by usaid and usda ; these programs serve a range of objectives , including humanitarian goals , economic assistance , foreign policy , market development , and international trade .

 ( for a summary of the six programs , see app .

i. ) .

the largest program , p.l .

480 title ii , is managed by usaid and represents approximately 74 percent of total in - kind food aid allocations over the past 4 years , mostly to fund emergency programs .

the bill emerson humanitarian trust , a reserve of up to 4 million metric tons of grain , can be used to fulfill p.l .

480 food aid commitments to meet unanticipated emergency needs in developing countries or when u.s. domestic supplies are short .

u.s. food aid programs also have multiple legislative and regulatory mandates that affect their operations .

one mandate that governs u.s. food aid transportation is cargo preference , which is designed to support a u.s. - flag commercial fleet for national defense purposes .

cargo preference requires that 75 percent of the gross tonnage of all government - generated cargo be transported on u.s. - flag vessels .

a second transportation mandate , known as the great lakes set - aside , requires that up to 25 percent of title ii bagged food aid tonnage be allocated to great lakes ports each month .

multiple challenges in logistics hinder the efficiency of u.s. food aid programs by reducing the amount , timeliness , and quality of food provided .

while in some cases agencies have tried to expedite food aid delivery , most food aid program expenditures are for logistics , and the delivery of food from vendor to village is generally too time - consuming to be responsive in emergencies .

factors that increase logistical costs and lengthen time frames include uncertain funding processes and inadequate planning , ocean transportation contracting practices , legal requirements , and inadequate coordination in tracking and responding to food delivery problems .

while u.s. agencies are pursuing initiatives to improve food aid logistics , such as prepositioning food commodities and using a new transportation bid process , their long - term cost - effectiveness has not yet been measured .

in addition , the current practice of selling commodities to generate cash resources for development projects — monetization — is an inherently inefficient yet expanding use of food aid .

the current practice of selling commodities as a means to generate resources for development projects — monetization — is an inherently inefficient yet expanding use of food aid .

monetization entails not only the costs of procuring , shipping , and handling food , but also the costs of marketing and selling it in recipient countries .

furthermore , the time and expertise needed to market and sell food abroad requires ngos to divert resources from their core missions .

however , the permissible use of revenues generated from this practice and the minimum level of monetization allowed by the law have expanded .

the monetization rate for title ii nonemergency food aid has far exceeded the minimum requirement of 15 percent , reaching close to 70 percent in 2001 but declining to about 50 percent in 2005 .

despite these inefficiencies , u.s. agencies do not collect or maintain data electronically on monetization revenues , and the lack of such data impedes the agencies' ability to fully monitor the degree to which revenues can cover the costs related to monetization .

usaid used to require that monetization revenues cover at least 80 percent of costs associated with delivering food to recipient countries , but this requirement no longer exists .

neither usda nor usaid was able to provide us with data on the revenues generated through monetization .

these agencies told us that the information should be in the results reports , which are in individual hard copies and not available in any electronic database .

various challenges to implementation , improving nutritional quality , and monitoring reduce the effectiveness of food aid programs in alleviating hunger .

since u.s. food aid assists only about 11 percent of the estimated hungry population worldwide , it is critical that donors and implementers use it effectively by ensuring that it reaches the most vulnerable populations and does not cause negative market impact .

however , challenging operating environments and resource constraints limit implementation efforts in terms of developing reliable estimates of food needs and responding to crises in a timely manner with sufficient food and complementary assistance .

furthermore , some impediments to improving the nutritional quality of u.s. food aid , including lack of interagency coordination in updating food aid products and specifications , may prevent the most nutritious or appropriate food from reaching intended recipients .

despite these concerns , usaid and usda do not sufficiently monitor food aid programs , particularly in recipient countries , as they have limited staff and competing priorities and face legal restrictions on the use of food aid resources .

some impediments to improving nutritional quality further reduce the effectiveness of food aid .

although u.s. agencies have made efforts to improve the nutritional quality of food aid , the appropriate nutritional value of the food and the readiness of u.s. agencies to address nutrition - related quality issues remain uncertain .

further , existing interagency food aid working groups have not resolved coordination problems on nutrition issues .

moreover , usaid and usda do not have a central interagency mechanism to update food aid products and their specifications .

as a result , vulnerable populations may not be receiving the most nutritious or appropriate food from the agencies , and disputes may occur when either agency attempts to update the products .

although usaid and usda require implementing organizations to regularly monitor and report on the use of food aid , these agencies have undertaken limited field - level monitoring of food aid programs .

agency inspectors general have reported that monitoring has not been regular and systematic , that in some cases intended recipients have not received food aid , or that the number of recipients could not be verified .

our audit work also indicates that monitoring has been insufficient due to various factors including limited staff , competing priorities , and legal restrictions on the use of food aid resources .

in fiscal year 2006 , although usaid had some non - title ii - funded staff assigned to monitoring , it had only 23 title ii - funded usaid staff assigned to missions and regional offices in 10 countries to monitor programs costing about $1.7 billion in 55 countries .

usda administers a smaller proportion of food aid programs than usaid and its field - level monitoring of food aid programs is more limited .

without adequate monitoring from u.s. agencies , food aid programs may not effectively direct limited food aid resources to those populations most in need .

as a result , agencies may not be accomplishing their goal of getting the right food to the right people at the right time .

u.s. international food aid programs have helped hundreds of millions of people around the world survive and recover from crises since the agricultural trade development and assistance act ( p.l .

480 ) was signed into law in 1954 .

nevertheless , in an environment of increasing emergencies , tight budget constraints , and rising transportation and business costs , u.s. agencies must explore ways to optimize the delivery and use of food aid .

u.s. agencies have taken some measures to enhance their ability to respond to emergencies and streamline the myriad processes involved in delivering food aid .

however , opportunities for further improvement remain to ensure that limited resources for u.s. food aid are not vulnerable to waste , are put to their most effective use , and reach the most vulnerable populations on a timely basis .

to improve the efficiency of u.s. food aid — in terms of its amount , timeliness , and quality — we recommended in our previous report that the administrator of usaid and the secretaries of agriculture and transportation ( 1 ) improve food aid logistical planning through cost - benefit analysis of supply - management options ; ( 2 ) work together and with stakeholders to modernize ocean transportation and contracting practices ; ( 3 ) seek to minimize the cost impact of cargo preference regulations on food aid transportation expenditures by updating implementation and reimbursement methodologies to account for new supply practices ; ( 4 ) establish a coordinated system for tracking and resolving food quality complaints ; and ( 5 ) develop an information collection system to track monetization transactions .

to improve the effective use of food aid , we recommended that the administrator of usaid and the secretary of agriculture ( 1 ) enhance the reliability and use of needs assessments for new and existing food aid programs through better coordination among implementing organizations , make assessments a priority in informing funding decisions , and more effectively build on lessons from past targeting experiences ; ( 2 ) determine ways to provide adequate nonfood resources in situations where there is sufficient evidence that such assistance will enhance the effectiveness of food aid ; ( 3 ) develop a coordinated interagency mechanism to update food aid specifications and products to improve food quality and nutritional standards ; and ( 4 ) improve monitoring of food aid programs to ensure proper management and implementation .

dot , usaid , and usda — the three u.s. agencies to whom we direct our recommendations — provided comments on a draft of our report .

these agencies — along with the departments of defense and state , fao , and wfp — also provided technical comments and updated information , which we have incorporated throughout the report as appropriate .

dot stated that it strongly supports the transportation initiatives highlighted in our report , which it agrees could reduce ocean transportation costs .

usaid stated that we did not adequately recognize its recent efforts to strategically focus resources to reduce food insecurity in highly vulnerable countries .

although food security was not a research objective of this study , we recognize the important linkages between emergencies and development programs and used the new usaid food security strategic plan for 2006-2010 to provide context , particularly in our discussion on the effective use of food aid .

usda took issue with a number of our findings and conclusions because it believes that hard analysis was lacking to support many of the weaknesses that we identified .

we disagree .

each of our report findings and recommendations was based on a rigorous and systematic review of multiple sources of evidence , including procurement and budget data , site visits , previous audits , agency studies , economic literature , and testimonial evidence collected in both structured and unstructured formats .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have .

should you have any questions about this testimony , please contact thomas melito , director , at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov .

other major contributors to this testimony were phillip thomas ( assistant director ) , carol bray , ming chen , debbie chung , martin de alteriis , leah dewolf , mark dowling , etana finkler , kristy kennedy , joy labez , kendall schaefer , and mona sehgal .

the united states has principally employed six programs to deliver food aid: public law ( p.l. ) .

480 titles i , ii , and iii ; food for progress ; the mcgovern - dole food for education and child nutrition ; and section 416 ( b ) .

table 1 provides a summary of these food aid programs .

