i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the making home affordable ( mha ) program , including the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) .

since the department of the treasury ( treasury ) first announced the framework for its mha program over 2 years ago , the number of homeowners facing potential foreclosure has remained at historically high levels .

hamp , the key component of mha , provides financial incentives to servicers and mortgage holders / investors to offer modifications on first - lien mortgages .

the modifications are intended to reduce borrowers' monthly mortgage payments to affordable levels to help these homeowners avoid foreclosure and keep their homes .

since hamp's inception , concerns have been raised that the program is not reaching the expected number of homeowners .

in two prior reports , we looked at the implementation of the hamp first - lien modification program , noted that treasury faced challenges in implementing it , and made several recommendations intended to address these challenges .

in addition , our ongoing work examines the extent to which additional mha programs have been successful at reaching struggling homeowners , the characteristics of homeowners who have been assisted by the hamp first - lien modification program , and the outcomes for borrowers who do not complete hamp trial or permanent modifications .

these programs include the second - lien modification program ( 2mp ) for those whose first liens have been modified under hamp , the home affordable foreclosure alternatives ( hafa ) program for those who are not successful in hamp modifications , and the principal reduction alternatives ( pra ) program for borrowers who owe more on their mortgages than the value of their homes .

my statement is based on the report on hamp that we issued in june 2010 , as well as on preliminary observations from our ongoing work .

specifically , this statement focuses on ( 1 ) the extent to which hamp servicers have treated borrowers consistently and the actions that treasury and its financial agents have taken to ensure consistent treatment ; ( 2 ) the status of treasury's second - lien modification , foreclosure alternatives , and principal reduction programs ; ( 3 ) the characteristics of borrowers who received hamp modifications ; and ( 4 ) outcomes for borrowers who are denied or fall out of hamp trial or permanent first - lien modifications .

to examine these questions , we spoke with and obtained information from 10 hamp servicers of various sizes who collectively had been designated 71 percent of the tarp funds allocated to participating servicers .

we visited 6 of them for our june 2010 report .

in addition , for our ongoing work , we spoke with and obtained data from 6 large mha - participating servicers .

we reviewed hamp program documentation issued by treasury , including supplemental directives for the first - lien program and announcements of new tarp - funded homeowner assistance programs .

to determine the key elements needed to ensure program stability and adequate program management , we compared documents obtained from treasury regarding hamp program governance and internal controls to the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) and the standards for internal control in the federal government .

we also analyzed loan - level data from treasury's hamp database , which included data reported by servicers on borrowers evaluated for hamp participation through september 30 , 2010 , to analyze the characteristics of borrowers who received hamp modifications , were canceled from hamp trial modifications , or redefaulted from permanent hamp modifications .

we coordinated our work with other tarp oversight entities , including the congressional oversight panel , the office of the special inspector general for tarp ( sigtarp ) , and the financial stability oversight board .

the work on which this testimony is based was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in march 2009 , treasury issued the first hamp guidelines for modifying first - lien mortgages in an effort to help homeowners avoid foreclosure .

the goal of the first - lien mortgage modification program is to reduce struggling homeowners' mortgage payments to more affordable levels — specifically to 31 percent of the borrower's income .

to reduce mortgage payments , servicers may modify the loan by lowering the interest rate , extending the amortization period , or forbearing principal .

according to treasury officials , the program was intended to offer reduced monthly payments to up to 3 to 4 million homeowners .

through december 2010 , there were a total of 143 active servicers under the tarp - funded portion of hamp .

through december 2010 , over 1.7 million hamp trial modifications had been offered to borrowers , nearly 1.5 million of which had begun hamp trial modifications .

of the trial modifications begun , approximately 152,000 were active trial modifications , and roughly 522,000 were active permanent modifications .

approximately 735,000 trial modifications and around 58,000 permanent modifications had been canceled ( fig .

1 ) .

as of december 31 , 2010 , $1 billion in tarp funds had been disbursed for tarp - funded housing programs , of which roughly $840 million was disbursed to servicers for hamp - related activity .

most of the disbursements to date have been made for the first - lien modification program .

in addition to first - lien modifications , treasury has announced a number of tarp - funded housing programs , including those for modifying second liens held by borrowers with first - lien modifications under hamp , reducing principal , offering temporary forbearance for unemployed borrowers , and providing alternatives to foreclosure ( see table 1 ) .

at the current time , with the exception of the housing finance agency ( hfa ) hardest - hit fund , the cutoff date for borrowers to be accepted into tarp - funded programs is december 31 , 2012 , and disbursements of tarp funds may continue until december 2017 .

although one of treasury's stated goals for hamp is to standardize the loan modification process across the servicing industry , in our june 2010 report , we identified several inconsistencies in the way servicers treated borrowers under hamp that could lead to inequitable treatment of similarly situated borrowers .

first , because treasury did not issue guidelines for soliciting borrowers for hamp until a year after announcing the program , the servicers we contacted solicited borrowers differently .

a few solicited those who were 31 days delinquent on their payments , but other servicers waited until borrowers were at least 60 days delinquent .

we also noted that many borrowers had complained they did not receive timely responses to their hamp applications and had difficulty obtaining information about the program .

in march 2010 , treasury issued guidelines to address some of the issues related to communicating with borrowers about the program , and said it planned to monitor servicers' compliance with the guidelines .

second , treasury's lack of specific guidelines for determining hamp eligibility for borrowers current or less than 60 days delinquent , but in imminent danger of defaulting has led to inconsistencies in how servicers evaluate them .

the 10 servicers who gao contacted reported seven different sets of criteria for determining imminent default .

two servicers considered borrowers in imminent default if they met basic hamp eligibility requirements , but other servicers had additional criteria , such as requiring that a hardship situation has existed for more than 1 year .

treasury's goal was to create uniform , clear , and consistent guidance for loan modifications across the servicing industry , but these differences may result in one borrower's being approved for hamp and another borrower with the same financial situation and loan terms being denied by a different servicer .

we recommended that treasury establish clear , specific criteria for determining whether a borrower was in imminent default to ensure greater consistency across servicers .

however , treasury believes the impact of these variations on borrowers is inconsequential and has declined to implement this recommendation .

we continue to believe that further actions are warranted .

in addition , treasury has not clearly informed borrowers that they can use the hope hotline to raise concerns about servicers' handling of hamp loan modifications and to challenge potentially incorrect denials , likely limiting the number of borrowers who have used the hotline for these purposes .

the hope hotline also has procedures for referring borrowers who need additional assistance to the making home affordable escalation team .

however , it is unclear whether borrowers are aware of and using the hope hotline to raise concerns about their servicers and challenge potentially incorrect denials .

we recommended that treasury ( 1 ) more clearly inform borrowers that the hope hotline may also be used for these purposes and ( 2 ) monitor the effectiveness of the hope hotline as a process for handling borrower concerns .

finally , treasury has taken some steps to ensure that servicers comply with hamp program requirements , but has yet to establish specific remedies for noncompliance with hamp guidelines .

for instance , the hamp servicer participation agreement describes actions that could be taken in response to noncompliance and the hamp compliance committee monitors servicers' performance and activities .

but without standardized remedies for noncompliance , treasury risks treating servicer noncompliance inconsistently and its methods of responding to incidents of noncompliance lack transparency .

in our june 2010 report , we recommended that treasury finalize and expeditiously issue consequences for servicers who do not comply with hamp requirements .

we made eight recommendations to improve the transparency and accountability of hamp in june 2010 .

treasury stated that it intended to implement some of the recommendations , but little action has been taken to date .

the implementation of treasury's 2mp , hafa , and pra programs has been slow , and limited activity has been reported to date .

this slow pace is attributed in part to several implementation challenges , including the following .

difficulty matching first and second liens for 2mp .

because eligibility for 2mp required a first - lien hamp modification , treasury contracted with a database vendor to provide data on existing second liens that corresponded with these modifications .

however , the servicers we contacted noted that even differences in the spelling of addresses — for example , in abbreviations or spacing — could prevent an accurate identification .

initial 2mp guidelines stated that servicers could not offer a second - lien modification without confirming a match with the database vendor , even if they had serviced both first and second liens on the same property .

in november 2010 , treasury provided updated program guidance that allowed servicers to offer a 2mp modification if they could identify a first - and second - lien match within their own portfolio or had evidence that a corresponding first lien existed , even if the database had not identified it .

extensive program requirements for hafa .

all six of the large mha servicers we spoke with identified extensive program requirements as reasons for the slow implementation of hafa , including the initial requirement that applicants first be evaluated for a hamp first - lien modification .

because of this requirement , potential hafa borrowers had to submit extensive income and other documentation required for a modification , even if they simply wanted to sell .

in cases where a borrower had already identified a potential buyer before executing a short - sale agreement with the servicer , the additional time required for a hamp first - lien evaluation may have dissuaded the buyer from purchasing the property .

restrictive short - sale requirements and a requirement that mortgage insurers waive certain rights may have also contributed to the limited activity under hafa .

servicers said that given these requirements , they did not expect hafa to increase their overall number of short sales and deeds - in - lieu .

in response to this concern , treasury released updated hafa guidance on december 28 , 2010 , to no longer require servicers to document and verify a borrower's financial information to be eligible for hafa .

voluntary nature of the pra program .

treasury officials told us that 13 of the 20 largest mha servicers were planning to offer principal reduction to some extent , but some servicers we spoke with said they would limit the conditions under which they would offer principal forgiveness under pra .

treasury's pra guidelines require all servicers participating in hamp to consider principal forgiveness for hamp - eligible borrowers with mark - to - market loan - to - value ratios ( ltv ) greater than 115 percent .

but servicers are not required to offer principal reduction , even if the net present value ( npv ) is higher when principal is forgiven .

for example , one servicer had developed a “second look” process that used internal estimates of default rates to determine npv and did not forgive principal unless these estimates — not those calculated using program guidelines — indicated a higher npv with forgiveness .

as a result , only 15 to 25 percent of those who otherwise would have received principal forgiveness received it , according to this servicer .

we recommended in june 2010 that treasury report activity under pra , including the extent to which servicers determined that principal reduction was beneficial to mortgage investors but did not offer it , to ensure transparency in the implementation of this program .

treasury officials told us they would report pra activity at the servicer level once the data were available .

we plan to continue to monitor treasury's reporting of pra and other tarp - funded housing programs .

in addition , we found that treasury could do more to build on the lessons learned from its first - lien modification program .

for example , we previously reported that treasury had not sufficiently assessed the capacity of servicers to implement the first - lien program .

more recently , we observed that treasury has not obtained all required documentation to demonstrate that servicers have the capacity to successfully implement the newer programs .

according to treasury , fannie mae has conducted program - specific readiness reviews for the top - 20 large servicers for 2mp , hafa , and pra , including all 17 servicers participating in 2mp .

these reviews assess servicers' operational readiness , including the development of key controls to support new programs , technology readiness , training readiness , staffing resources , and program processes and documentation .

according to treasury's summary of these reviews , of those that had completed reviews , 4 had provided all required documents for hafa , and 3 had provided all required documents for pra .

none of the servicers provided all required documents for 2mp .

as a result , servicers' ability to effectively offer troubled homeowners second - lien modifications , foreclosure alternatives , and principal reductions is unclear .

further , treasury has not implemented our june 2010 recommendation that it establish goals and effective performance measures for these programs , nor has it said how it will use any assessments to hold servicers accountable for their performance .

treasury also has not established actions it will take in cases where individual servicers are not performing as expected in these programs .

as we noted in june 2010 , without performance measures and goals , treasury will not be able to effectively assess the outcomes of these programs .

our analysis of hamp data for borrowers in trial and permanent modifications indicated that over half of borrowers cited curtailed income , such as reduced pay , as the primary reason for needing to lower their mortgage payments ( 56 percent of borrowers in active modifications and 53 percent in trial modifications ) .

however , only 5 percent of borrowers in each of these groups cited unemployment as their primary reason for financial hardship .

borrowers also had high levels of debt prior to modification with monthly mortgage payments that were 45 and 46 percent of gross monthly income , respectively , and total debt levels of 72 and 76 percent of gross monthly income , respectively .

even after modification , these borrowers continued to have high debt levels ( median back - end dti ratios of 55 and 57 percent for those in trial and permanent modifications , respectively ) .

in addition , borrowers in trial and permanent modifications tended to be “underwater,” with median mark - to - market ltv ratios of 123 percent and 128 percent , respectively .

borrowers who were either canceled from a trial modification or redefaulted from a permanent one shared several of these characteristics , including having high debt levels and being “underwater” on their mortgages .

however , some characteristics appeared to increase the likelihood that a borrower would be canceled from a trial modification .

for example , borrowers who received a trial modification based on stated income were 52 percent more likely to be canceled from trial modifications than those who started a trial modification based on documented income .

in some cases , borrowers who received trial modifications based on stated income were not able to or failed to provide proof of their income or other information for conversion to permanent modification .

in other cases , borrowers may have submitted the required documentation but the servicer lost the documents .

in addition , borrowers who were 60 or 90 days or more delinquent at the time of their trial modifications were 6 and 9 percent more likely to have trial modifications canceled , respectively , compared with borrowers who were not yet delinquent at the time of their trial modifications .

treasury has acknowledged the importance of reaching borrowers before they are seriously delinquent by requiring servicers to evaluate borrowers still current on their mortgages for imminent default .

but , as we noted in june 2010 , this group of borrowers may be defined differently by different servicers .

borrowers who had high mark - to - market ltv ratios ( from 120 to 140 percent ) were 7 percent less likely to be canceled from trial modifications than those with mark - to - market ltv ratios at or below 80 percent , and those with a mark - to - market ltv ratio of more than 140 percent were 8 percent less likely to be canceled .

borrowers who received principal forgiveness of between 1 and 50 percent of their total loan balance were less likely to be canceled from trial modifications compared with those who did not receive principal forgiveness .

in addition , larger monthly payment reductions lowered the likelihood that a trial modification would be canceled .

for example , borrowers who received a principal and interest payment reduction of least 10 percent were less likely to be canceled from their trial modifications than other borrowers .

our initial observations of over 15,000 non - gse borrowers who had redefaulted from permanent hamp modifications through september 2010 indicated these borrowers differed from those in active permanent modifications in several respects .

specifically , non - gse borrowers who redefaulted on their hamp permanent modifications tended to have higher levels of delinquency at the time they were evaluated for a trial modification ( median delinquency of 8 months compared to 5 months for those still in active permanent modifications ) , lower credit scores , and lower median percentage of payment reduction compared with those who were still current in their permanent modifications ( 24 percent compared with 33 percent ) .

these borrowers may have received smaller reductions in their payments because they had lower debt levels before modification than borrowers who did not redefault .

we requested data from six servicers on the outcomes of borrowers who ( 1 ) were denied a hamp trial modification , ( 2 ) had their trial modification canceled , or ( 3 ) redefaulted from a hamp permanent modification .

according to the data we received , of the about 1.9 million gse and non - gse borrowers who were evaluated for a hamp modification by these servicers as of august 31 , 2010 , 38 percent had been denied a hamp trial modification , 27 percent had seen their hamp trial modifications canceled , and 1 percent had redefaulted from a hamp permanent modification .

according to these servicers' data , borrowers who were denied hamp trial modifications were more likely to become current on their mortgages without any additional help from the servicer ( 39 percent ) than to have any other outcome .

of those borrowers who were canceled from a hamp trial modification , servicers often initiated actions that could result in the borrower retaining the home .

specifically , 41 percent of these borrowers had received or were in the process of receiving a permanent proprietary modification , and 16 percent had received or were in the process of receiving a payment plan .

however , servicers started foreclosure proceedings on 27 percent of borrowers at some point after the hamp trial modification was canceled , but only 4 percent of these borrowers completed foreclosure .

compared with borrowers who were denied , borrowers who had a hamp trial modification canceled were less likely to become current on their mortgages ( 15 percent ) or to pay off their loan ( 4 percent ) .

finally , though data are limited , of the borrowers who redefaulted from a hamp permanent modification , almost half were reflected in categories other than proprietary modification , payment plan , becoming current , foreclosure alternative , foreclosure , or loan payoff .

twenty - eight percent of borrowers who redefaulted from permanent modifications were referred for foreclosure at some point after redefaulting , but , like borrowers denied or canceled from a hamp trial modification , the percentage of borrowers who completed foreclosure remained low relative to other outcomes ( less than 1 percent ) .

unlike borrowers who were denied or canceled , borrowers who redefaulted were less likely to receive or be in the process for receiving a permanent proprietary modification or payment plan after redefaulting , with 27 percent of borrowers receiving or in the process for receiving one of the outcomes .

in addition , less than 1 percent of borrowers who redefaulted had become current as of august 31 , 2010 .

we also looked at data that treasury had begun reporting on the disposition paths of borrowers who were denied or canceled from hamp trial modifications .

however , weaknesses in how treasury requires servicers to report data make it difficult to understand the current status of these borrowers .

first , treasury's system for reporting the disposition of borrowers requires servicers to place borrowers in only one category , even when borrowers are being evaluated for several possible dispositions , with non - hamp ( proprietary ) modifications reported first .

as a result , the proportion of borrowers reported as receiving proprietary modifications is likely to be overstated relative to other possible dispositions , such as foreclosure starts .

further , treasury does not require servicers to distinguish between completed and pending actions , so some reported outcomes may not be clear .

for example , we asked six large servicers to separate borrowers who had a hamp trial modification canceled into two groups: those who were being evaluated for permanent proprietary modifications and those who had actually received them .

the servicers' data indicated that 23 percent of these borrowers were in the process of being approved for proprietary modifications , and 18 percent had received one .

at the same time , treasury reported that 43 percent of borrowers canceled from a hamp trial modification through august 2010 were in the process of obtaining a proprietary modification .

servicers told us they had been able to offer more proprietary modifications than hamp permanent modifications because proprietary modifications offered greater flexibility .

for example , several servicers told us that their proprietary modification programs had fewer documentation requirements .

several servicers told us they were able to offer more proprietary modifications than hamp modifications or help borrowers when hamp could not because their proprietary modifications had fewer eligibility requirements , such as restrictions on occupancy type .

in addition , while hamp guidelines require borrowers to have a mortgage payment exceeding 31 percent of their income , all of the servicers we spoke with indicated their proprietary modification programs also served borrowers who had lower payment ratios .

while the number of proprietary modifications has outpaced the number of hamp modifications , the sustainability of both types of modifications is still unclear .

for example , proprietary modifications may not reduce monthly mortgage payments as much as hamp modifications , potentially affecting the ability of borrowers to maintain their modified payments .

in summary , we reported in june 2010 that it would be important for treasury to expeditiously implement a prudent design for the remaining tarp - funded housing programs .

our current work shows there is more treasury can do to ensure the effective implementation of these programs , including ensuring that servicers have sufficient capacity to implement them , and that borrowers are notified about potential eligibility for second - lien modifications .

we also believe it will be important for treasury to have clear and accurate information on the dispositions of borrowers who are denied or fall out from hamp modifications .

without accurate reporting of borrower outcomes , treasury cannot know the actual extent to which borrowers who are denied , canceled , or redefaulted from hamp are helped by other programs or evaluate the need for further action to assist this group of homeowners .

we provided a copy of our current draft report to treasury for its review and comment .

treasury acknowledged the report's description of servicers' challenges and appreciated our assessment of treasury's housing programs .

treasury indicated that the draft report raised certain criticisms of the design and implementation of mha that were unwarranted .

we continue to believe there are opportunities to improve the transparency , accountability , and effectiveness of mha and anticipating the report this month , in march 2011 .

we will continue to monitor treasury's implementation and management of tarp - funded housing programs as part of our ongoing oversight of the performance of tarp in meeting its legislative goals .

we are also conducting a broad - based study of the federal government's efforts to mitigate the impact of foreclosures , which will include an assessment of how federal foreclosure mitigation efforts or alternatives might better preserve homeownership , prevent avoidable foreclosures , and otherwise help resolve troubled mortgages .

chairman biggert , ranking member gutierrez , and members of the subcommittee , i appreciate this opportunity to discuss this important program and would be happy to answer any questions that you may have .

thank you .

for information on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or sciremj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made major contributions to this statement include lynda downing , harry medina , john karikari ( lead assistant directors ) ; tania calhoun ; emily chalmers ; william chatlos ; grace cho ; rachel demarcus ; marc molino ; mary osorno ; jared sippel ; winnie tsen ; jim vitarello ; and heneng yu .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

