i am pleased to have the opportunity to be here today to discuss some issues associated with the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) biosurveillance initiatives , specifically the national biosurveillance integration center ( nbic ) and the biowatch program .

the united states faces potentially dangerous biological threats that occur naturally or may be the result of a terrorist attack .

new diseases , such as avian influenza , west nile virus , and severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) have emerged in recent years .

infectious diseases have the potential to develop into widespread outbreaks and could have significant consequences , such as causing hundreds of thousands of casualties , disrupting and weakening our economy , damaging public morale and confidence , and threatening our national security .

in addition to naturally occurring infectious disease outbreaks , the united states faces the possibility that terrorists will use biological agents as weapons of mass destruction .

threats of bioterrorism , such as anthrax attacks and high - profile disease outbreaks , have drawn attention to the need for systems that provide early detection and warning about biological threats , known as biosurveillance systems .

dhs , in cooperation with various other federal agencies , is developing two major initiatives to provide early detection and warning about biological threats: nbic , a center for integrating information on biological events of national significance , which the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( 9 / 11 commission act ) mandated dhs to establish and make fully operational by september 30 , 2008 , and the biowatch program , which operates systems to test the air for specific biological threats .

my remarks today will focus on the status of dhs's efforts to ( 1 ) make nbic fully operational by the statutorily mandated deadline and ( 2 ) improve the technology used by the biowatch program .

our preliminary observations of these two dhs programs are based on our ongoing review of u.s. biosurveillance efforts , as required by the 9 / 11 commission act .

the law mandates that gao review u.s. biosurveillance efforts at the federal , state , local , and tribal levels of government .

our preliminary observations on nbic and the biowatch program are based on reviews of dhs planning , development , and implementation documents concerning these initiatives ; related statutes and federal directives ; and interviews with dhs officials .

we interviewed officials from the office of health affairs ( oha ) responsible for establishing nbic and managing the biowatch program .

we also interviewed officials from dhs's directorate for science and technology ( s&t ) , the primary research and development office responsible for developing next - generation detection technology for biowatch .

we conducted our work from february 2008 to july 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , there has been concern that another terrorist attack on u.s. soil could occur involving biological , chemical , radiological , or nuclear weapons .

concerns like these have prompted increased federal attention to and investment in national emergency preparedness — that is , the nation's ability to prevent , protect against , respond to , and recover from large - scale emergency events .

effective preparation for , detection of , and response to a major biological event requires effective pre - and postdisaster coordination and cooperation among different federal agencies , levels of government , nongovernmental organizations , and the private sector .

in the case of biological threats , detection of biological agents is a first step in an effective response to a natural , accidental , or intentional outbreak of a biologically caused disease .

in august 2007 , the 9 / 11 commission act required dhs to establish nbic to detect , as early as possible , a biological event of national concern that presents a risk to the united states , or the infrastructure or key assets of the united states .

the 9 / 11 commission act provides that the mission of nbic is to enhance the capability of the federal government to: rapidly identify , characterize , localize , and track a biological event of national concern ; integrate and analyze data relating to human health , animal , plant , food , and environmental monitoring systems ; and disseminate alerts to member agencies , and state , local , and tribal governments .

the 9 / 11 commission act also requires nbic to be fully operational by september 30 , 2008 .

prior to the passage of the 9 / 11 commission act , two presidential directives charged federal agencies to coordinate federal efforts and create a new biological threat awareness capacity to enhance detection and characterization of a biological attack .

in response to these presidential directives , dhs began the national biosurveillance integration system ( nbis ) program in 2004 as a means of integrating information across government agencies regarding biological events .

the nbis program developed an it system , also known as nbis , to bring together various data used for human , animal , and plant health surveillance ; environmental monitoring data ; and intelligence and threat analysis .

subsequently , the 9 / 11 commission act established nbic as the entity responsible for , among other things , developing and running the it system , still known as nbis .

since it was created in march 2007 , oha has overseen nbis and now the nbic program office .

dhs , in cooperation with other federal agencies , created the biowatch program in 2003 to detect the release of airborne biological agents .

the biowatch program deploys detectors which collect data that , when analyzed , can be used to identify biological agents on the biowatch threat list .

current biowatch detection technology contains filters that collect air samples , but the filters must be collected manually , and testing of the samples is carried out in state and local public health laboratories .

using this manual process , results are usually obtained within 10 to 34 hours of an agent's detection .

biowatch detectors are currently deployed in 30 cities , and local jurisdictions are responsible for the public health response to positive findings in the biowatch program .

oha has responsibility for managing the operations of the biowatch program .

s&t , which is the primary research and development arm of dhs , is responsible for developing detectors for the biowatch program .

dhs has made progress making nbic fully operational by september 30 , 2008 , as required by the 9 / 11 commission act , but has faced difficulties completing some key tasks , such as defining what capabilities the center will provide once fully operational , formalizing agreements to obtain interagency coordination , and fully implementing its it system .

nbic has not yet defined what capabilities the center should have in place in order to be fully operational .

according to nbic officials , nbic has drafted , but not finalized , planning documents to define these capabilities .

in addition , nbic has initiated coordination with member agencies through memoranda of understanding ( mous ) and interagency working groups .

nbic is working to establish additional coordination efforts to enhance nbic's integration capabilities .

further , a contractor dhs hired to enhance nbic's it system delivered an upgrade to the system on april 1 , 2008 , but more work remains to be done .

for example , member agencies will not have full access to the it system until nbic employees have been trained to use the system .

additionally , nbic reports that it continues to negotiate agreements with member agencies on the data they are to provide for the it system .

dhs has made progress making nbic fully operational by the mandated september 30 , 2008 , deadline ; however , it is unclear what operations the center will be capable of carrying out at that point .

nbic has acquired a facility that accommodates office space , a 24-hour watch center , as well as secure areas to handle classified materials .

additionally , in january 2008 nbic hired a permanent director to oversee nbic operations .

as of july 2008 , nbic has also filled 26 of 37 , or 70 percent , of nbic's available staff positions , and according to nbic officials , nbic is in the process of hiring four additional staff members , including a deputy director .

nbic officials are planning to use contractors to fill the remaining 7 positions .

furthermore , nbic has also acquired one detailee from a member agency , the department of health and human services , and is working to acquire additional detailees .

nbic has drafted a concept of operations ; a finalized version is pending comments from nbic's member agencies .

officials have also drafted , but not finalized , standard operating procedures .

in fiscal year 2008 , $8 million were available to nbic officials to establish the center ; officials told us that they recently requested an additional $4.2 million in a reprogramming that dhs has not yet approved .

nbic has not yet defined the capabilities the center should have in order to be considered fully operational .

the 9 / 11 commission act does not define fully operational or what capabilities nbic needs to have in place by the statutorily mandated september 30 , 2008 , deadline .

nbic officials told us that they are currently trying to define “fully operational” and are drafting detailed plans for the final 90 days of planning before the deadline .

officials told us that these documents describe the details of nbic's expected operational capabilities and functions , such as the state of their it system , personnel expectations , analytic capabilities , and include specific goals , objectives , milestones , and cost estimates .

dhs did not provide us with these planning documents because the documents are in draft form .

nbic has initiated coordination efforts with 11 federal agencies but faces difficulties completing formal agreements to obtain their cooperation .

since the new nbic director started in january 2008 , nbic has organized interagency working groups and has finalized mous with 6 of the 11 agencies that nbic identified as important to the operational needs of the center .

nbic has an interagency working group consisting of these 11 agencies , in addition to dhs , that first met under the direction of the new director in march 2008 .

as part of the interagency working group , dhs officials stated , nbic has created a sub - working group that meets on a weekly basis to discuss issues such as the daily operations of nbic , reporting requirements , and data - sharing issues .

nbic also organized an interagency oversight council , which includes representatives from member agencies , private - sector organizations , and academia , to provide technical oversight and guidance in the development and implementation of nbic's operations .

the oversight council plans to meet for the first time in august 2008 .

nbic has begun facilitating interagency coordination while continuing to implement additional elements of the program .

for example , nbic officials told us that they helped coordinate the federal government's efforts to deal with the recent national salmonella outbreak , while simultaneously continuing to work on making nbic fully operational to meet the september 30 , 2008 , deadline .

as part of its efforts to establish interagency coordination , nbic is seeking to formalize its relationship with federal agencies through three types of documents: mous , interagency security agreements ( isas ) , and interagency agreements ( iaas ) .

first , dhs is asking federal agencies to sign mous to confirm the agency or department's initial agreement to participate in nbic as a member agency .

second , dhs is asking agencies to sign isas that formalize the technical exchange of information , such as data on human health , between nbic and these agencies .

finally , dhs is asking agencies to sign iaas that define programmatic , financial , and staffing arrangements between nbic and these agencies .

as part of the iaas , agencies are to agree to provide detailees to work at nbic .

these detailees will provide subject - matter expertise and facilitate nbic coordination with their respective home department or agency .

to date , nbic and potential member agencies have finalized 6 of 11 mous ; however , they have not finalized any isas or iaas .

dhs has signed mous with the departments of defense , agriculture , health and human services , interior , state , and transportation .

dhs is still working to finalize mous with another 5 agencies to formalize their membership in nbic .

nbic does not have isas or iaas in place with any of its current and potential member agencies .

according to nbic officials , one difficulty in finalizing the isas is due , in part , to defining the data - sharing arrangements with member agencies given the constraints on arrangements for sharing data imposed by the traditional roles of these agencies .

for example , interagency coordination for the purposes of characterizing a biological event may require data that nbic member agencies have not previously shared with other agencies .

in addition , dhs faces difficulty finalizing iaas , the formal mechanisms through which nbic obtains detailees from federal agencies .

in the absence of iaas , according to nbic's draft concept of operations , the center cannot effectively perform its integration and analytical mission without the subject - matter knowledge from interagency detailees .

as of july 2008 , nbic has been able to secure one detailee from a member agency .

officials were unable to predict how many additional mous , isas , iaas , or detailees nbic will have in place by september 30 , 2008 .

a contractor dhs hired to enhance nbic's it system delivered an upgrade to the system in april 2008 ; however , nbic officials stated that they need to complete additional work before granting member agencies full access to the system .

the system , known as nbis , provides tools to enhance nbic's data integration capabilities and collaboration with member agencies .

such tools include a worldwide geographical map displaying emergent and ongoing adverse health events , an assessment of the homeland security implications of those events , a library of all referenced data , and general disease and situational reports .

nbic officials told us that additional work needs to be done before giving member agencies full access to the system .

for example , nbic does not have interagency security agreements in place with member agencies that specify the data that agencies will share with the system .

in addition , as nbic officials work with the nbis system , they are identifying additional improvements that need to be made to the system .

furthermore , while member agencies will have access to some of the individual tools that are a part of nbis , until nbic analysts have been trained to use nbis , member agencies will not have full access to all of the system's interagency collaboration functions .

officials estimate that training will not be completed until at least early 2009 .

dhs has two ongoing efforts to improve the detection technology used by the biowatch program .

s&t is developing a new technology .

oha is developing an interim solution to enhance the detectors currently in use .

s&t is developing new detection technology known as generation 3.0 which would replace the existing technology used by the biowatch program .

this new technology is to provide a fully automated detector which not only collects air samples but also analyzes them for threats .

the current technology collects air samples which are periodically manually removed from the equipment and taken to a laboratory for analysis , a process that could take 10 to 34 hours .

officials stated that automating analysis of air samples could reduce the elapsed time between air sampling and testing it for threats from the current 10 to 34 hours to 4 to 6 hours , reducing detection time by at least 4 hours and possibly as much as 30 hours .

in addition to the automated detection capability , generation 3.0 is to detect a broader range of identified biological agents to eventually cover all the biological agents on the biowatch threat list — a list of specific biological agents that could pose a health threat if aerosolized and released to the environment .

the estimated cost for acquiring these detectors is $80,000 to $90,000 per unit , with yearly operation and maintenance costs of $12,000 to $41,000 per unit .

operational testing and evaluation of this technology is scheduled for april 2009 , about a year later than initially planned because oha provided s&t with revised functional requirements about 4 months before s&t was scheduled to complete the generation 3.0 prototype detector .

s&t developed the original requirements for the generation 3.0 technology , which required the automatic detectors to , among other things , operate continuously , detect more biological threats , be less expensive to operate , and be deployed in both indoor and outdoor environments .

s&t planned to complete the development of the hardware and software and conduct field tests of its prototype generation 3.0 detectors by april 2008 , at which point oha was to take responsibility for final operational testing and evaluation of the detectors .

however , oha provided s&t with new requirements for the generation 3.0 detector in january 2008 , which delayed operational testing and evaluation by 1 year , from april 2008 to april 2009 .

the new requirements included additional requirements and provided additional details for some of the original requirements .

for example , oha's new requirements contain restrictions for the size and weight of the generation 3.0 detector which were not specified in the original requirements .

as a result of the 1-year delay , s&t also designed an additional field test for the generation 3.0 prototypes , scheduled to begin in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009 , which will occur in an urban environment and allow for the prototypes to be tested in real - world conditions .

according to s&t and oha officials , the generation 3.0 detector will ultimately replace all current biowatch detectors by 2013 , with initial deployment beginning in 2010 .

while s&t is completing is work on the generation 3.0 detectors , oha is developing an interim solution to enhance the detectors currently in use by adding the capability to automatically analyze air samples for some biological agents .

oha's interim technology , known as generation 2.5 , is intended to add the capability to automatically analyze air samples for the same number of biological agents currently monitored by the existing biowatch detector technology .

however , the enhanced detectors will not have the capability to identify additional biological agents listed on the biowatch threat list .

according to oha officials , generation 2.5 detectors will , like generation 3.0 detectors , reduce the elapsed time between sampling the air and detecting a biological agent by at least 4 hours and possibly as much as 30 hours .

further , oha officials stated that they plan to operationally test and evaluate new prototype detectors beginning in november 2008 and to acquire over 100 of these new detectors , contingent on successful completion of operational testing and evaluation .

the estimated cost for acquiring and testing these detectors is $120,000 per unit , with yearly maintenance costs of $65,000 to $72,000 per unit .

according to dhs officials , oha plans to deploy these new detectors both indoors and outdoors ; however , no procedural guidance exists for responding to positive results from detectors placed indoors .

according to oha officials , they plan to develop this guidance by october 2008 and apply it to all future biowatch detectors deployed indoors .

mr. chairman , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact me or e. anne laffoon , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-4199 .

michelle cooper , jessica gerrard - gough , tracey king , amanda krause , juan tapia - videla , john vocino , and sally williamson made key contributions to this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

