i am pleased to be here today to discuss our report on usaid's workforce planning and highlight the preliminary findings from our ongoing review of usaid's operating expense account .

the workforce report is being released today .

humanitarian and economic development assistance is an integral part of u.s. global security strategy , particularly as the united states seeks to diminish the underlying conditions of poverty and corruption that may be linked to instability and terrorism .

in fiscal year 2003 , usaid expects to obligate about $13 billion and manage programs in about 160 countries .

agency staff often work in difficult environments and under evolving program demands .

more will be demanded of usaid's staff as they implement large - scale relief and reconstruction programs in afghanistan and iraq while continuing traditional long - term development assistance programs .

as a result , it is essential that usaid develop a strategic approach to its workforce planning so that it can identify and attain the essentials skills it needs to accomplish its goals .

it is also important that usaid identify and report accurate costs on administering its foreign aid programs .

my statement today will cover these two broad areas .

i will focus most of my statement on our review of usaid's workforce planning .

i will discuss some of usaid's human capital challenges , including its recent efforts to staff missions in afghanistan and iraq , and the status of its efforts to develop a strategic workforce planning system .

regarding usaid's operating expense account , i will focus on how the agency's reporting of operating expenses does not always capture the full cost of administering foreign assistance .

in 1993 , we reported that usaid had not adequately managed changes in its overseas workforce and recommended that usaid develop a comprehensive workforce planning system to better identify staffing needs and requirements .

in the mid - 1990s , usaid reorganized its activities around strategic objectives and began reporting in a results - oriented format but had made little progress in personnel reforms .

in july 2002 , we reported that usaid could not quickly relocate or hire the staff needed to implement a large - scale reconstruction and recovery program in latin america , and we recommended actions to help improve usaid's staffing flexibility for future disaster recovery requirements .

studies by several organizations , including gao , have shown that highly successful service organizations use strategic management approaches to prepare their workforces to meet present and future mission requirements .

we define strategic workforce planning as focusing on long - term strategies for acquiring , developing , and retaining an organization's workforce and aligning human capital approaches that are clearly linked to achieving programmatic goals .

based on work with the office of personnel management and other entities , we identified strategic workforce planning principles used by leading organizations .

according to these principles , a strategic workforce planning and management system should ( 1 ) involve senior management , employees , and stakeholders in developing , communicating , and implementing the workforce plan ; ( 2 ) determine the agency's current critical skills and competencies and those needed to achieve program results ; ( 3 ) develop strategies to address gaps in critical skills and competencies ; and ( 4 ) monitor and evaluate progress and the contribution of strategic workforce planning efforts in achieving program goals .

until the mid - 1970s , about two thirds of usaid's operating expenses were funded from appropriations to program accounts , and the rest were funded from a separate administrative expenses account .

in 1976 , congress began providing a line - item appropriation for operating expenses separate from usaid's humanitarian and economic development assistance programs .

the accompanying senate report noted that usaid's “cost of doing business” would be better managed if these funds were separately appropriated .

congress authorized usaid's separate operating expense account the following year .

usaid's criteria for determining the expenses to be paid from operating expense funds are based on guidance it has received from congress as well as its assessment of who benefits from a particular activity — the agency or the intended program recipient .

for example , congressional reports in the late 1970s directed usaid to fund the costs of all full - time staff in permanent positions from the operating expense account .

usaid faces a number of challenges in developing and implementing a strategic workforce plan .

its overseas missions operate in a changing foreign policy environment often under very difficult conditions .

usaid's workforce , particularly its u.s. direct - hire foreign service officers , has decreased over the years ; but in recent years program dollars and the number of countries with usaid activities have increased .

these factors have combined to produce certain human capital vulnerabilities that have implications for the agency's ability to effectively carry out and oversee foreign assistance .

a strategic approach to workforce planning and management can help usaid identify the workforce it needs and develop strategies for attaining this workforce that will last throughout successive administrations .

since 1990 , usaid has continued to evolve from an agency in which u.s. direct - hire foreign service employees directly implemented development projects to one with a declining number of direct - hire staff who oversee the contractors and grantees carrying out most of its day - to - day activities .

as numbers of u.s. direct - hire staff declined , mission directors began relying on other types of employees , primarily foreign national personal services contractors , to manage mission operations and oversee development activities implemented by third parties .

in december 2002 , according to usaid's staffing report , the agency's workforce totaled 7,741 , including 1,985 u.s. direct - hires .

personal services contractors made up more than two - thirds of usaid's total workforce , including 4,653 foreign national contractors .

of the 1,985 u.s. direct - hires , 974 were foreign service officers , about 65 percent of whom were posted overseas .

other individuals not directly employed by usaid also perform a wide range of services in support of the agency's programs .

these individuals include employees of institutional or services contractors , private voluntary organizations , and grantees .

in addition to having reduced the number of u.s. direct hires , usaid now manages programs in more countries with no usaid direct - hire presence , and its overseas structure has become more regional .

table 1 illustrates the changes in usaid's u.s. direct - hire overseas presence between fiscal years 1992 and 2002 .

in fiscal year 2002 , usaid managed activities in 88 countries with no u.s. direct - hire presence .

according to usaid , in some cases , activities in these countries are very small and require little management by usaid staff .

however , in 45 of these countries usaid manages programs of $1 million or more , representing a more significant burden on the agency .

usaid also increasingly provides administrative and program support to countries from regional service platforms , which have increased from 2 to 26 between fiscal years 1992 and 2002 .

program funding also recently increased about 78 percent — from $7.3 billion in fiscal year 2001 to about $13 billion in fiscal year 2003 .

as a result of the decreases in u.s. direct - hire foreign service staff levels , increasing program demands , and a mostly ad - hoc approach to workforce planning , usaid now faces several human capital vulnerabilities .

for example , the attrition of its more experienced foreign service officers , its difficulties in filling overseas positions , and limited opportunities for training and mentoring have sometimes led to the deployment of direct - hire staff who do not have essential skills and experience and the reliance on contractors to perform many functions .

in addition , usaid lacks a “surge capacity” to enable it to respond quickly to emerging crises and changing strategic priorities .

as a result , according to usaid officials and a recent overseas staffing assessment , the agency is finding it increasingly difficult to manage the delivery of foreign assistance .

in addition , usaid works in an overseas environment that presents unique challenges to workforce planning .

mission officials noted the difficulties in adhering to a formal workforce plan linked to country strategies in an uncertain foreign policy environment .

for example , following the events of september 11 , 2001 , the middle east and sub - saharan african missions we visited — egypt , mali , and senegal — received additional work that was not anticipated when they developed their country development strategies and work plans .

also , the mission in ecuador had been scheduled to close in fiscal year 2003 .

however , this decision was reversed due to political and economic events in ecuador , including a coup in 2000 , the collapse of the financial system , and rampant inflation .

program funding for ecuador tripled from fiscal year 1999 to fiscal year 2000 , while staffing was reduced from 110 to 30 personnel ; and the budget for the mission's operating expenses was reduced from $2.7 million to $1.37 million .

during our field work , we found that other factors unique to usaid's overseas work environment can affect its ability to conduct workforce planning and attract and retain top staff .

these factors vary from country to country and among regions and include difficulties in attracting staff to hardship posts , inadequate salaries and benefits for attracting the top host country professionals , and lengthy clearance processes for locally contracted staff .

usaid's workforce challenges are illustrated by its difficulties in staffing hardship posts like afghanistan and iraq .

as of september 4 , 2003 , according to usaid's new personnel data system , the mission in kabul had 42 full - time staff — 7 foreign service officers and 35 personal service contractors , mostly local hires .

however , the mission had 61 vacancies , including 5 vacancies for foreign service officers .

in iraq , as of september 15 , 2003 , the mission had 13 usaid direct - hire staff ; 3 additional u.s. government employees ; and about 60 personal services and institutional contractors .

the mission had 13 vacancies that will most likely be filled by contract staff .

usaid's human resource office is in its annual bidding process for foreign service positions .

when that process is complete , the office expects to have a better picture of replacements for current staff in afghanistan and iraq as well as additional placements .

according to usaid staff , the agency is having trouble attracting foreign service officers to these posts because in - country conditions are difficult and tours are unaccompanied .

usaid's average staff age is in the late forties , and this age group is generally attracted to posts that can accommodate families .

both posts are responsible for huge amounts of foreign aid — in fiscal year 2003 alone , usaid's assistance for afghanistan and iraq is expected to total $817 million and $1.6 billion , respectively .

usaid faces serious accountability and quality of life issues as it attempts to manage and oversee large - scale , expensive reconstruction programs in countries with difficult conditions and inadequate numbers of both foreign service and local hire staff .

in response to the president's management agenda , usaid has taken steps toward developing a comprehensive workforce planning and human capital management system that should enable the agency to meet its challenges and achieve its mission , but progress so far is limited .

in evaluating usaid's efforts in terms of proven strategic workforce planning principles , usaid has more to do .

for example: the involvement of usaid leadership , employees , and stakeholders in developing and communicating a strategic workforce plan has been mixed .

usaid's human resource office is drafting a human capital strategy , but at the time of our review it had not yet been finalized or approved by such stakeholders as omb and the office of personnel management .

as a result , we cannot comment on whether usaid employees and other stakeholders will have an active role in developing and communicating the agency's workforce strategies .

usaid has begun identifying the core competencies its future workforce will need , and a working group is conducting a comprehensive workforce analysis and planning pilot at three headquarters units that will include an analysis of current skills .

however , it has not yet conducted a comprehensive assessment of the critical skills and competencies of its current workforce .

usaid hopes to have a contractor in place by the end of september , 2003 , to assist the working group in identifying critical competencies and devising strategies to close skill gaps .

usaid is also in the process of determining the appropriate information technology instrument and methodology that will permit the assessment of its current workforce skills and competencies .

usaid's strategies to address critical skill gaps are not comprehensive and have not been based on a critical analysis of current capabilities matched with future requirements .

usaid has begun hiring foreign service officers and presidential management interns to replace staff lost through attrition .

however , the agency has not completed its civil service recruitment plan and has not yet included personal services contractors — the largest segment of its workforce — in its agencywide workforce analysis and planning efforts .

according to usaid human resource staff , the civil service recruitment plan will be completed after conducting the competency analysis for civil service staff .

usaid has not created a system to monitor and evaluate its progress toward reaching its human capital goals and ensuring that its efforts continue under the leadership of successive administrators .

because it does not have a comprehensive workforce planning and management system , usaid cannot ensure that it has the essential skills needed to carry out its ongoing and future programs .

to help usaid plan for changes in its workforce and continue operations in an uncertain environment , our report recommends that the usaid administrator develop and institutionalize a strategic workforce planning and management system that takes advantage of strategic workforce planning principles .

usaid's operating expense account does not fully reflect the agency's cost of delivering foreign assistance , primarily because the agency pays for some administrative activities done by contractors with program funds .

as we noted in our recent report , usaid's overseas missions have increasingly hired personal services contractors to manage usaid's development activities due to declining numbers of u.s. direct - hire staff .

according to usaid guidance , contractor salaries and related support can be paid from program funds when the expenses are benefiting a particular program or project .

in some cases , however , the duties performed by contractors , especially personal services contractors , are indistinguishable from those done by u.s. direct - hire staff .

one senior level usaid program planning officer told us that 10 to 15 percent of program funds may be a more realistic estimate of usaid's cost of doing business , as opposed to the 8.5 percent average since fiscal year 1995 that we calculated based on our analysis of usaid reported data .

a recent usaid internal study identified about 160 personal services contractors who were performing inherently governmental duties , but these costs are not always reported as operating expenses .

recent data collection efforts by usaid indicate that the agency will likely obligate approximately $350 million in program funds for operating expenses incurred during fiscal year 2003 .

because usaid's cost of doing business is not always separated from its humanitarian and development programs — the original intent behind establishing the separate operating expense account , the amount of program funds that directly benefits a foreign recipient is likely overstated .

overall , to accomplish our objectives , we analyzed personnel data , workforce planning documents , and obligations data reported by usaid in its annual budget justification documents .

we did not verify the accuracy of usaid's reported data .

we also interviewed cognizant usaid officials representing the agency's regional , technical , and management bureaus in washington , d.c. , and conducted fieldwork at seven overseas missions — the dominican republic , ecuador , egypt , mali , peru , senegal , and the west africa regional program in mali .

to examine usaid's progress in developing and implementing a strategic workforce planning system , we evaluated the agency's efforts in terms of workforce planning principles used by leading organizations: ensuring the involvement of agency leadership , employees , and stakeholders ; determining current skills and competencies and those needed ; implementing strategies to address critical staffing needs ; and evaluating progress in achieving human capital goals .

to determine whether usaid's operating expenses reflect its cost of doing business , we reviewed usaid reports and obligations data and discussed the matter with cognizant officials at usaid , the department of state , and the office of management and budget .

we also reviewed mission staffing reports to determine whether staff were funded from the operating expense account or program funds and discussed staff duties with cognizant mission officials .

we obtained written comments on a draft of our report on usaid's workforce planning and discussed our preliminary findings from our review of usaid's operating expense account with cognizant usaid officials .

overall , usaid agreed with our findings and concurred with our recommendation to implement a strategic workforce planning system .

our review was conducted between july 2002 and september 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions you may have .

for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call jess ford at ( 202 ) 512-4268 or al huntington at ( 202 ) 512-4140 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony included kimberly ebner , jeanette espinola , emily gupta , rhonda horried , and audrey solis .

mark dowling , reid lowe , and jose pena provided technical assistance .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

