the increased role of the armed forces in military operations around the world , and the greater reliance on the reserves and national guard , has focused national attention on what is done to help servicemen and women successfully transition to civilian life after serving in the military .

originally created in 1990 , the transition assistance program ( tap ) provides information on specific benefits and services , including employment and relocation assistance , education opportunities , health and life insurance , and financial planning .

jointly administered under agreements among the departments of defense ( dod ) , labor ( dol ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) , tap is intended to serve military personnel who separate and members of the reserves and national guard who demobilize after at least 180 days of active duty .

over 300,000 servicemen and women met these criteria and were eligible for tap in fiscal year 2004 .

concerns about the needs of transitioning service members — including those returning from iraq and afghanistan — and whether tap is meeting their needs - - - are raised in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 , which mandated a gao report on tap .

this report ( 1 ) assesses tap's administration , including program participation , and ( 2 ) identifies actions agencies are taking to improve tap as well as the challenges that remain .

to develop the information for this report , we reviewed the legislative history of tap , including records of congressional hearings , and interviewed responsible officials , including tap program managers , from dod , the armed forces and commands , the national guard bureau , va , and dol .

we also reviewed tap program materials , including guides and manuals prepared for participants and facilitators as well as slides and videos .

we compiled and analyzed statistics on tap program participation and surveyed selected veterans' service organizations .

we also visited fort bragg , north carolina , to talk to participants and observe briefings for members of the army reserve and national guard being demobilized there as well as tap sessions for others separating at the base .

as agreed , the coast guard , which is overseen by homeland security , was not included in our review .

to assess the reliability of the data on the numbers separating and on their tap program participation , we reviewed documentation on the data systems and data entry , interviewed knowledgeable agency officials , and worked closely with them to understand or correct discrepancies .

we determined that the numbers of service members separating and participating were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report , but that the participation rates we derived from these numbers represent approximations , as explained in a more detailed description of our methodology in appendix i .

we conducted our work from december 2004 through april 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the role of the armed forces in the global war on terrorism and in military operations in afghanistan and iraq has heightened concerns about the assistance that these and other service members receive when they transition back into civilian life .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 mandated that gao report on tap for service members separating or retiring from the military and members of the reserves and national guard who are released from active duty in a process referred to as demobilization .

all service members who have been on active duty for at least 180 days are eligible for tap , but those separating because of a disability are eligible regardless of the length of their active duty service .

the time frames for provision of tap are spelled out in law .

eligible service members must be provided tap while they are on active duty and receiving military pay , either as soon as possible within the 2 years prior to their anticipated retirement date or in the 1 year prior to their anticipated separation date - - in either case , no later than 90 days prior to their discharge or release .

the exception to this rule occurs when separations are not anticipated and less than 90 days of active duty remain .

in such cases , tap must be provided as soon as possible .

about 309,000 servicemen and women were discharged or released from active military service in fiscal year 2004 with sufficient time on active duty to meet the tap eligibility criteria .

of these , about 192,000 were members of the full - time active duty armed forces - - - the air force , army , navy , or marine corps .

generally , the remaining 117,000 were members of the reserves and national guard who had been called to active duty in response to a national emergency and were later released .

many of these service members had been employed in civilian occupations before they were called to active duty and were training for their military mission during certain weeks and weekends each year .

the use of the reserves and national guard has increased dramatically in recent years , with more called to active duty than at any other time since the korean war .

about 478,000 members of the reserves and national guard have been called to active duty since september 11 , 2001 , and about 181,000 members were on active duty as of april 2005 .

most of these members were serving with the army - - - many on overseas missions , and on the front lines in iraq , afghanistan , and the balkans .

not only have more members of the reserves and national guard been called to active duty and sent overseas , but the number of days they spend on average in active duty status has doubled since 1990 , when tap was established .

dod expects this trend to continue through at least fiscal year 2007 , with reserve and national guard members serving on active duty for a year or more on average .

delivery of the tap components for most participants occurs at one of the 215 transition offices located on military installations .

this includes 82 air force tap offices located in family support centers , 53 army offices that are part of the army career and alumni program , as well as the 62 navy offices and 18 marine corps offices that constitute their respective transition assistance management programs .

however , reserve and national guard members who were called to active duty , served , and are returning home usually transition at fewer locations , referred to as demobilization sites ; for example , the army has 27 demobilization sites and the marine corps has 5 sites .

typically the demobilization process is rapid , taking a matter of days once the service members arrive back in the united states from overseas .

the army standard is to demobilize units in 5 days , and it is not uncommon for military installations to get 2 days' or less advance notice before returning troops arrive .

during demobilization , service members may be expected to participate in as many as 18 separate briefings on various topics , such as legal and medical issues , and scheduled activities , such as physical examinations .

according to officials we interviewed , control of the schedule for demobilization is in the hands of the commanders of the installations where demobilization occurs , subject to guidance from the armed forces on briefing topics and activities that must be covered .

tap provides information and links to a broad range of benefits and services for separating service members to ease their transition to civilian life .

the topics that must be covered in tap are spelled out in law and include employment and relocation assistance , education opportunities , health and life insurance , and financial planning .

most of the benefits become available to service members once they have separated and are veterans , but to be eligible for certain of these benefits , service members must take specific actions while they are still on active duty .

the information that tap provides on benefits and services needs to be accurate and up to date , reflecting the most recent changes in law .

changes enacted in 2004 , for example , permit reserve and national guard members who were called to active duty after september 11 , 2001 , to obtain a year's worth of health insurance coverage for themselves and their family for each 90 days of active duty , as long as they contribute a share of the cost and continue to serve in a reserve capacity after they are released from active duty .

service members must select this coverage while on active duty and enroll within 180 days of release from active duty or they forfeit their right to this benefit .

to take advantage of the various benefits and services , separating service members need to be aware of the benefits and services and know how to access them .

for example , service members who have been on active duty continuously for 24 months and plan to pursue an education may receive up to $816 a month under the montgomery gi bill , if they have not previously declined the benefit .

according to dod , about 5,800 members of the reserves and national guard had been on active duty long enough on january 31 , 2005 , to qualify for this benefit , which usually is available only to full - time active duty military personnel .

tap is designed to serve as a gateway to additional information and services that are available , either while service members are on active duty or after they have separated and returned home .

for example , the dol workshop highlights many of the skills and techniques helpful in obtaining employment .

after completing the workshop , service members can benefit further by refining their résumés , practicing their interviewing skills , and using computers to conduct job searches .

to take advantage of opportunities to do so , they are welcome to return to tap offices on military installations .

even after service members have separated from active duty , dod policy permits them to use the services at military installations during the 180 days following their separation .

they are also encouraged to contact state workforce agencies' one - stop career centers near their homes for further employment and training services .

in our review of tap in 2002 , we found that the program was available to service members but not all participated .

some service members faced difficulties being released from military duties to attend tap because of the priority accorded their military mission or the lack of supervisory support for tap .

for service members who were able to participate , tap varied in content and delivery , in part because the armed forces were able to exercise their flexibility to tailor the program to better meet the circumstances of their service members .

for example , some service members received additional services that were designed to enhance tap ; elsewhere , service members in remote locations got a shorter version of tap or experienced the program through videos rather than on - site facilitators .

tap consists of separate components offered by dod , dol , and va .

these federal agencies facilitate interagency coordination through regular meetings and formal agreements .

participation in tap varies by the component offered and the military service responsible .

preseparation counseling is the only component mandated in law and , accordingly , has had the highest rates of participation over the 3 years ending in fiscal year 2004 .

in general , participation rates are lower for the voluntary employment workshop .

among the services , the navy and marine corps report the highest rates for the employment workshop , with the marine corps attributing its high rate to its recent policy of mandatory attendance .

reserve and national guard members returning from overseas may get similar information but generally do not have time to attend formal tap components during demobilization .

local installation commanders rather than tap managers control demobilization schedules .

the tap program consists of four core components with a specific federal agency responsible for the delivery and content of each , as shown in figure 1 .

according to dod , the primary goal of tap is to prepare separating service members and their families with the skills , tools , and self - confidence necessary to ensure successful reentry into the nation's civilian workforce .

tap represents the completion of the military personnel “life cycle” that begins with recruitment , continues through active duty service , and ends when the service member returns to the civilian sector .

the first component is preseparation counseling that provides a brief overview of services and benefits available to those who are separating and is conducted by the armed forces .

the second component is an employment workshop conducted over 2 or 2 ½ days by certified facilitators following a dol guide .

the third component covers veterans' benefits , including disability compensation , and is often provided on the last day of the employment workshop by va .

the fourth component — the disabled transition assistance program , conducted by va — offers information and counseling , primarily on vocational rehabilitation and employment options .

it also covers insurance , specially adapted housing , and the americans with disabilities act , for individuals who have or think they may have a service - connected disability .

preseparation counseling is the only component where attendance is mandated in law ; participation in all the other components is voluntary unless dod or the services decide otherwise .

all separating service members with at least 180 days of active duty must receive preseparation counseling .

this component introduces all the subsequent components , highlighting each of them briefly .

each military service is required to provide the counseling prior to release or discharge as specified in law and to identify the type and source of benefits and services available in the following areas: employment , relocation , education , health and life insurance , and financial planning .

separating service members complete a checklist during this component , certifying that they have been informed of the services available to them and indicating with a check mark any subsequent services they wish to receive , such as the employment workshop .

a copy of this signed checklist becomes a part of the individual service member's personnel record and , according to dod officials , is required before the service member can be separated or demobilized .

see appendix ii for a complete list of the specific services and benefits covered , as indicated on the preseparation counseling checklist .

more hours are set aside for the employment workshop than for any other component .

as shown in figure 1 , from 22 to 30 hours are scheduled for the delivery of all tap components , with 16 to 20 hours devoted to this workshop .

this emphasis on preparation for civilian employment is consistent with the purpose of tap when it was established in 1990 .

agency managers explained that tap was designed to serve full - time active duty service members who generally had little prior civilian employment experience and might have had difficulty transferring skills acquired in the military to the civilian economy .

many had specialized in critical skills , such as those utilized in combat arms , which could not be easily transferred to civilian occupations .

helping military personnel translate their military experience into skills valued in the civilian workforce was viewed as of paramount importance .

although the reserves and national guard were specifically identified in the law that established tap , the program was designed to meet the needs of full - time active duty service members because most reserve and national guard members had not served in an active duty capacity long enough to be eligible for tap .

after separating service members complete one or more of the core tap components , they may obtain additional , individualized counseling on specific benefits and services at tap offices located on military installations .

they may have access to automated tools designed to help them prepare résumés or cover letters to potential employers or opportunities to practice their job interview skills .

service members are also encouraged to contact state workforce agencies' one - stop career centers and va hospitals for additional services after they return home .

although veterans' service organizations do not have a formal role in the provision of tap , they often serve as an informal referral resource for service members who seek their assistance .

to varying degrees , the veterans' service organizations that we contacted were primarily involved in helping service members complete claims such as those for va disability compensation , as well as claims for other va benefits and medical treatment .

other activities performed by the veterans' service organizations include briefings on va benefits and advice and counseling on a range of issues .

many military installations have provided these organizations with office space where they can assist service members .

certain veterans' organizations , such as the disabled american veterans , amvets , and the veterans of foreign wars , have taken advantage of this opportunity .

for example , the disabled american veterans reports that it has 25 staff members located on installations who assist service members at about 80 military installations and 18 military treatment facilities .

to facilitate interagency coordination and oversight , the federal agency partners established the tap steering committee , which is chaired by dol .

each federal agency has also designated a single person as the point of contact for tap , generally referred to as the agency tap manager .

in addition , within dod , each of the armed forces has identified a single person who is responsible , generally referred to as the service tap manager .

the dod managers meet as a group on a quarterly basis and also with other agency tap managers on a quarterly basis to discuss issues , propose initiatives , and act as a sounding board .

any problems that develop and are not resolved at the local level can be sent back to the steering committee for resolution .

broad planning and budgeting for tap takes place at the federal level within dod and dol - – the only agencies that have funds dedicated to the support of tap .

dod and the services estimate that about 200,000 service members , not including members of the reserves and national guard , have been eligible for tap each fiscal year since 2001 and have provided an average of $45 million per year in budget authority .

 ( see app .

iii for a breakout by military service. ) .

dol develops its tap budget using dod's estimates of the number separating and historical information that about 70 percent of those separating actually attend the employment workshops .

dol reports that in fiscal year 2004 it actually spent about $13 million on tap .

va estimates that it spent $0.7 million in the same year for its components of tap .

 ( for more information about the scheduling and delivery of employment workshops and other tap components at the local installations , see app .

iv. ) .

to clarify the roles of the federal agencies involved , an interagency agreement is required by law for all tap components except preseparation counseling , where dod has sole responsibility .

pursuant to law , the roles and responsibilities of dod , dol , and va for the transition program are outlined in a 1994 agreement called a memorandum of understanding .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

under this agreement , dol has the leadership role in delivering the employment workshops , dod ensures that service members participate and supplies logistical support , and va provides information on veterans' benefits and delivers the dtap component for separating members who have or may have service - connected disabilities .

a separate 1993 agreement between dod and va outlines how va provides its tap components overseas , with va providing the staff and dod providing the funding and logistical support .

in addition to carrying out these agreements at the national level , the federal agencies encourage similar agreements among state and regional offices and the installations located in their areas .

uniformity in the content and quality of tap is achieved in part by standardized guidebooks and manuals as well as certification of facilitators for one or more components .

for both preseparation counseling and the employment workshop , participants receive guidebooks or manuals covering topics identified in the law that established tap .

like instructional textbooks , the guidebooks and manuals help structure how these components are presented .

in addition , manuals have been developed for use by the individuals who facilitate the employment workshops , and all workshop facilitators must be trained and certified by the national veterans' training institute .

for oversight purposes and to help ensure the quality of the workshops , dol asks participants to complete a critique form shown in appendix v. on the form , participants have an opportunity to provide comments and suggestions and also indicate on a scale how much they have gained from the information presented .

dol facilitators review the forms to assess the level of satisfaction of participants and consider suggestions for improvements .

although the va components of tap do not have comparable guides or manuals , va officials explain that the slides and handouts they use can be more easily updated to conform to changes in the laws governing veterans' benefits .

the demobilization of reserve and national guard members , however , is outside the control of the tap managers .

dod and armed forces guidelines establish the procedures governing demobilization and the topics to be covered , but individual installation commanders have discretion over the actual schedule .

to provide tap information to reserve and national guard members in 2003 , the dod tap manager and service managers prepared written materials for distribution at demobilization .

the materials included a laminated , pocket - sized preseparation guide written for reserve and national guard members that highlighted all of the benefits and services available and provided web site addresses and toll - free numbers .

depending on the branch of military service or command responsible , the location , and other circumstances , the amount of time devoted to the tap components may vary .

other variations include the extent of personal attention given participants and the instructional method used .

preseparation counseling may take the form of individualized , one - on - one counseling sessions of an hour or more or it may take the form of group briefings , depending in part on the time available and the numbers to be counseled .

group sessions are more common at large bases like those maintained by the army and marine corps , where many individuals are separating .

also , the army has made use of technology and offers preseparation counseling at banks of computers that use interactive programs and include headphones so that participants can work independently and at their own pace while remaining part of a group .

in the navy , transition assistance may take place on board ship rather than at military installations .

tap varies in part because the military services are able to exercise their flexibility to tailor the program to better meet the circumstances of their service members .

while some service members receive additional services designed to enhance tap , others at remote locations may participate in tap by video or telephone because there are no trained personnel on - site .

because of the demobilization timetables , many reserve and national guard members cannot take advantage of tap components offered to full - time active duty military personnel and instead receive much shorter presentations as part of large groups at demobilization briefings .

for example , members of the reserves and national guard may be offered a 45-minute veterans' benefits briefing by va at the demobilization briefing while 3 to 4 hours of veterans' benefits briefing are provided other military personnel on the last day of the tap workshop .

participation also varies by the military service involved and the component of tap offered .

for example , the army had about twice as many service members attending preseparation counseling as any one of the other services from fiscal year 2002 through 2004 .

during the same period , the number of army reserve and army national guard members attending preseparation briefings at demobilization increased more than ten - fold , from about 9,000 to about 93,000 .

 ( app .

vi shows the number of service members who separated and those who attended tap components by military service. ) .

as expected , estimated participation rates have been the highest for preseparation counseling where attendance is mandated in law .

the average rates for the three years ending in 2004 have ranged from 76 percent to over 100 percent , depending on the military service .

also as expected , the estimated participation rates are generally lower for the 3,000 or more employment workshops held each year , where attendance is voluntary .

the average rates for the three years ranged from 56 percent to 86 percent .

this represents the number attending the workshops as a percentage of all who separated and were eligible for tap .

the army reports that about 20 percent of those eligible each year indicated that they were not interested in attending the workshops .

the marine corps , which has mandated attendance at the employment workshops , and the navy show the highest participation rates over the three years .

although the navy shows higher rates for participation in employment workshops than in preseparation counseling , the discrepancy is more likely a reflection of reporting problems than of actual attendance , and the actual numbers of service members receiving counseling is probably higher .

retirees were disproportionately represented in the employment workshops .

across the armed forces , about one - third of all who participate are retirees , although they constitute about one - fifth of all who separate .

the remainder are those separating or released prior to retirement .

no data are available for participation in the va components of tap .

because the veterans' benefits briefings are usually held on the last day of the employment workshops , va officials indicated that the participation rates for their briefings are equivalent to the rates for the employment workshops .

in addition , va told us that dtap is provided to all service members who are receiving care or separating from medical treatment facilities by va counselors who are located at or make regular visits to these medical facilities .

however , no data are available to determine the number of individuals eligible for dtap , and va's records do not distinguish the number who participate in this component from the total of all recipients of va outreach briefings .

very few members of the reserve or national guard are able to attend the employment workshops , although at demobilization they complete their preseparation counseling checklists and may be briefed on veterans' benefits and health insurance coverage options , depending on the schedule developed for demobilization .

the tap managers with dod and the military services explained that the chief problem is lack of time during demobilization , which is often completed in 5 days .

in addition , many of these service members are anxious to return home and are not interested in prolonging their stay to attend workshops .

further , many have jobs at home that are being held for them , so they may not need to attend the employment workshop .

however , the tap managers also told us that they believe that employment information in some form is relevant and useful for some reserve and national guard members .

they noted that some were self - employed before they went on active duty , and their businesses may have suffered or gone into bankruptcy in their absence .

other service members may have worked for companies that have gone out of business since their active duty began .

other members might prefer to find better jobs than the ones they held before they went on active duty .

while tap managers were not able to provide data on the number who might be interested in attending the employment workshop , members of the reserves and national guard we met generally confirmed the views of the tap managers .

the agencies administering the program have taken several actions to improve tap program materials for all eligible personnel separating from the military , including reserve and national guard members .

in addition , the agencies have taken steps to increase participation , primarily among full - time active duty military personnel .

however , despite efforts so far , challenges remain , particularly in meeting the needs of demobilizing reserve and national guard members for transition assistance .

dod is updating information and reconsidering the topics to be covered during preseparation counseling , based on its assessment of the differing needs of participants .

as a result , dod plans to eliminate the “one size fits all” approach currently in place .

for full - time active duty service members , it has drafted an updated counseling checklist .

to meet the needs of demobilizing reserve and national guard members , it has drafted a separate counseling checklist tailored to their circumstances .

 ( see app .

vii for the changes that are planned to the form shown in app .

ii. ) .

in updating the information for both groups , dod added several internet sites so that service members can follow up to obtain more information on available services and benefits , including sites explaining options for health insurance coverage .

to better meet the needs of reserve and national guard members , their new checklist eliminates information on benefits that apply only to active duty members , such as relocation assistance and separation pay .

instead , the new form provides benefit information applicable to demobilizing reserve and national guard service members , such as reemployment rights , employer support , and loan relief .

dod is taking the same approach to the revision of the guidebook and other materials used in preseparation counseling .

dod officials plan to update the preseparation guide that contains information on services and benefits available to service members separating from full - time active duty .

in addition , they are developing a separate guide for demobilizing reserve and national guard personnel .

meanwhile , the military services have developed new materials specifically geared toward the needs of reserve and national guard service members .

for instance , the army reported that it uses a separate script and slides for preseparation counseling of demobilizing reserve and national guard service members and gives them a handout on services and benefits tailored to their needs as well as a calling card with the telephone number of a resource center that these service members can contact for one - on - one assistance .

dol and va are also taking actions to improve the information they provide on benefits and services available to separating service members .

dol plans to use focus groups and survey data to assess the strengths and weaknesses of its employment workshop curriculum in serving the needs of all service members .

va has improved its marketing activities by issuing pamphlets , brochures , a videotape , and a wallet - size card with information on how to obtain further information about va health care and benefits .

one of its brochures is entitled “a summary of va benefits for national guard and reserve personnel.” to ensure that all participants have the information they need in dtap , va formed a task force in 2004 to restructure and standardize the dtap curriculum to meet the needs of all separating service members who have or may have a disability and invited dod and the military services to participate .

as a result , va has developed a new curriculum with video , slides , and a script for dtap .

this standardized dtap curriculum is intended to provide extensive information on va's vocational rehabilitation and employment services .

va also issued a quick reference guide to present information about vocational counseling , rehabilitation , and employment services available to active duty service members as well as veterans with service - connected disabilities .

the guide is intended for distribution at dtap sessions offered at military installations and treatment facilities and for other purposes and locations as appropriate .

along with this new effort , va continues its outreach campaign to contact all service members in need of these services .

dod and its partner agencies are considering or have undertaken several actions designed to increase participation in tap , including making attendance mandatory or mandating that service members receive permission to attend tap , so that individuals have the opportunity to participate with the support of their commanders or other leaders ; emphasizing the importance and relevance of veterans' benefits by offering this information before the employment workshop as a stand - alone briefing by va ; sending dol contractors and va staff overseas to present their tap components to service members located at bases around the world ; and developing a centralized database to automate and manage information on participation .

recently , the tap service representatives at dod proposed to the secretary of defense that participation in tap be mandatory .

under the proposed policy change , all service members would be required first to attend preseparation counseling .

following preseparation counseling , all service members would be required to attend the veterans' benefits briefing , because the range of benefits is extensive and likely to affect the lives of most separating service members .

in addition , attendance at dtap would be required of all service members who have or think they have a service - connected disability , are awaiting a medical discharge , or have incurred an injury or illness while on active duty , or aggravated a pre - existing condition .

further , service members with an interest in attending the employment workshop who check “yes” on the preseparation counseling form would receive permission , without exception , to attend the dol - or service - sponsored employment workshop in its entirety .

the policy change in tap participation is being proposed to ( 1 ) bring more consistency to the overall program , ( 2 ) allow more service members to access tap , and ( 3 ) encourage commanders to release service members to attend the va briefings and all other relevant components of tap .

in 2002 , we reported that the support that commanders and supervisors have for transition services may determine the degree to which service members have access to the services .

if supervisors are not supportive of the transition assistance , or if they feel that mission needs are too pressing , they may be reluctant to allow service members under them to access services offered .

some service members we met told us that they faced difficulties being released from military duties to attend tap because of the priority accorded their military mission or the lack of supervisory support for tap .

they said that even when commanders support attendance at the workshop , others — such as the platoon , section , or unit leaders — may be reluctant to approve requests to attend the workshops .

this proposed policy change is designed to address these issues .

in addition , va and dol are taking actions to improve access to transition assistance for active duty service members stationed overseas .

it is important for service members stationed overseas to receive transition assistance there , especially for those who separate at overseas locations .

starting in 1993 , va sent six military service coordinators or veterans' benefits counselors to u.s. military installations located in europe and later increased the staff to seven , assigned them for tours of 3 to 6 months , and extended their territory beyond europe .

however , va has no staff overseas for 3 months each year .

in 2003 , dol began phasing in its employment workshops , first using its own staff and later contractor personnel living overseas , rather than relying on the military services to conduct overseas employment workshops , as had been the case previously .

standard operating procedures are being developed to clarify the roles and responsibilities of dol , dod , and va in the delivery of employment workshops at overseas locations .

currently va provides its benefits briefings at 68 military installations and plans to have a military service coordinator in bahrain starting in may 2005 , while dol provides its employment workshops at 49 military installations and plans to expand to additional installations .

 ( see app .

viii for a list of locations overseas where dol and va offer tap. ) .

in january 2005 , the tap managers with dod and the military services met to discuss ways to better understand service member participation in tap .

in particular , they discussed the development of a centralized database to automate and manage information on the participation of active duty and reserve and national guard service members .

this new information system is in the initial planning stages .

it would provide dod and the services with the capability of disaggregating data on service members attending preseparation counseling to identify those who are retiring or separating voluntarily or involuntarily .

the system would also provide information on the reasons why service members do not receive preseparation counseling at least 90 days prior to separation or retirement , as required by law .

in addition , the new information system would permit dod and the services to analyze information specifically relevant to active duty service members or to reserve and national guard service members .

although several actions are under way or planned to improve tap , challenges remain , particularly in designing transition services that better accommodate the schedules of demobilizing reserve and national guard service members .

dod acknowledges that this presents several unique challenges , that the service members have not been surveyed to determine how to meet their needs , and that further study might suggest ways to address the challenges , primarily in the logistics of when and where to offer tap .

table 1 describes some of the key differences in circumstances between reserve and national guard members and others separating that need to be considered .

the tap managers for dod and the military services identified several challenges in designing transition services that better meet the needs of demobilizing reserve and national guard service members .

staff who provide transition assistance may not know when reserve and national guard units are returning for demobilization , because national security concerns prevent the release of information on the movement of large numbers of service members .

moreover , the time scheduled for demobilization varies by service and demobilization site .

commanders are challenged with trying to balance demobilizing some units while at the same time mobilizing others .

they also balance getting reserve and national guard members back to their families as quickly as possible with the extra time needed for transition assistance .

finally , dod , va , and dol do not know the amount of resources needed to provide transition assistance in a different format , such as providing tap after the reserve and national guard service members have returned home and begun to readjust to civilian life .

at this point , they may be more receptive to tap and better able to define their needs .

dod's proposed policy revisions acknowledge logistical issues that limit access for reserve and national guard members to tap .

for example , the planned changes to the preseparation counseling checklist require that demobilizing service members be released by commanders to attend the employment workshop only if there is time to complete this component before they are released from active duty .

under current demobilization schedules , reserve and national guard members do not have sufficient time to attend the workshops .

further , the tap managers with dod and the military services told us that they did not know how many demobilizing service members would be interested , if time could be made available , or how the content should be altered to meet their special needs .

to deal with the logistical challenges , the tap managers for dod and the military services are considering the option of providing some tap components to reserve and national guard members after they have been demobilized , and dol is involved in state pilot programs to test this option .

dod officials envision va presenting its benefits briefing and dtap , where applicable , during a scheduled drill weekend after the service members have been home for 45 to 60 days .

dod officials believe such an option would require additional resources and a mandate that reserve and national guard commanders allow sufficient time for staff to provide the transition assistance .

however , the tap managers do not know how many reserve and national guard members might be interested and able to attend such activities .

meanwhile , dol is currently involved in three state pilot programs of employment workshops designed for returning reserve and national guard members .

one in minnesota will offer a shortened version of the employment workshop , using a curriculum based on input from unemployed or underemployed reserve and national guard service members .

the pilot program will involve a change in national guard rules so that members can be required to attend the activity 30 days after their release , when they may be facing financial and other problems .

in oregon , dol is working closely with the national guard and the state workforce agency to provide employment workshops to national guard members .

the first workshops were offered in march 2005 .

in michigan , the state workforce agency is negotiating with the reserves and national guard to arrange a 4-day workshop , where these personnel will work alongside veterans who are receiving intensive case management services at the one - stop career center .

besides limiting access to the employment workshops , short demobilization time frames may also result in reserve and national guard members who are not informed in a timely manner of the requirement to apply for health insurance coverage and certain va education benefits while on active duty .

the national guard members we spoke with who had attended the va benefits briefing told us that they could not recall being informed of the need to apply for these benefits while on active duty ; these members included one who believed that he had been on active duty long enough to qualify for the more generous education benefits .

they indicated that too much information was covered in the 45- minute benefits briefing they received from va at demobilization and believed that at a minimum the va should have highlighted the significance of applying immediately , explained what information was required , and told them where to submit the application .

they added that they were unfamiliar with the services and layout of the installation where they were demobilizing , because they were only passing through on their way home .

the men and women who serve in our armed forces , particularly now that the u.s. military has increased its presence in contingency operations around the world , put their lives on the line every day .

for this reason , it is important that the government do all it can to help servicemen and women successfully transition to civilian life after service ends .

unlike their full - time active duty counterparts , however , the reserves and national guard members returning from active duty overseas who might opt for transition assistance do not always have the opportunity to participate in formal tap components .

although they receive some of the same information in briefings at demobilization , they may be required to attend as many as 18 briefings and activities over 5 days , most dealing with issues other than tap , such as legal and medical matters .

as a result , the information on available benefits is often abbreviated and may not emphasize certain benefits , including some education and medical benefits , that they may forfeit if the service members do not apply while they are still on active duty .

in addition , because these personnel are released from active duty within days of returning to the united states , any transition assistance must fit within this compressed time frame , and be offered overseas near the areas of combat or after the service members have returned home .

the agencies responsible for tap are aware of the challenge but have not determined the number interested , the appropriate topics , or the optimal timing and location .

moreover , for service members who have incurred disabilities , dtap information is critical .

yet va does not keep track of how many service members attend dtap .

better program statistics in this area could help va meet the needs of these service members and provide follow - up assistance .

to ensure that members of the reserve and national guard have the opportunity to benefit from transition assistance , we recommend that dod , in conjunction with dol and va , determine what demobilizing reserve and national guard members need to make a smooth transition and explore the logistical options for providing that assistance , such as opportunities for employment workshops before or after their demobilization and providing timely information about the need to apply for certain benefits while still on active duty .

to develop more accurate program statistics , we also recommend that va keep track of service members who attend dtap to ensure that adequate follow - up is possible with this population , which may be in particular need of the services .

we provided a draft of this report to dod , dol and va for review and comment .

all concurred with our findings and recommendations .

the written comments from these agencies appear in appendixes ix through xi .

dod said that the report accurately portrays the program and its operational processes and also recognizes logistical and other challenges in meeting the needs of reserve and national guard service members .

dod agreed with our recommendation and stated its commitment to work with its partner agencies to determine the needs of these service members for assistance , explore options to enhance their participation , and ensure that they receive timely information on the need to apply for certain benefits before they are released from active duty .

dol acknowledged the need for continuous monitoring and refinement of the employment workshops .

dol stated it will offer its assistance to dod in determining the tap workshop requirements for members of the reserves .

in addition , dol highlighted several initiatives described in the report that are designed to improve transition services , such as the pilot programs in three states that provide employment information to service members after their release from active duty .

dol noted that the lessons learned and best practices that are derived from these pilot programs will be disseminated widely .

va said it recognizes the need to emphasize time limits for establishing eligibility for certain benefits while on active duty , especially education and medical benefits .

va added that it is developing a brochure to describe a new education benefit for members of the reserves and national guard .

va also explained that it is developing a process to track dtap participation , as we recommended .

in addition , an agreement with the national guard bureau has been drafted so that va will know when and where demobilizing members return to their communities .

we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of dod , dol , and va , and other interested parties .

copies will be made available to others upon request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you have any question about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7101 .

key contributors are listed in appendix xii .

to assess how the transition assistance program ( tap ) is administered , we reviewed the legislative and regulatory history of tap , including records of congressional hearings , and interviewed responsible officials , including tap managers and other officials from the departments of defense ( dod ) , labor ( dol ) , and veterans affairs ( va ) ; the armed forces ; reserve affairs ; and the national guard bureau .

we did not interview officials from the department of homeland security concerning the coast guard .

we reviewed memorandums of agreement among the federal agencies involved , minutes of steering committee meetings , as well as policy directives prepared by dod and va. we reviewed tap program materials , including guidebooks and manuals prepared for participants and facilitators , slides , videos , and handouts .

to examine the role of veterans' service organizations — the extent of their participation in tap and their views on what their role should be — we conducted structured interviews with officials in the following organizations: amvets , disabled american veterans , american legion , paralyzed veterans of america , and veterans of foreign wars .

to experience firsthand the challenges of providing tap to members of the reserve and national guard returning from overseas , we visited fort bragg , north carolina , on february 23-24 , 2005 .

at fort bragg we observed a morning demobilization briefing given to members of the army national guard that covered several topics , including va veterans' benefits , health insurance , and completion of the preseparation counseling checklist .

we also attended the formal tap preseparation counseling , two concurrent employment workshops , and the briefing on va veterans' benefits for other service members .

in addition , we discussed transition assistance with the installation command , program providers , and demobilizing service members who participated in the demobilization briefing as well as other service members who participated in the formal tap components .

to show the level of participation in tap for each of the armed forces for each fiscal year from 2002 through 2004 , we obtained from the tap managers the number of service members participating in two of the four components of transition services — preseparation counseling and the dol employment workshop .

va data do not separately identify the number of service members attending its benefits briefings or disabled transition assistance program sessions .

however , va told us that in the united states the number of service members attending the employment workshop should approximate the number attending the va benefits briefings , because the va briefings usually follow the employment workshops .

to estimate the rate of participation in preseparation counseling , we used data from the armed forces on the number of service members discharged who had served on active duty for at least 180 days and data on the number of service members who had completed the preseparation counseling checklist .

to estimate the rate of participation in the dol employment workshop , we used data provided by dol on service members completing the workshop and dod data on service members discharged who had served on active duty for at least 180 days .

we note that the dol workshop is not mandatory and not all service members express an interest in taking the workshop .

because the number of service members interested in taking the workshop was not available for all the armed forces , our estimate represents the number of service members completing the workshop in relation to the number of service members discharged , not the number who indicate they wanted to attend the workshop .

we would expect the estimated rate of participation in the dol employment workshops to be higher if we were able to compare the number participating with the number expressing an interest in participating .

we consider the rates shown in appendix vi to be estimates , because many of the service members who participated in a component during one of the years shown were not among the service members who separated that same year .

by law , the armed forces must try to provide preseparation counseling between 1 and 2 years prior to separation .

this means that service members may participate in tap in 2002 but not be counted as separating until 2004 .

further , some service members who participate do not separate as planned , either because of their personal decision to extend or reenlist , or the armed forces' policy of stop loss .

stop loss keeps individuals on active duty beyond their normal date of separation or retirement and has been implemented at various times by all of the armed forces since september 2001 .

for these reasons , the estimated rates for the army and marine corps in the mandatory preseparation counseling component exceeded 100 percent in 1 or more years .

to assess the reliability of the data on the number of service members discharged with at least 180 days of active duty service and the number participating in tap , we reviewed documentation about the data systems and data entry , interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data , and worked closely with agency officials when we found discrepancies to understand or correct them .

we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

we conducted our work from december 2004 through april 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

dod's budget assumes an estimated 200,000 full - time active duty personnel have been eligible for tap each fiscal year since 2001 .

the number of participants is based on lists drawn up by the military services of personnel who have indicated their interest in separating as well as those who may be uncertain about their decision .

this list constitutes the anticipated separations but does not include unanticipated separations or demobilization of reserve and national guard members .

dod officials note that funding for tap has been flat since fiscal year 1995 ; prior to that , we reported that dod spent about $83 million in fiscal years 1992 and 1993 .

the scheduling of employment preparation workshops generally takes place in one of the 44 states with medium to large military installations .

dol relies on federal veterans' employment and training directors assigned to each state and territory , who meet with the commanders of the military installations in their area and obtain estimates for the numbers separating at each installation .

based on these planning figures , workshop schedules are developed that are reviewed quarterly and may be adjusted more frequently as long as dol has at least 14 days' warning .

generally dol tries to have at least 15 participants in each workshop , but preferably 25 to 35 .

if many additional participants are expected , dol officials told us that they will try to add a facilitator to give participants more individual attention during certain sessions , for example , when participants practice interviewing for jobs .

in some cases , the services have requested separate workshops for retirees only or for senior personnel with different kinds of skills .

depending on its budget , the number of potential participants , and the availability of facilitators with the appropriate skills , dol may honor such requests .

for example , we observed two employment workshops running concurrently at fort bragg , one specifically for personnel in the higher pay grades .

the facilitators who conduct most of the employment workshops are state employees supported by dol grants who specialize in providing services to veterans .

they are either local veterans' employment representatives or disabled veterans' outreach program representatives and must be trained and certified by the national veterans' training institute .

for the veterans' benefits component , va generally relies on dol to arrange for the workshops and contact a local or regional va representative to conduct the va briefing on veterans' benefits at the end of the workshop .

overseas and at about 70 military installations in the united states , the employment workshop facilitators are dol contractors working for native american management services , and they are also trained and certified by the institute .

dol officials we interviewed told us that they prefer to have va personnel present information on veterans' benefits because the va personnel usually have the expertise , experience , and most current information necessary to advise participants concerning their personal circumstances .

appendix vi: participation in transition assistance program by component , fiscal year , and military service numbers include reserve and national guard members who demobilized after at least 180 days of federal active duty .

the air force count of preseparation counseling participants does not distinguish these members from other eligible members who participate .

the air force tap manager believes that a more reliable measure of participation is a december 2004 audit of 400 personnel records of members separated from various installations that shows 91percent had completed their preseparation counseling checklists .

this is calculated as the percentage of total eligible separations .

for the employment workshops where participation is voluntary , a better indicator would be the percentage of service members indicating an interest in attending , but these data are not available for all services and years .

number of service members separating with 180 days or more of active duty , not including reserve and national guard members .

the navy reports that the numbers of preseparation participants are understated because of incomplete or delayed reports from uniformed military personnel to transition staff , and that the actual numbers should more closely approximate the numbers of employment workshop participants .

transitional health care benefit – for eligibility criteria and additional information go to www.tricare.osd.mil ( 1 ) a member of a reserve component who is separated from active duty to which called or ordered in support of a contingency operation if the active duty is for a period of more than 30 days .

 ( 2 ) a member who is separated from active duty for which the member is involuntarily retained ( stop loss ) in support of a contingency operation .

 ( 3 ) a member who is separated from active duty served pursuant to a voluntary agreement of the member to remain on active duty for a period of less than one year in support of a contingency operation .

in addition to the contacts named above , william e. hutchinson and martin scire made key contributions to this report .

in addition , roger thomas provided legal assistance , william r. chatlos assessed the reliability of participation data , and corinna nicolaou assisted in report development .

military pay: gaps in pay and benefits create financial hardships for injured army national guard and reserve soldiers .

gao - 05-125 .

washington , d.c.: february 17 , 2005 .

military pay: gaps in pay and benefits create financial hardships for injured army national guard and reserve soldiers .

gao - 05-322t .

washington , d.c.: february 17 , 2005 .

vocational rehabilitation: more va and dod collaboration needed to expedite services for seriously injured servicemembers .

gao - 05-167 .

washington , d.c.: january 14 , 2005 .

military personnel: dod needs to address long - term reserve force availability and related mobilization and demobilization issues .

gao - 04-1031 .

washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2004 .

military personnel: dod actions needed to improve the efficiency of mobilizations for reserve forces .

gao - 03-921 .

washington , d.c.: august 21 , 2003 .

military and veterans' benefits: observations on the transition assistance program .

gao - 02-914t .

washington , d.c.: july 18 , 2002 .

military downsizing: persons returning to civilian life need more help from dod .

gao / hehs - 94-39 .

washington , d.c.: january 21 , 1994 .

