i am pleased to be here to discuss our ongoing work on preventing sexual harassment in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) research .

prominent members of the academic community who receive federal stem grant funding have engaged in or been accused of sexual harassment , according to a number of recent media reports .

sexual harassment is not only degrading and illegal , studies show it has a negative effect on the ability of women to engage in research at the same level as men .

title ix of the education amendments of 1972 is the primary federal law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex , including sexual harassment , in education programs and activities receiving any federal financial assistance .

in fiscal year 2017 , u.s. universities were awarded over $15 billion in federal grant funding for stem research .

federal agencies are responsible for enforcing title ix compliance at the universities they fund .

in 2015 , we reported on six federal agencies' grant making to women in stem research , including title ix compliance .

we found that the departments of defense and health and human services ( hhs ) were not conducting required title ix compliance reviews at universities they funded and recommended that the two agencies periodically do so .

we also found that the department of justice ( doj ) had no formal information - sharing process for federal agencies to exchange best practices on title ix compliance activities , and we recommended that it establish such a process .

in 2016 , doj established the stem title ix working group , which meets quarterly with the six major stem grant - making federal agencies .

my statement today addresses preliminary observations from our ongoing work and describes: ( 1 ) the availability of staff and budget at selected federal agencies to address sexual harassment complaints at universities they fund for stem research , ( 2 ) efforts at these selected federal agencies to establish and communicate policies and procedures for university grantees on preventing sexual harassment , and ( 3 ) steps these selected federal agencies have taken to promote information sharing and collaboration among agencies to prevent sexual harassment at universities they fund for stem research .

for all three objectives , we selected five federal research grant - making agencies — three agencies from cabinet - level departments and two independent agencies — that together funded approximately 80 percent of the federal government's basic and applied extramural research in stem fields from fiscal year 2015 through 2017 .

the five federal agencies are: department of agriculture , including the national institute of food and agriculture ( usda - nifa ) ; department of energy ( doe ) ; national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , an national institutes of health ( nih ) , an agency of hhs ; and national science foundation ( nsf ) , an independent agency .

as part of our ongoing work , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and documentation ( e.g .

selected federal agencies' policies and procedures on preventing sexual harassment , grant requirements as outlined in terms and conditions , and interagency meeting agendas ) .

we also reviewed prior gao work and interviewed officials from selected federal agencies .

our preliminary observations will not be generalizable to all agencies that provide federal stem grants .

we shared the information in this statement with doe , hhs , nasa , nsf , and usda , and these agencies provided technical comments that we incorporated , as appropriate .

we will complete our ongoing work that will include examining selected agencies' efforts to conduct title ix compliance reviews and to address sexual harassment complaints .

we plan to complete this work by the end of 2019 .

we are conducting the work upon which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

selected agencies' funding for university stem research .

the five federal agencies included in our preliminary analysis provide billions of dollars annually for university research in stem fields , with nih providing more than the other four agencies combined .

table 1 details the total amount of research funding provided to universities by each agency in fiscal year 2017 .

sexual harassment .

as defined in the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( nasem ) 2018 report , sexual harassment encompasses three types of behavior: sexual coercion: favorable treatment conditioned on sexual activity .

unwanted sexual attention: verbal or physical unwelcome sexual advances , which can include assault .

gender harassment: sexist hostility and crude behavior .

the most common form of sexual harassment is gender harassment , which generally involves hostility , exclusion , or other discrimination based on a person's gender .

the 2018 report found that sexual harassment in academia is significantly more common among female students in engineering and medical majors than in non - stem fields .

according to the report , at least five factors create the conditions under which sexual harassment is likely to occur in stem programs and departments in academia: perceived tolerance for sexual harassment environments where men outnumber women and leadership is male environments in which the power structure of an organization is hierarchical with strong dependencies on those at higher levels or in which people are geographically isolated increased focus on symbolic compliance with title ix uninformed leadership on campus title ix of the education amendments of 1972 .

title ix of the education amendments of 1972 is the primary federal law that addresses sex discrimination in all federally funded grant programs at educational institutions .

under title ix , federal agencies that award grants to educational institutions have enforcement responsibilities to ensure such institutions do not discriminate based on sex .

enforcement responsibilities include issuing regulations , conducting periodic compliance reviews of funding recipients , and investigating timely written complaints of sex discrimination against recipients .

doj and the department of education have other responsibilities for administering title ix .

doj is designated by executive order no .

12250 to coordinate title ix compliance across federal agencies , including information sharing .

federal grant awards and grant life cycle .

in general , federal agencies administer grants through a common administrative life cycle: pre - award , award , implementation , and closeout .

during the pre - award stage , most of the agencies we reviewed require grantees to submit an “assurance of compliance” form as part of their grant application to attest compliance with anti - discrimination laws , including title ix .

for the award stage , the federal agency awarding the grant enters into an agreement with grantees stipulating the terms and conditions for the use of grant funds .

during the implementation stage , among other things , the federal agency manages and oversees the grant , including any title ix compliance reviews .

a title ix compliance review is an agency's assessment of whether a grantee is complying with the law .

federal agencies may conduct these reviews onsite at an institution ( grantee ) or via a desk audit .

in the closeout stage , the awarding federal agency and grantee bring the grant to its conclusion , once all the work associated with the grant agreement is complete , the grant end date has arrived , or both .

among the federal agencies we reviewed , different offices handle various aspects of grant compliance .

generally , each agency's civil rights or diversity office conducts title ix compliance reviews , develops policies and procedures for grantees , and investigates allegations and complaints involving university researchers supported by their agency's federal stem grants .

the office that awards grants generally creates and modifies grant terms and conditions .

our preliminary analysis indicates that the selected federal agencies' staff and budget available to address sexual harassment complaints from individuals at grantee universities varies according to the duties and funding for the primary agency offices responsible for addressing the complaints , as well as with the number of complaints received from grantees .

duties and funding for offices responsible for addressing complaints .

our preliminary analysis shows that all five agencies ( doe , hhs , nasa , nsf , and usda - nifa ) primarily address sexual harassment complaints through their civil rights or diversity offices .

however , these offices are responsible for more than just addressing complaints and preventing sexual harassment at grantee universities ; they also oversee a number of civil rights , diversity and inclusion efforts for the entire agency .

moreover , most of these offices also address internal employee sexual harassment complaints and other discrimination issues .

for example , hhs officials described how staff in their office for civil rights at headquarters and eight regional offices conduct compliance reviews and investigate all complaints alleging sexual harassment and other forms of discrimination against recipients of hhs federal financial assistance , including recipients of nih grants .

usda - nifa said their civil rights and diversity office staff are not always available when sexual harassment issues arise because they have other duties and also cover other discrimination issues .

in addition , some agencies noted challenges in ensuring adequate staffing levels .

for example , usda - nifa officials cited the need to fill vacant positions in their civil rights office , and nsf officials described a need to find staff with expertise in this complicated , specialized area .

all five agencies fund their civil rights and diversity offices separately from their stem research funding , and there is little relationship between the two budgets .

for more information on selected agencies' civil rights and diversity office staffing and budgets planned for fiscal year 2019 , see table 2 .

number of complaints received .

our preliminary analysis of sexual harassment complaint information indicates that four of the five selected agencies received three or fewer complaints from individuals at grantee universities from fiscal year 2015 through 2019 .

see table 3 .

officials from doe told us that because they receive so few sexual harassment complaints from individuals at grantee universities , they have enough resources to address those that are reported to their civil rights or diversity offices .

in addition , officials from hhs told us that because they receive so few complaints , their civil rights office has used other oversight mechanisms , like title ix compliance reviews , to examine whether sexual harassment is occurring at universities receiving hhs funds , including funds from nih .

however , as agencies continue to strengthen grantee policies or requirements , it may affect the number of complaints an agency receives from individuals at grantee universities , as well as the amount of resources an agency needs to address them .

for example , nsf officials described how the number of sexual harassment complaints they receive has increased since the agency implemented new grant terms and conditions that require university grantees to report any sexual harassment findings involving a principal investigator or co - principal investigator for nsf - funded research .

nsf officials also described an increased number of questions and calls about how to report incidents , requests for training and presentations , and meetings with program officers , awardee representatives and other stakeholders , among other items .

based on our preliminary review , all five of the selected agencies have established and communicated their own sexual harassment prevention policies to grantees within the last 2 fiscal years , but agency communication mechanisms and the content of these grantee policies vary .

specifically , our preliminary analysis shows that nasa , nih , and nsf communicate their policies on sexual harassment in multiple forms , such as grantee policy manuals , best practices documents , and online faqs .

the result is that grantees receive a relatively high level of detail about preventing sexual harassment and mechanisms for reporting complaints .

in contrast , cabinet agencies doe and usda - nifa provide fewer forms of guidance , either through their website or agency director and secretary - level policy statements and documents , which focus more generally on the broader category of sex discrimination or provide different levels of information on sexual harassment prevention policies for grantees .

see table 4 for more information .

regarding the content of the policies , our preliminary analysis shows that doe , nih , nsf , and usda - nifa updated their definitions of behaviors or actions that qualify as sexual harassment in their grantee policies and procedures , and nasa is in the process of doing so .

the definitions are more specific than previous definitions ; for example , they include descriptions of gender harassment , the most common form of sexual harassment .

the increased specificity may make clear the behaviors or actions grantees are expected to address in their efforts to prevent sexual harassment .

the agencies continue to develop and revise policies and communication mechanisms for grantees .

also , nsf and nasa have modified , or are taking steps to modify their grant terms and conditions to strengthen requirements for university grantees to report on findings of sexual harassment to the funding agency .

officials from both agencies told us these modifications will help hold grantees accountable for reporting sexual harassment ; the nsf director states on the agency's website that these changes are “intended to provide targeted , serious consequences for harassers” while also providing “tools to make harassment stop without disturbing others' careers and lives.” the requirement also supports the nasem 2018 report recommendation for institutions to be transparent about reporting sexual harassment findings , which is intended to foster a culture and climate that does not tolerate sexual harassment at universities .

officials from cabinet agencies doe , nih ( a component of hhs ) , and usda - nifa stated they would need to go through formal rulemaking processes to alter their grant terms and conditions in a similar manner .

in addition , our preliminary analysis shows that two of the five selected agencies are taking steps to evaluate the effectiveness of their sexual harassment prevention policies and procedures for grantees .

nsf officials told us that they are in the process of determining how best to evaluate the effectiveness of the new sexual harassment reporting requirements and how the requirements have affected grantees .

similarly , doe is in the process of comparing its policies and procedures against other federal agencies' , according to officials .

to date , the other three agencies have not yet evaluated the effectiveness of their policies , but officials at these agencies told us that they focus on ensuring grantees comply with title ix regulations as a way to measure the effect of their policies .

for example , nasa established a goal to promote compliance and encourage best practices among grantees , and the agency measures progress towards this goal through verifying grantee compliance with title ix .

usda - nifa officials are also in the process of creating a tool to provide a comprehensive blueprint for civil rights compliance — including title ix compliance — and are planning to implement the tool in fiscal year 2020 .

we will continue to examine and assess the selected agencies' sexual harassment prevention policies for university grantees and steps they are taking to evaluate them in our ongoing work .

based on our preliminary review , all five selected agencies have taken some steps to promote information sharing and collaboration among agencies on title ix compliance reviews through doj's title ix stem working group .

according to officials , the group discusses strategies for conducting joint title ix compliance reviews to leverage limited agency resources and share best practices .

for example , doe and nsf have conducted three joint compliance reviews , and nasa and nsf told us that they are in the process of conducting a joint review .

these joint reviews can be helpful , as the selected agencies conduct a small number of compliance reviews ( two to four ) annually relative to the number of university grantees who must comply with title ix .

despite this collaboration , all five selected agencies reported challenges in obtaining and sharing information .

for example , all five selected agencies told us they rarely discuss sexual harassment cases at doj's title ix stem working group meetings unless they are directly related to an ongoing or planned compliance review .

in addition , doe , nasa , nih , and nsf stated they rarely learn about instances of sexual harassment from voluntary reporting from universities or other federal agencies and instead must rely on other sources , such as news reports .

this situation may change at nsf and nasa , which have taken steps to modify their grant terms and conditions to require reporting of sexual harassment findings by grantees .

challenges in obtaining and sharing information on sexual harassment cases may increase the risk of a situation known as “pass the harasser,” in which a researcher with substantiated findings of sexual harassment obtains employment at another university or grants from another funding agency without the university or funding agency being aware of the researcher's history .

officials from all five selected agencies noted a willingness to participate in an interagency working group to address the culture of sexual harassment in stem research that moves beyond conducting title ix compliance reviews .

the white house's office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) has taken steps to establish an interagency working group .

in may 2019 , ostp established a joint committee under the national science and technology council to address challenges in the research environment .

ostp , nih , nsf , doe , and the national institute of standards and technology directors were selected as joint committee chairs to engage with the academic and science community for policymaking insight and to convene interagency efforts .

according to doe officials , the committee will address several priorities , including the development of policies and procedures across the federal government regarding sexual harassment in the research environment .

three of the five selected agencies ( nsf , nasa , and doe ) stated ostp would be the appropriate entity to establish uniform sexual harassment policy guidelines to help provide consistency across the federal government .

nsf and nasa officials suggested that doj or the department of education would be the appropriate agencies to collaborate with ostp on the ongoing monitoring of sexual harassment policy guidelines .

all five selected agencies reported taking collaborative steps with universities and federal agencies to address the culture and climate for women in stem .

for example , in 2019 , nih established a working group with university experts to collaborate with other federal agencies to assess the current state of sexual harassment allegation investigation , reporting , remediation , and disciplinary procedures at nih - funded organizations and advise on oversight , accountability , and reporting measures for grantees , among other things .

in addition , all five agencies provided examples of collaborative efforts that would help address the culture of sexual harassment in stem research .

for example , nasa officials told us that it would be helpful to conduct joint meetings with other university grantees across agencies to discuss sexual harassment in science .

lastly , efforts to improve information sharing and collaboration across agencies beyond conducting title ix compliance reviews are consistent with findings in the 2018 nasem report , which states , “adherence to legal requirements is necessary but not sufficient to drive the change needed to address sexual harassment.” we will continue to examine and assess selected agencies' title ix reviews and efforts to collaborate and share information in our ongoing work .

in closing , i note that we are continuing our ongoing work on this topic .

sexual harassment is not only degrading to individual researchers , it undermines the quality and fairness of our nation's research enterprise .

it is therefore important that federal agencies ensure their grantees effectively prevent and address sexual harassment in stem research .

we look forward to continuing our work to determine whether additional federal actions may be warranted to promote this objective .

chairwoman johnson , ranking member lucas , and members of the committee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact john neumann , managing director , science , technology assessment , and analytics , at ( 202 ) 512-6888 or neumannj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

key contributors to this testimony include rob marek ( assistant director ) , michelle st. pierre ( assistant director ) , kristy kennedy ( analyst - in - charge ) , nora adkins , caitlin cusati , nkenge gibson , amanda postiglione , janay sam , and ben shouse .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

