the number of individuals experiencing hunger has grown to more than 1 billion worldwide in 2009 , up from a record 963 million in 2008 , according to the united nations ( un ) food and agriculture organization ( fao ) .

fao attributes this upsurge in hunger to the global economic crisis , which followed rising food and fuel prices from 2006 to 2008 .

however , even before these crises , the number of undernourished people had been increasing annually in sub - saharan africa — where some of the world's food needs are greatest — underscoring the need to improve international food assistance .

international food assistance includes both emergency food aid and long - term food security programs .

due to rising food prices , increasing conflicts , poverty , and natural disasters , in 2007 , a record 47 countries — 27 located in africa — faced food crises requiring emergency assistance , according to fao .

to address these emergencies , countries provide food aid as part of a humanitarian response to address acute hunger through either in - kind donations of food or cash donations .

in - kind food aid is food procured and delivered to vulnerable populations , while cash donations are given to implementing organizations , such as the un world food program ( wfp ) , to procure food in local and regional markets , also referred to as local and regional procurement ( lrp ) .

international food assistance also includes a development - focused response to address long - term chronic hunger through food security programs .

while food aid has helped to address the immediate nutritional requirements of some vulnerable people in the short term , it has not addressed the underlying causes of persistent food insecurity .

as the largest donor to international food assistance , contributing over half of all food aid supplies to alleviate hunger and support development , the united states plays an important role in responding to emergency food aid needs and ensuring global food security .

however , gao has previously reported that u.s. agencies' efforts to reduce global food insecurity in sub - saharan africa have been fragmented and uncoordinated .

for decades , the u.s. government has set goals to improve the effectiveness of u.s. food aid by reaching global targets for reducing hunger , malnutrition , and poverty .

global targets were set at the 1996 world food summit and reaffirmed in 2000 with the millennium development goals , when the united states and more than 180 world leaders pledged to halve the total number and proportion of undernourished people reported worldwide from the 1990 level by 2015 .

the u.s. administration continues to commit to international food assistance by pledging u.s. leadership in developing a new global approach to hunger and the secretary of state has emphasized the importance of a comprehensive approach to sustainable systems of agriculture in rural areas worldwide .

in july 2009 , the united states and assembled leaders at the group of 8 ( g8 ) summit in l'aquila , italy , agreed to a $20 billion , 3-year commitment to increasing food security .

the u.s. share of this commitment , or $3.35 billion , includes $1.36 billion for agriculture and related programming to establish food security in fiscal year 2010 , representing more than double the fiscal year 2009 budget request level .

enclosed are a series of papers highlighting key issues to assist in developing this new global approach to hunger and to help shape oversight agendas to evaluate these efforts .

our objectives were to ( 1 ) update u.s. agencies' responses to gao's previous international food assistance recommendations and ( 2 ) identify potential oversight questions for congressional consideration .

since 1996 , we have published 18 products that provided insight , many with recommendations , on international food assistance .

specifically , in the past 3 years , we issued four reports with 16 recommendations to improve the efficiency of u.s. food aid and food security programs .

over the course of our work , we also identified improvements that were needed , as well as obstacles that affect the success of program planning and implementation .

as a result , we have identified five issues for congressional consideration to ensure more efficient and effective international food assistance: ( 1 ) coordination and integration , ( 2 ) needs assessments and market information , ( 3 ) transportation and logistics , ( 4 ) nutrition and food quality control , and ( 5 ) monitoring and evaluation .

coordination and integration: in 2007 and 2008 , we reported a lack of coordination and integration among food aid stakeholders .

in 2007 , we reported that u.s. food aid is funded under four program authorities and delivered through six programs administered by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the programs serve a range of objectives , including humanitarian goals , economic assistance , foreign policy , market development , and international trade .

we found inadequate coordination between u.s. agencies in tracking and responding to food delivery problems .

in 2008 , we found that interventions designed to mitigate the factors that contribute to food insecurity — such as low agricultural productivity , limited rural development , government policy disincentives , and poor health — have been fragmented and uncoordinated across the u.s. government .

for example , the u.s. presidential initiative to end hunger in africa was limited to usaid programs , although it purported to be a governmentwide strategy .

as a result , we made two recommendations to the administrator of usaid: ( 1 ) develop an integrated governmentwide u.s. strategy for achieving food security in sub - saharan africa that includes improved collaboration with host governments and other donors and ( 2 ) report to congress annually on the progress of implementing this strategy .

although u.s. agencies have met regularly to develop a governmentwide food security strategy , the strategy has yet to be published and reporting on its status is premature .

needs assessments and market information: ensuring that food aid reaches the most vulnerable populations is critical to enhancing its effectiveness .

emergency needs assessments include analyses of various factors , among them the effects of the crisis on vulnerable populations , strategies used by these populations to deal with the crisis , and its impact in terms of food insecurity .

they are usually carried out as a joint effort by several organizations , including fao , wfp , and nongovernmental organizations ( ngo ) , in response to a request from the government of an affected country .

in 2007 , we found that estimates of emergency food needs have differed significantly and , in some cases , have resulted in delays in appropriately responding to crises with sufficient food and complementary assistance .

in 2009 , we also found that unreliable market information and poorly functioning or unintegrated markets can cause adverse impacts on local or regional markets where food aid is purchased .

therefore , we made recommendations to ( 1 ) enhance the reliability and use of needs assessments , ( 2 ) determine ways to provide adequate nonfood resources when it will enhance the effectiveness of u.s. food aid , and ( 3 ) improve market information collected in areas where u.s. - funded lrp occurs .

although u.s. agencies have addressed the first two recommendations with new guidelines , it is too soon to tell how plans to address the third recommendation will be implemented .

transportation and logistics: in 2007 , we reported on u.s. food aid and highlighted several inefficient logistical planning and transportation practices .

specifically , we noted that despite growing demand for food aid , rising business and transportation costs contributed to a 52 percent decline in average tonnage delivered from 2001 to 2006 .

with the addition of 2007 and 2008 data , more recent trends indicate that , despite increases in u.s. funding for emergencies , the tonnage of food aid delivered continues to decline .

from 2006 to 2008 , u.s. food aid funding increased by nearly 53 percent , while tonnage delivered fell by 5 percent over that over that time period ( see fig .

1 ) .

time period ( see fig .

1 ) .

in 2009 , we determined that lrp is generally more cost - effective and timely than u.s. in - kind food aid ( see fig .

2 ) .

however , certain legal requirements for u.s. food aid , such as the requirement to procure only u.s. - grown agricultural commodities and to transport those commodities on u.s. - flag vessels , known as “cargo preference,” may constrain u.s. agencies' use of lrp .

therefore , we made the following recommendations: ( 1 ) improve food aid logistical planning through cost - benefit analysis , ( 2 ) work with stakeholders to modernize ocean transportation and contracting practices , ( 3 ) update implementation and reimbursement methodologies for transportation of u.s. food aid , and ( 4 ) update the memorandum of understanding ( mou ) between u.s. food assistance agencies and the department of transportation ( dot ) to minimize the cost of cargo preference regulations and resolve uncertainties associated with the application of cargo preference requirements to regional food procurement .

although usaid , usda , and dot have made significant inroads to improving logistical planning and modernizing ocean transportation and contracting practices , dot has not updated its regulations pertaining to cargo preference , and the agencies have not signed a comprehensive mou that addresses our concerns as recommended .

nutrition and food quality control: in 2007 , we reported that although u.s. agencies had made efforts to improve the nutritional quality of food aid , the appropriate nutritional value of the food and the readiness of u.s. agencies to address nutrition - related quality issues remained uncertain .

we also found that some impediments to improving the nutritional quality of u.s. food aid prevented the most nutritious or appropriate food from reaching intended recipients .

in 2009 , we reported on concerns about the quality of food procured in developing countries and adherence to certain product specifications .

as a result , we recommended that usaid and usda ( 1 ) establish a coordinated system for tracking and resolving food quality complaints ; ( 2 ) develop an interagency mechanism to update food aid specifications and products ; and ( 3 ) collect evidence on lrp's adherence to quality standards and product specifications .

although usaid and usda have established a commodity quality “feedback loop” to resolve food quality complaints and both agencies have commissioned studies on food aid specifications , they have not yet initiated plans to collect evidence on lrp adherence to quality standards .

monitoring and evaluation: monitoring and evaluation are critical oversight and program management tools that could help ensure that strategic objectives and intermediate goals of international food assistance programs are met .

in 2007 , we found that usaid and usda did not sufficiently monitor food aid programs .

in september 2009 , we determined that usaid lacks a comprehensive plan for monitoring and evaluating nonemergency food aid .

we also found that while usaid's office of food for peace has initiated an upgrade of its information technology system , its plans lack a concept of operations document that communicates overall system characteristics .

as a result , we recommended that usaid and usda ( 1 ) develop an information collection system to track monetization transactions and ( 2 ) improve monitoring of food aid to ensure proper management and implementation .

in addition , we recommended that usaid ( 3 ) develop a concept of operations document to help reduce the risks associated with upgrading the office of food for peace's information technology system and ( 4 ) develop an integrated monitoring and evaluation plan that links monitoring and evaluation to key usaid goals , establishes a systematic process for determining appropriate budget levels and staff resources , examines all available funding options , and establishes time frames for implementing and evaluating the plan .

although usaid and usda have addressed the first two recommendations by developing an information collection system to monitor food aid and monetization transactions , most of usaid's planned monitoring and evaluation actions are still in progress and it is too early to assess their impact .

the issues discussed in the five enclosures — accompanied by potential oversight questions — are based on completed and ongoing gao work on international food assistance .

this report also expands on the issues discussed on gao's transition web site at http: / / www.gao.gov / media / video / gao - 09-294sp .

we obtained information for this report from agency documents and interviews with agency officials in washington , d.c. , including usaid and the departments of agriculture , state , and transportation .

appendix i contains additional details about our scope and methodology .

we conducted our work from june 2009 to september 2009 .

the work on which this report is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

usaid and the departments of agriculture and transportation provided technical comments on a draft of this report , which have been incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the congressional committees listed below .

in addition , we are sending copies of this report to the president and vice president of the united states , and executive branch agencies .

the report also is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

a list of related gao products appears at the end of this report .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact thomas melito at ( 202 ) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

for press inquiries , please contact chuck young at ( 202 ) 512-4800 .

gao staff who made key contributions are listed in appendix ii .

key findings international food assistance , which includes both food aid and food security programs , is provided by multiple u.s. agencies with differing strategies , goals , and objectives .

in 2008 , we reported that donors and other implementing partners experienced difficulties in coordination and that the united states lacked an integrated , governmentwide strategy to address the root causes of food insecurity .

the u.s. presidential initiative to end hunger in africa — the principal strategy to meet its commitment toward halving hunger in sub - saharan africa — purported to be a governmentwide strategy , but was limited to only some of usaid's agricultural development activities and did not integrate with other agencies in terms of plans , programs , resources , and activities to address food insecurity in africa .

we will publish a new report on u.s. efforts to address global food insecurity in february 2010 .

the united states has principally employed six programs to deliver food aid: public law ( p.l. ) .

480 ( renamed the food for peace act in 2008 ) , titles i , ii , and iii ; food for progress ; mcgovern - dole food for education and child nutrition ; and section 416 ( b ) .

table 1 provides a summary of these food aid programs by program authority .

response to recommendations based on information provided by usaid and usda and our own analysis , we determined that recommendation 1 has not been implemented .

although the interagency policy committee has met regularly to develop a governmentwide food security strategy , the group has yet to publish its strategy .

however , the interagency policy committee has established an objective to help rural farmers feed themselves and to help countries establish sustainable agriculture systems by ( 1 ) investing in country - led food security plans , ( 2 ) coordinating stakeholders strategically , ( 3 ) supporting multilateral mechanisms , ( 4 ) ensuring a sustained commitment , and ( 5 ) focusing on a comprehensive approach to agriculture productivity .

the interagency policy committee has also identified seven principles for its food security strategy , including the following: stimulate postharvest and private sector growth , support women and families , maintain the natural resource base , expand knowledge and training , increase trade flows , and support an enabling policy environment .

based on information provided by usaid and usda and our own analysis , we determined that recommendation 2 has not been implemented .

usaid officials stated that they plan to update congress on progress toward implementation of a governmentwide food security strategy as part of the agency's 2008 initiative to end hunger in africa report ; the full version of this report was not publicly available as of september 2009 .

a summary report provided by usaid identifies three food security pillars — ( 1 ) immediate humanitarian response , ( 2 ) urgent measures to address causes of the food crisis , and ( 3 ) related international policies and opportunities — used to respond to the 2007 and 2008 global food crisis .

however , the governmentwide strategy has not yet been finalized , and it is premature to report on its implementation .

oversight questions 1 .

what coordination and integration mechanisms has the u.s. government established to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of u.s. international food assistance ? .

2 .

what is the nature and scope of current u.s. global food security activities ? .

what agencies , programs , and funding levels are involved ? .

how are ngos , international organizations , foreign governments , and host governments involved in these efforts ? .

3 .

what progress have u.s. agencies made in developing an integrated governmentwide global food security strategy ? .

what are the goals and timeframe for the implementation of the strategy ? .

4 .

what key criteria has the u.s. government developed to assess the implementation of the global food security strategy ? .

does the u.s. government plan to report annually to congress on the results of the strategy ? .

