i am pleased to be here today as you examine federal approval of state medicaid demonstrations , a significant and growing proportion of medicaid expenditures .

section 1115 of the social security act provides the secretary of health and human services with broad authority to waive many traditional federal medicaid requirements when approving medicaid demonstrations .

the secretary can use the authority to provide states with flexibility for experimenting with delivering services outside medicaid's traditional rules .

however , certain parameters apply .

under law , medicaid demonstrations must , as determined by the secretary , be likely to promote medicaid objectives .

by policy , demonstrations should be budget neutral , that is , should not increase the federal government's costs for medicaid .

one key aspect of the broad authority under section 1115 is that it allows the secretary to approve new types of expenditures under demonstrations .

expenditure authorities approved in these demonstrations allow states to receive federal funds for costs that would not otherwise be eligible for federal matching funds under medicaid .

in other words , the secretary may allow states to effectively turn what otherwise would not be considered an allowed medicaid cost into a covered medicaid cost , as part of their demonstrations .

expenditures for demonstrations are a rapidly increasing proportion of medicaid expenditures .

in fiscal year 2011 , section 1115 demonstrations governed about one - fifth of medicaid expenditures , rising to nearly one - third of total medicaid expenditures in fiscal year 2014 , an estimated $89 billion in federal funds .

historically , many states sought section 1115 demonstrations to provide health coverage to individuals who could not be covered under traditional medicaid rules .

but in recent years , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has approved demonstrations for many other purposes .

my testimony today will cover our work related to the secretary's approvals of medicaid demonstrations .

my remarks will summarize some of our key findings about hhs's approvals , in particular ( 1 ) the types of expenditure authorities for non - coverage - related purposes that hhs has recently approved and whether approval documentation shows how they promote medicaid objectives , and ( 2 ) hhs's policy and processes for ensuring that approved medicaid demonstrations are not likely to raise federal costs .

my remarks on the types of expenditure authorities hhs has approved are based on findings from our april 2015 report , which examined expenditure authorities approved in demonstrations for non - coverage - related purposes and the criteria hhs used to determine whether expenditure authorities were likely to promote medicaid objectives .

for that report , we examined new demonstrations , as well as extensions or amendments to existing demonstrations , approved by hhs from june 2012 through mid - october 2013 .

we identified a total of 25 states that received approvals during this time .

we examined the approval documents for each demonstration , including the special terms and conditions , which set forth hhs's conditions and limitations for the demonstration ; interviewed hhs officials ; and obtained additional documentation from hhs to identify the criteria used for approval and how the department documented that states' demonstrations met such criteria .

my remarks regarding hhs's policy and processes for ensuring that medicaid demonstrations are budget neutral are based on multiple for these reports , we reports we have produced on this topic since 2002.reviewed documentation for selected new comprehensive demonstrations at the time , as well as budget neutrality analyses prepared by the states and submitted to hhs .

we compared the spending limits approved by hhs with our estimates of the spending limits following hhs's policy .

we also reviewed hhs's policy and interviewed agency officials .

the reports cited provide further details on our scope and methodology .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

medicaid is a joint federal - state program that finances health care coverage for low - income and medically needy individuals .

in fiscal year 2014 , medicaid covered on average an estimated 65 million beneficiaries at an estimated cost of over $500 billion .

states pay for medicaid - covered services provided to eligible individuals under a federally approved medicaid state plan , and the federal government pays its share of a state's expenditures .

states that wish to change their medicaid programs in ways that deviate from certain federal requirements may seek to do so under the authority of an approved demonstration .

section 1115 of the social security act authorizes the secretary of health and human services to waive certain federal medicaid requirements and to allow costs that would not otherwise be eligible for federal matching funds — through “expenditure authorities” — for experimental , pilot , or demonstration projects that , in the secretary's judgment , are likely to assist in promoting medicaid objectives .

the demonstrations provide a way for states to test and evaluate new approaches for delivering medicaid services .

to obtain approval , states submit applications for section 1115 demonstrations to hhs for review .

upon approval , hhs issues an award letter to the state and an approval specifying the medicaid requirements that are being waived , the expenditure authorities approved , and the special terms and conditions detailing the requirements for the demonstration .

hhs typically approves a section 1115 demonstration for a 5-year period that can be amended or extended .

under hhs policy in place since the early 1980s , section 1115 demonstrations should be budget neutral to the federal government .

in other words , the secretary should not approve demonstrations that would increase federal costs for the state's medicaid program beyond what the federal government would have spent without the demonstration .

to have a budget - neutral demonstration , generally a state must establish that its planned changes to its medicaid program — including receiving federal matching funds for otherwise unallowable costs — will be offset by savings or other available medicaid funds .

once approved , each demonstration operates under a negotiated budget neutrality agreement that places a limit on federal medicaid spending over the life of the demonstration , typically 5 years .

according to hhs's policy , demonstration spending limits are based on states' projected costs of continuing their medicaid programs without a demonstration .

the higher the projected costs without a demonstration , the more federal funding states are eligible to receive for the demonstration .

hhs's policy calls for establishing a spending base using a state's actual historical spending from a recent year and projecting spending over the course of the demonstration using certain growth rates established in policy .

hhs approved expenditure authorities for a broad range of purposes beyond expanding medicaid coverage to individuals , including state - operated programs and funding pools .

however , how these programs and funding pools would further medicaid objectives was not always apparent from hhs's documentation .

recent approvals highlight the need for specific criteria and clear documentation to show how demonstrations further medicaid purposes .

in our april 2015 report examining recent demonstration approvals in 25 states , we found that hhs had approved expenditure authorities allowing 5 states to receive federal medicaid matching funds for state expenditures for more than 150 state - operated programs .

prior to the demonstrations , these programs were not coverable under medicaid .

the 5 states were approved to spend up to $9.5 billion in medicaid funds ( federal and state ) for these programs during their current demonstration approval periods , which ranged from 2.5 to 5 years .

the state programs were operated or funded by a wide range of different state agencies , such as state departments of mental health , public health , corrections , youth services , developmental disabilities , aging , and state educational institutions .

prior to being included in the demonstrations , these programs could have been financed with state or non - medicaid federal funding sources , or a combination of these , such as state appropriations or non - medicaid federal grant funding .

under the demonstrations , states must first allocate and spend state resources for programs to receive federal medicaid matching funds .

the federal matching funds received could replace some of the state's expenditures for the programs , freeing up state funding for other purposes .

for example , states could use the freed - up state funding to invest in health care quality improvement efforts or health reform initiatives or simply to address shortfalls in states' budgets .

the expenditure authorities for state programs supported a broad range of state program costs that would not otherwise have been eligible for federal medicaid funding .

although many of the programs offered health - related services , such as prostate cancer treatment and newborn immunizations , not all were necessarily income - based .

in addition to programs providing health - related services , other state programs authorized to receive funding included those providing support services to individuals and families , for example , to non - medicaid - eligible individuals ; those providing access to private insurance coverage for targeted groups ; and those funding health care workforce training programs .

overall , state programs that were approved for federal medicaid funds appeared to be wide ranging in nature .

how funding for these state - operated programs would likely promote medicaid objectives was not always clear from hhs's approval documents .

we found that the documents did not consistently include information indicating what , specifically , the approved expenditures for state programs were for and , therefore , how they would likely promote medicaid objectives .

state programs approved by hhs were generally listed by program name in the special terms and conditions of each state's approval , but often without any further detailed information .

examples of state program names listed in the approval documents included a healthy neighborhoods program , grants to councils on aging , childhood lead poisoning primary prevention , and a state - funded marketplace subsidies program .

a full listing of the state programs funded by expenditure authorities we reviewed is included in appendix i .

further , we found that several state programs approved for federal medicaid funds appeared , based on information in the approvals , to be only tangentially related to improving health coverage for low - income individuals and lacked documentation explaining how their approval was likely to promote medicaid objectives .

for example , the purposes of some programs approved included funding insurance for fishermen and their families at a reduced rate ; constructing supportive housing for the homeless ; and recruiting and retaining health care workers .

for two of the five states we reviewed , hhs's approvals included additional details beyond the program names about the programs — including program descriptions and target populations — in the special terms and conditions .

such information can help explain how the programs may promote medicaid objectives ; however , we found that even when such information was included , hhs's basis for approving expenditure authorities for some state programs was still not transparent .

for example , one state received approval to claim matching funds for spending on a state program that issues licenses and approves certifications of hospitals and other providers in the state .

while the terms and conditions delineated the program's mission and funding limits , it did not explicitly address how the program related to medicaid objectives .

the approvals for the other three states , accounting for nearly half of the more than 150 state programs in our review , lacked information on how the state programs would promote medicaid objectives , such as how they would benefit low - income populations .

we also found that hhs's approvals varied in the extent to which they provided assurances that medicaid funding for state programs would not duplicate any other potential sources of non - medicaid federal funding .

in two of the five states we reviewed , the terms and conditions identified all other federal and nonfederal funding sources for each state program and included specific instructions on how states should “offset” other revenues received by the state programs related to eligible expenditures .

the approval for a third state did not identify other funding sources received by each program but included a general program integrity provision requiring the state to have processes in place to ensure no duplication of federal funding .

in contrast , the approvals for two states did not identify other federal and nonfederal funding sources for each program and lacked language expressly prohibiting the states' use of funding for the same purposes .

another major type of non - coverage - related expenditure authority that hhs approved allowed states to make new kinds of supplemental payments — that is , payments in addition to base payments for covered services — to hospitals and other providers .

in our april 2015 report , we found that hhs approved expenditure authorities in eight states for pools of dedicated funds — called funding pools — amounting to more than $26 billion ( federal and state share ) over the course of the current approvals , which ranged from 15 months to over 5 years .

these expenditure authorities allowed states to receive federal medicaid funds for supplemental payments made to providers for uncompensated care or for delivery system or infrastructure improvements .

in addition , some states had funding pools approved for other varied purposes , such as graduate medical education .

funding pools for hospital uncompensated care costs .

in our april 2015 report , we found that hhs approved expenditure authorities in six states to establish or maintain hospital uncompensated care funding pools for a total of about $7.6 billion ( federal and state ) in approved spending .

funding pools for incentive payments to hospitals .

hhs also approved new expenditure authorities in five states for funding pools to make incentive payments to promote health care delivery system or infrastructure improvements for nearly $18.8 billion ( federal and state share ) in spending .

these expenditure authorities were for payments to incentivize hospitals or their partners to make a variety of improvements , such as lowering hospitals' rates of adverse events or incidence of disease , improving care for patients with certain conditions , and increasing delivery system capacity .

as with approvals of expenditure authorities for state programs , we found that hhs's approvals of expenditure authorities for funding pools also did not consistently document how expenditures would likely promote medicaid objectives .

the approvals of incentive payment funding pools we reviewed established a structure for planning , reporting on , and getting paid for general , system - wide improvements — for example , increasing primary care capacity or lowering admission rates for certain diseases — but most provided little or no detail on how the initiatives related to medicaid objectives , such as their potential impact on medicaid beneficiaries or low - income populations .

further , the criteria for selecting providers eligible to participate in incentive pools were not apparent in most of the approvals we reviewed .

hhs's approvals typically listed eligible providers but with no additional information about their role in providing services to medicaid populations .

for example , none of the terms and conditions for the five states' demonstrations that we reviewed established a minimum threshold of medicaid or low - income patient volume as the basis for participation ; however , three of the five states' approvals required that the payment allocations be weighted in part on measures of medicaid or low - income patient workload .

we also found that the approvals for incentive payment funding pools varied in the extent to which they provided assurances that medicaid funding for these initiatives would not duplicate other sources of federal funding .

the terms and conditions for only one of the five states required the state to demonstrate that its funding pool was not duplicating any other existing or future federal funding streams for the same purpose .

two other states' terms and conditions required hospitals to demonstrate that incentive projects did not duplicate other hhs initiatives .

the extent to which approvals for uncompensated care pools included protections against potential duplication of federal funds was somewhat mixed .

the approvals placed some limits on the potential overlap between payments to individual providers from the uncompensated care pool and medicaid's disproportionate share hospital program , which provides allotments to states for payments to hospitals that serve a disproportionate share of low - income and medicaid patients .

we found that hhs consistently included a requirement that when states calculate their disproportionate share hospital payment limits for individual hospitals , they include as offsetting revenue any payments for inpatient or outpatient services the hospitals may have received from the uncompensated care pool .

aside from instructions about the disproportionate share hospital program , however , the approvals generally did not explicitly prohibit other potentially duplicative sources of funding , such as grants awarded under other federal programs .

while section 1115 of the social security act provides hhs with broad authority in approving expenditure authorities for demonstrations that , in the secretary's judgment , are likely to promote medicaid objectives , as we reported in april 2015 , according to hhs officials , the agency has not issued explicit criteria explaining how it assesses whether demonstration expenditures meet this broad statutory requirement .

hhs officials also told us that for a demonstration to be approved , its goals and purposes must provide an important benefit to the medicaid program , but they did not provide more explicit criteria for determining whether approved demonstration expenditures would provide an important benefit or promote medicaid objectives .

hhs officials also said that it is not in the agency's interest to issue guidelines that might limit its flexibility in determining which demonstrations promote medicaid objectives .

given the breadth of the secretary's authority under section 1115 — the exercise of which may result in billions of dollars of federal expenditures for costs not otherwise allowed under medicaid , we recommended in april 2015 that hhs issue criteria for assessing whether section 1115 expenditure authorities are likely to promote medicaid objectives .

hhs partially concurred with this recommendation , stating that all section 1115 demonstrations are reviewed against “general criteria” to determine whether medicaid objectives are met , including whether the demonstration will ( 1 ) increase and strengthen coverage of low - income individuals ; ( 2 ) increase access to , stabilize , and strengthen providers and provider networks available to serve medicaid and low - income populations ; ( 3 ) improve health outcomes for medicaid and other low - income populations ; and ( 4 ) increase the efficiency and quality of care for medicaid and other low - income populations through initiatives to transform service delivery networks .

hhs was silent , however , as to whether it planned to issue written guidance on these general criteria , and we maintain that these general criteria are not sufficiently specific to allow a clear understanding of what hhs considers in reviewing whether expenditure authorities are likely to promote medicaid objectives .

for example , although each of hhs's four general criteria relates to serving low - income or medicaid populations , hhs does not define low - income or what it means to serve these individuals .

in our april 2015 report , we also emphasized the importance of hhs documenting the basis for its approval decisions and showing how approved expenditure authorities are likely to promote medicaid's objectives .

without such documentation , hhs cannot provide reasonable assurance that it is consistently applying its criteria for determining whether demonstration expenditures promote medicaid objectives .

we recommended that hhs ensure the application of its criteria for assessing section 1115 demonstrations is documented in all approvals , to inform stakeholders — including states , the public , and congress — of the basis for its determinations that approved expenditure authorities are likely to promote medicaid objectives .

hhs concurred with this recommendation , stating that it will ensure that all future section 1115 demonstration approval documents identify how each approved expenditure authority promotes medicaid objectives .

finally , we recommended that hhs take steps to ensure that demonstration approval documentation consistently provides assurances that states will avoid duplicative spending by offsetting as appropriate all other federal revenues when claiming federal medicaid matching funds .

in response , hhs said it would take steps to ensure approval documentation for state programs , uncompensated care pools , and incentive payment pools consistently provides assurances that states will avoid duplication of federal spending .

hhs's policy and process for approving state spending on medicaid demonstrations lack transparency and do not provide assurances that demonstrations will be budget neutral for the federal government .

longstanding concerns support the need for budget neutrality policy and process reform .

gao's prior work has found that hhs's policy and process for determining state demonstration spending limits lack transparency related to the criteria and evidence used to support state spending limits , and the most recent written policy , issued in 2001 , does not reflect hhs's actual practices .

spending limits are based on states' estimated costs of continuing their medicaid programs without the proposed demonstration .

according to hhs policy , demonstration spending limits should be calculated by estimating future costs of baseline spending — using actual medicaid costs , typically from the most recently completed fiscal year — and applying a benchmark growth rate ( which is the lower of the state - specific historical growth rates for a recent 5-year period and estimates of hhs officials reported that their policy and nationwide medicaid growth ) .process allow for negotiations in determining spending limits , including adjustments to the growth rates used to project baseline costs .

for example , if there are documented anomalies in historical spending data , adjustments can be made so that projected spending is accurate .

however , hhs's policy does not specify criteria and methods for such adjustments or the documentation and evidence that are needed to support adjustments .

gao , medicaid demonstration waivers: approval process raises cost concerns and lacks transparency , gao - 13-384 ( washington , d.c.: june 25 , 2013 ) any adjustments .

but hhs officials did not have documentation for the agency's process or policy on when estimates are allowed or an explanation for what type of documentation of adjustments is required .

between 2002 and 2014 , we have reviewed more than a dozen states' approved comprehensive demonstrations and found that hhs had not consistently ensured that the demonstrations would be budget neutral .

we found that hhs has allowed states to use questionable methods and assumptions for their spending baselines and growth rates in projecting spending , without providing adequate documentation to support them .

in particular , hhs allowed states to make adjustments that allowed for cost growth assumptions that were higher than growth rates based on historical spending and nationwide spending , without adequate support for the deviations from these benchmarks included in its policy .

hhs also allowed states to include costs in the baseline spending that the state never incurred .

in some cases , these practices allowed states to add billions of dollars in costs to their projected spending .

for example , in our 2013 report , we found that one state's approved spending limit for 2011 through 2016 was based on outdated information on spending — 1982 data were projected forward to represent baseline spending and state - specific historical spending growth for a recent period .

had baseline expenditures and benchmark growth rates been based on recent expenditure data that were available , the 5-year spending limit would have totaled about $26 billion less , and the federal share of this reduction would have been about $18 billion .

another state's approved spending limit for 2011 through 2016 included hypothetical costs in the state's estimate of its baseline spending ; that is , costs the state had not incurred were included in the base year spending estimate .

these costs represented higher payment amounts that the state could have paid providers during the base year , but did not actually pay .

for example , the state base year included costs based on the state's hypothetically paying hospitals the maximum amount allowed under federal law , although the state had not paid the maximum amount .

we estimated that had the state included only actual expenditures as indicated by hhs's policy , the 5-year spending limit would have totaled about $4.6 billion less , and the federal share of this reduction would have been about $3 billion .

allowing questionable assumptions and methods increases projected spending and allows for significant increase in federal costs .

we have found that had hhs developed demonstration spending limits based on levels suggested by its policy , spending limits would have been tens of billions of dollars lower .

for example , for five states' demonstrations we reviewed in our 2013 and 2014 reports , we estimate that had hhs used growth rates consistent with its policy and allowed only actual costs in base year spending , demonstration spending limits would have been almost $33 billion lower than what was actually approved.the federal share of the $33 billion reduction would constitute an estimated $22 billion .

 ( see table 1. ) .

our concerns with hhs's process and criteria are long - standing , and our recommendations for improving hhs's policy and process have not yet been addressed .

on several occasions since the mid - 1990s , we have found that hhs had approved demonstrations that were not budget neutral to the federal government , and we have made a number of recommendations to hhs to improve the budget neutrality process , but hhs has not agreed .

specifically , we have recommended that hhs ( 1 ) better ensure that valid methods are used to demonstrate budget neutrality , ( 2 ) clarify criteria for reviewing and approving demonstration spending limits , and ( 3 ) document and make public the bases for approved spending limits .

in 2008 , because hhs disagreed with our recommendations — maintaining that its review and approval process was sufficient — we suggested that congress consider requiring the secretary of health and human services to improve the department's review criteria and methods by documenting and making clear the basis for approved spending limits .

in 2013 , we further recommended that hhs update its written budget neutrality policy to reflect the actual criteria and processes used to develop and approve demonstration spending limits , and ensure the policy is readily available to state medicaid directors and others .

hhs disagreed with this recommendation , stating that it has applied its policy consistently .

however , based on multiple reviews of medicaid demonstrations , we continue to believe that hhs must take actions to improve the transparency of its demonstration approvals .

in conclusion , section 1115 medicaid demonstrations provide hhs and states with a powerful tool for testing and evaluating new approaches for potentially improving the delivery of medicaid services to beneficiaries .

in using the broad authority provided under section 1115 , the secretary has responsibility for the prudent use of federal medicaid resources , including ensuring that demonstration expenditures promote medicaid objectives and do not increase overall federal medicaid costs .

our work has shown , however , that it has not always been clear how approved demonstration spending relates to medicaid objectives .

for example , several state programs that were approved for medicaid spending that we reviewed appeared , based on information in the approvals , to be only tangentially related to improving health coverage for low - income individuals .

hhs's approved expenditure authorities can set new precedents for other states to follow and raise potential for overlap with other funding streams .

similarly , we have had longstanding concerns , dating back decades , that hhs's policy and process for approving total spending limits under demonstrations have not always ensured that spending under demonstrations will not increase federal medicaid costs .

as section 1115 demonstrations have become a significant and growing proportion of medicaid expenditures , ensuring that demonstration expenditures are linked to medicaid purposes and are budget neutral is even more critical to ensuring the long - term sustainability of the program , upon which tens of millions of low - income beneficiaries depend to cover their medical costs .

without clear criteria , policies , appropriate methods for developing spending limits , and improved documentation of the bases for decisions , hhs's demonstration approvals affecting tens of billions in federal spending will continue to lack transparency and to raise concerns about the fiscal stewardship of the program .

chairman pitts , ranking member green , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you might have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact katherine iritani , director , health care at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or iritanik@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are catina bradley , assistant director ; tim bushfield , assistant director ; christine davis ; shirin hormozi ; linda mciver ; roseanne price ; and emily wilson .

from june 2012 through mid - october 2013 , five states received approval from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) for section 1115 demonstrations that included expenditure authorities allowing funding for state programs .

table 2 shows examples of the names of the state programs funded in the terms and conditions of each state's approval documentation .

often there was no further detailed information regarding the approved programs .

medicaid demonstrations: approval criteria and documentation need to show how spending furthers medicaid objectives .

gao - 15-239 .

washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2015 .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 15-290 .

washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2015 .

medicaid demonstrations: hhs's approval process for arkansas's medicaid expansion waiver raises concerns .

gao - 14-689r .

washington , d.c.: august 8 , 2014 .

cost savings – health – medicaid demonstration waivers .

gao - 14-343sp .

washington , d.c.: april 2014 .

medicaid demonstration waivers: approval process raises cost concerns and lacks transparency .

gao - 13-384 .

washington , d.c.: june 25 , 2013 .

medicaid demonstration waivers: recent hhs approvals continue to raise cost and oversight concerns .

gao - 08-87 .

washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2008 .

medicaid demonstration projects in florida and vermont approved under section 1115 of the social security act .

b - 309734 .

july 27 , 2007 .

medicaid demonstration waivers: lack of opportunity for public input during federal approval process still a concern .

gao - 07-694r .

washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2007 .

medicaid waivers: hhs approvals of pharmacy plus demonstrations continue to raise cost and oversight concerns .

gao - 04-480 .

washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2004 .

schip: hhs continues to approve waivers that are inconsistent with program goals .

gao - 04-166r .

washington , d.c.: january 5 , 2004 .

medicaid and schip: recent hhs approvals of demonstration waiver projects raise concerns .

gao - 02-817 .

washington , d.c.: july 12 , 2002 .

medicaid section 1115 waivers: flexible approach to approving demonstrations could increase federal costs .

gao / hehs - 96-44 .

washington , d.c.: november 8 , 1995 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

