i am pleased to be here to discuss ( 1 ) potential duplication in economic development programs and ( 2 ) internal controls in place to help ensure that only eligible small businesses participate in federal procurement programs that provide them certain contracting preferences such as set - asides .

in march 2011 and more recently in may 2011 , we reported on potential duplication among federal economic development programs , and in this statement i will discuss this work .

we focused on this area because economic development programs that are administered efficiently and effectively can contribute to the well - being of the nation's economy at the least cost to taxpayers .

absent a common definition for economic development , we previously developed a list of nine activities most often associated with economic development .

these activities include: planning and developing strategies for job creation and retention , developing new markets for existing products , building infrastructure by constructing roads and sewer systems to attract industry to undeveloped areas , and establishing business incubators to provide facilities for new businesses' operations .

we recently completed an examination of 80 economic development programs at four agencies — the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and agriculture ( usda ) and the small business administration ( sba ) — where we assessed potential for overlap in the design of the programs , the extent to which the four agencies collaborate to achieve common goals , and the extent to which the agencies have developed measures to determine the programs' effectiveness .

sba administers 19 of the 80 programs .

according to the agencies , funding provided for these 80 programs in fiscal year 2010 amounted to $6.2 billion , of which about $2.9 billion was for economic development efforts , largely in the form of grants , loan guarantees , and direct loans .

the 80 programs and their fiscal year 2010 funding are listed in appendix i .

small business contracting programs are a subset of the 80 economic development programs we examined .

to encourage small business contracting , congress has created programs — such as the historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) , service - disabled veteran - owned small business , and 8 ( a ) business development programs — that give contracting preferences to specific categories of small businesses .

the hubzone program provides set - aside and other contracting preferences to small businesses in economically distressed communities , or hubzones , with the intent of stimulating economic development in those areas .

the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program permits awards of set - aside and sole - source contracts to any small business owned and controlled by one or more service - disabled veterans .

the 8 ( a ) program helps eligible socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses by providing business development support , such as counseling and technical assistance , and providing opportunities to obtain federal contracts on a set - aside basis or noncompetitively up to specified dollar amounts .

sba is responsible for administering the hubzone and 8 ( a ) programs .

sba , along with federal procuring agencies , also administers the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program .

pursuant to the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 ( or 2006 act ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has the unique authority to award contracts to veteran - owned small businesses and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses on a priority basis .

the 2006 act also requires va to maintain a database of veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and verify the ownership , control , and veteran or service - disabled status of businesses listed in its database .

my testimony today discusses several reports we have issued in the past few years .

specifically , i will discuss our work on ( 1 ) potential duplication and fragmentation in economic development programs and ( 2 ) internal controls in small business contracting programs .

my discussion of internal controls in small business contracting programs will focus on the hubzone program , va's efforts to verify the veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses to which it awards contracts , and the 8 ( a ) program .

this testimony draws primarily from reports we issued from 2008 through may 2011 , and updates that information where noted .

for our march 2011 and may 2011 reports on potential duplication and fragmentation in economic development programs , we relied on our previous work , ongoing work following up on recommendations from the previously issued reports , and the preliminary results of our ongoing evaluation of economic development programs at four federal agencies .

for example , for the most recent work we gathered new information related to program missions , targeted populations , and funding for the programs .

agency officials self reported the data on program funds , which were determined to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review .

we focused on commerce , hud , sba , and usda .

using the catalog of federal domestic assistance and other agency documents , we identified 80 federal programs administered by the four agencies that could fund economic development activities .

we also met with officials from each of the agencies to discuss each program and the program missions .

because sba officials view all of their programs as being related to economic development , we included all sba programs in this review .

for our june 2008 report on internal controls in the hubzone program , we compared the actions that sba takes to certify hubzone firms with its policies and procedures and selected internal control standards .

for example , we reviewed data for 125 applications to determine the extent to which sba requested documentation from firms to support applications .

we also compared hubzone performance measures with our guidance on the attributes of effective performance measures .

for our may 2010 report on va's efforts to contract with veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , we reviewed the agency's verification guidelines and procedures for reviewing applications and conducting site visits to determine va's progress in verifying the veteran status , control , and ownership of businesses .

we also reviewed files for a sample of verified businesses to determine how well va followed its procedures and to identify any deficiencies in the process .

for our march 2010 report on internal controls in the 8 ( a ) program , we visited 5 of the 68 sba districts and reviewed files of 136 8 ( a ) firms to assess sba's compliance with its eligibility review procedures .

we collected recent annual review information from each file , including evidence supporting eligibility criteria .

for more information on our scope and methodology , see the referenced reports .

the work on which this statement is based was performed from august 2007 to may 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the purpose of the hubzone program , established by the hubzone act of 1997 , is to stimulate economic development in economically distressed communities ( hubzones ) by providing federal contracting preferences to eligible small businesses .

the types of areas in which hubzones may be located are defined by law and consist of census tracts , nonmetropolitan counties , indian reservations , redesignated areas ( that is , census tracts or nonmetropolitan counties that no longer meet the criteria but remain eligible until after the release of the first results from the 2010 census or 3 years after they ceased being qualified ) , and base closure areas .

to be certified to participate in the hubzone program , a firm must meet the following four criteria: must be small by sba size standards ; must be at least 51 percent owned and controlled by u.s. citizens ; principal office — the location where the greatest number of employees perform their work — must be located in a hubzone ; and at least 35 percent of the full - time ( or full - time equivalent ) employees must reside in a hubzone .

the veterans benefits act of 2003 , which established the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program , permits contracting officers to award set - aside and sole - source contracts to any small business concern owned and controlled by one or more service - disabled veterans .

veteran means a person who served in the active military services , and who was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable .

service - disabled means that the disability was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in active service .

a firm also must qualify as a small business under the north american industry classification system ( naics ) industry - size standards .

a firm must meet several initial eligibility requirements to qualify for the 8 ( a ) program ( a process known as certification ) , and then meet other requirements to continue participation .

a concern meets the basic requirements for admission to the program if it is a small business that is unconditionally owned and controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who are of good character and u.s. citizens , and demonstrates the potential for success .

our work involving 80 economic development programs at four agencies — commerce , hud , sba , and usda — indicates that the design of each of these fragmented programs appears to overlap with that of at least one other program in terms of the economic development activities that they are authorized to fund .

for example , as shown in table 1 , the four agencies administer a total of 54 programs that can fund “entrepreneurial efforts,” which include helping businesses to develop business plans and identify funding sources .

sba accounts for 19 of these 54 programs , and it administers programs contained in six of the nine economic activities .

 ( the 19 sba programs are listed in the table in appendix i. ) .

our prior work going back more than 10 years also identified potential overlap and fragmentation in economic development programs .

among other things , we found that legislative or regulatory restrictions that target funding on the basis of characteristics such as geography , income levels , and population density ( rural or urban ) differentiated many programs .

while some of the 80 programs we assessed fund several of the nine economic development activities , almost 60 percent ( 46 of 80 ) fund only one or two activities .

these smaller , narrowly scoped programs appear to be the most likely to overlap because many can only fund the same , limited types of activities .

for example , narrowly scoped programs comprise 21 of 54 programs that can fund entrepreneurial efforts .

moreover , most of the 21 programs target similar geographic areas .

to address issues arising from potential overlap and fragmentation in economic development programs , we previously have identified collaborative practices agencies should consider using to maximize the performance and results of federal programs that share common outcomes .

these practices include leveraging physical and administrative resources , establishing compatible policies and procedures , monitoring collaboration , and reinforcing agency accountability for collaborative efforts through strategic or annual performance plans .

preliminary findings from our ongoing work show that commerce , hud , sba , and usda appear to have taken actions to implement some of the collaborative practices , such as defining and articulating common outcomes , for some of their related programs .

however , the four agencies have offered little evidence so far that they have taken steps to develop compatible policies or procedures with other federal agencies or searched for opportunities to leverage physical and administrative resources with their federal partners .

moreover , we found that most of the collaborative efforts performed by program staff on the front line that we have been able to assess to date have occurred only on a case - by - case basis .

as a result , the agencies do not appear to be consistently monitoring or evaluating these collaborative efforts in a way that allows them to identify areas for improvement .

we reported in september 2008 that the main causes for limited agency collaboration include few incentives to collaborate and lack of a guide on which agencies could rely for consistent and effective collaboration .

in that same report , we recommended that sba and usda take steps to adopt a formal approach to encourage further collaboration .

to date , the two agencies have entered into a memorandum of understanding and usda has recently taken some action to monitor the collaborative efforts of its field office staff .

in failing to find ways to collaborate more , agencies may miss opportunities to leverage each other's unique strengths to more effectively promote economic development and efficiently use taxpayer dollars set aside for that purpose .

in addition , a lack of information on program outcomes has been a long - standing concern .

this information is needed to determine if potential overlap and fragmentation has resulted in ineffective or inefficient programs .

more specifically: commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) , which administers eight of the programs we reviewed , continues to rely on a potentially incomplete set of variables and self - reported data to assess the effectiveness of its grants .

this incomplete set of variables may lead to inaccurate claims about program results , such as the number of jobs created .

moreover , in only limited instances have eda staff requested documentation or conducted site visits to validate the self - reported data provided by grantees .

we first reported on this issue in march 1999 and issued a subsequent report in october 2005 .

in response to a recommendation we made in 2005 , eda issued revised operational guidance in december 2006 that included a new methodology that regional offices were to use to calculate estimated jobs and private - sector investment attributable to eda projects .

however , during our recently - completed review we found that the agency still primarily relies on grantee self - reported data and conducts a limited number of site visits to assess the accuracy of the data .

while acknowledging these findings , eda officials stated that they do employ other verification and validation methods in lieu of site visits .

these methods include reviews to ensure the data are consistent with regional trends and statistical tests to identify outliers and anomalies .

sba has not yet developed outcome measures that directly link to the mission of its hubzone program , or implemented its plans to evaluate the program based on variables tied to program goals .

we reported in june 2008 that while sba tracks a few performance measures , such as the number of small businesses approved to participate in the program , the measures do not directly link to the program's mission .

therefore , we recommended that the agency further develop measures and implement plans to assess the effectiveness of the program .

while sba continues to agree that evaluating the outcomes of the hubzone program is important , to date the agency has not yet committed resources for such an evaluation .

the usda's office of rural development , which administers 31 of the programs we reviewed , has yet to implement the usda inspector general's ( ig ) 2003 recommendation on ensuring that data exist to measure the accomplishments of one of its largest rural business programs — the business and industry loan program , which cost approximately $53 million to administer in fiscal year 2010 .

usda officials stated that they have recently taken steps to address the ig's recommendation , including requiring staff to record actual jobs created rather than estimated jobs created .

however , an ig official stated that these actions are too recent to determine whether they will fully address the recommendation .

without quality data on program outcomes , these agencies lack key information that could help them better manage their programs .

in addition , such information would enable congressional decision makers and others to make decisions to better realign resources , if necessary , and identify opportunities for consolidating or eliminating some programs .

building on our past work , we are in the planning phase of a new , more in - depth review that will focus on a subset of these 80 programs , including a number of sba programs .

we plan to evaluate how funds are used , identify additional opportunities for collaboration , determine and apply criteria for program consolidation , and assess how program performance is measured .

more generally , as the nation rises to meet the current fiscal challenges , we will continue to assist congress and federal agencies in identifying actions needed to reduce duplication , overlap , and fragmentation ; achieve cost savings ; and enhance revenues .

as part of current planning for our future annual reports , we are continuing to look at additional federal programs and activities to identify further instances of duplication , overlap , and fragmentation as well as other opportunities to reduce the cost of government operations and increase revenues to the government .

we will be using an approach to ensure governmentwide coverage through our efforts by the time we issue of our third report in fiscal year 2013 .

we plan to expand our work to more comprehensively examine areas where a mix of federal approaches is used , such as tax expenditures , direct spending , and federal loan programs .

likewise , we will continue to monitor developments in the areas we have already identified .

issues of duplication , overlap , and fragmentation will also be addressed in our routine audit work during the year as appropriate and summarized in our annual reports .

as gao has reported , three small business programs have had varying degrees of internal control weaknesses that affected program oversight .

for example , in a june 2008 report , gao determined that sba's mechanisms for certifying and monitoring firms in the hubzone program gave limited assurance that only eligible firms participated .

in our june 2008 report on the hubzone program , we found that ( 1 ) sba's mechanisms for certifying and monitoring firms provided limited assurance that only eligible firms participated in the program and ( 2 ) the agency had not evaluated the effectiveness of the program .

specifically , for certification and recertification , firms self - reported information on their applications and sba requested documentation or conducted site visits of firms to validate the self - reported data in limited instances .

our analysis of the 125 applications submitted in september 2007 showed that sba requested supporting documentation for 36 percent of the applications and conducted one site visit .

to address these deficiencies , we recommended that sba develop and implement guidance to more consistently obtain supporting documentation upon application and conduct more frequent site visits to help ensure that firms applying for certification were eligible .

sba has made some progress in better ensuring that participating firms are eligible for the hubzone program .

according to agency officials , sba conducted 911 site visits to certified firms in fiscal year 2009 and made 1,142 site visits in fiscal year 2010 .

in march 2010 , sba issued a guide for analysts to use when reviewing applications to help ensure a standardized and more efficient review of applications .

the guidance provides examples of the types of documentation that sba staff should collect from applicants and also offers tips for identifying fraudulent claims and documents .

we also reported that sba had not followed its policy of recertifying firms ( the process through which sba can monitor firms' continued eligibility ) every 3 years and as a result had a backlog of more than 4,600 firms that had gone unmonitored for more than 3 years .

we recommended that the agency eliminate the backlog and take the necessary steps to better ensure recertifications were completed in a more timely fashion .

in september 2008 , sba eliminated the backlog by hiring more staff .

the agency recently provided us with a flow chart that describes the most recent steps they had taken to recertify firms in a timely manner and the resources that they planned to dedicate to this effort .

finally , as discussed previously , we found that sba had not implemented plans to assess the effectiveness of the hubzone program and recommended that sba develop performance measures and implement plans to do so .

in august 2008 , sba issued a notice of methodology in the federal register for measuring the impact of the hubzone program .

however , the proposed methodology was not well developed .

for example , it did not incorporate expert input or a previous study conducted by sba's office of advocacy .

we do not believe that this effort was useful for addressing our recommendation .

while sba continues to agree that evaluating program outcomes is important , to date the agency has not yet committed resources for such an evaluation .

in may 2010 , we reported that va had made limited progress in implementing an effective verification program .

the 2006 act requires that va give priority to veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses when awarding contracts to small businesses and provides for the use of sole - source and set - aside contracts to achieve contracting goals va must establish under the act .

the act also requires va to maintain a database of veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and verify the ownership , control , and veteran or service - disabled status of businesses in the database .

the database would be available to other federal agencies .

furthermore , businesses conducting contract work for va must be listed in the database to receive contracting preferences for veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

this verification requirement is unique to va. for other federal agencies , the service - disabled veteran - owned small business program is a self - certification program and therefore is susceptible to misrepresentation ( that is , ineligible firms participating in the program ) .

while the 2006 act requires va to use the veteran preferences authorities to award contracts only to verified businesses , va's regulation did not require that this take place until january 1 , 2012 .

since our may 2010 report , congress passed the veterans small business verification act requiring va to accelerate its time frame for verifying all businesses in its mandated database .

va has set a target date of july 31 , 2011 , to do so .

in fiscal year 2009 , 25 percent of the contracts awarded using veteran preference authorities went to verified businesses .

at the time of our report , va had verified about 2,900 businesses – – approximately 14 percent of businesses in its database of veteran - owned and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

among the weaknesses we identified in va's verification program were files missing required information and explanations of how staff determined that control and ownership requirements had been met .

va's procedures call for site visits to further investigate the ownership and control of higher - risk businesses , but the agency had a large and growing backlog of businesses awaiting site visits .

furthermore , va contracting officers awarded contracts to businesses that were denied after the verification process .

finally , although site visit reports indicate a high rate of misrepresentation , va had not developed guidance for referring cases of misrepresentation for investigation and enforcement action .

such businesses would be subject to debarment under the 2006 act .

to help address the requirement to maintain a database of verified businesses , we recommended that va develop and implement a plan for a more thorough and effective verification program .

more specifically , we recommended that the plan address actions and milestone dates for improving the program , including updating data systems to reduce manual data entry and adding guidance on how to maintain appropriate documentation , on when to request documentation from business owners or third parties , and on how to conduct an assessment that addresses each eligibility requirement .

we also recommended that va conduct timely site visits at businesses identified as higher risk and take actions based on site visit findings , including prompt cancellation of verified status .

according to va officials , they have taken a number of actions to address our recommendations .

for example , va officials told us they had awarded contracts to help expedite the processing of applications , including conducting site visits and reviewing documentation supplied by applicants .

as of march 29 , 2011 , they said that 607 site visits had been conducted and 195 of the applicants visited ( 32 percent ) did not meet the control requirement .

also , va officials reported a queue of 6,431 active applications pending verification and said they had acquired the capability to process 500 applications per week and expected to have processed about 15,000 applications by july 31 , 2011 .

furthermore , va officials told us that as part of their implementation of the requirements of the veterans small business verification act , all applicants are now required to submit specified documents establishing their eligibility with respect to ownership and control before a verification decision can be made .

va officials told us they were in the process of testing a new case management system that will reduce the manual input of data , which they plan to implement by june 1 , 2011 .

va's development of an effective verification program could provide an important tool for sba's oversight of the governmentwide contracting program for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

that is , va's database could serve as a resource for federal agencies to use when assessing whether a firm is actually service - disabled veteran - owned .

we reported in march 2010 that while sba relies primarily on its annual reviews of 8 ( a ) firms to help ensure the continued eligibility of firms in the program , we observed inconsistencies and weaknesses in annual review procedures related to determinations of continued eligibility .

for example , sba did not consistently notify or graduate 8 ( a ) firms that exceeded industry averages for economic success or graduate firms that exceeded the net worth threshold of $750,000 ( see table 2 ) .

we noted that the lack of specific criteria in the current regulations and procedures may have contributed to the inconsistencies that we observed and that sba had taken steps to clarify some , but not all , of these requirements in a proposed rule change .

we also reported that sba's program offices did not maintain comprehensive data on or have a system in place to track complaints about the eligibility of firms in the 8 ( a ) program .

district staff were not aware of the types and frequency of complaints across the agency .

as a result , sba staff lacked information that could be used to help identify issues relating to program integrity and help improve the effectiveness of sba oversight .

although complaint data are not a primary mechanism to ensure program eligibility , continuous monitoring is a key component in detecting and deterring fraud .

we recommended that sba provide more guidance to help ensure that staff more consistently follow annual review procedures and more fully utilize third - party complaints to identify potentially ineligible firms .

according to sba officials , they have taken some actions to address these recommendations .

for example , sba officials told us that in august 2010 they had provided staff with a new guide for conducting annual reviews of the continuing eligibility of firms in the 8 ( a ) program .

additionally , sba officials said they were providing training to staff on the recently published revisions to regulations governing the 8 ( a ) program .

these revisions provided more clarification on factors that determine economic disadvantage ( such as total assets , gross income , retirement accounts ) for continuing eligibility in the program .

sba officials also said that they have been incorporating changes into their web site that will allow third parties to submit complaints about potentially ineligible firms in the 8 ( a ) program .

chair landrieu , ranking member snowe , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

key contributors to this testimony include paige smith , assistant director ; tania calhoun ; andy finkel ; janet fong ; triana mcneil ; harry medina ; barbara roesmann ; kathryn supinski ; and bill woods .

table 3 lists the 80 economic development programs and provides information about their funding , when available .

using the catalog of federal domestic assistance and other agency documents , we identified 80 federal programs administered by the four agencies listed below — the departments of commerce ( commerce ) , housing and urban development ( hud ) , and agriculture ( usda ) and the small business administration ( sba ) — that could fund economic development activities .

we did not include tax credit programs aimed at economic development in this review .

