for decades , the navy has been striving to improve its ability to detect potential enemy submarines before they can get within effective weapons range of u.s. forces .

in 1985 , the navy established the surveillance towed array sensor system ( surtass ) low frequency active ( lfa ) sonar program to develop a long - range capability for detecting a new generation of quieter soviet nuclear and diesel submarines operating principally in the open ocean .

since the end of the cold war , the navy has shifted its focus to include regional conflicts and the threat posed by diesel - electric submarines operating in littoral waters .

the navy continued to develop surtass / lfa because it showed technological potential to detect objects at great distances .

sound produced at low frequencies can travel further underwater than sound produced at higher frequencies .

however , as the navy conducted testing of the system in the mid - 1990s , some public interest groups and scientists raised concerns that surtass / lfa may cause harm to marine mammals .

the navy discontinued operational testing of the system and initiated an environmental impact statement process .

currently , the navy will not begin testing or operating the system until it receives a letter of authorization from the national marine fisheries service .

according to navy officials , a decision on the authorization is expected later in 2002 .

in addition , some of the same groups that have raised environmental concerns have questioned whether surtass / lfa will increase the navy's undersea detection capabilities and whether the navy has an alternative for the system .

in response to your request , we examined ( 1 ) the extent surtass / lfa will enhance the navy's antisubmarine warfare capabilities to detect submarines and ( 2 ) whether there are other existing or planned systems that can provide the same long - range detection capabilities as surtass / lfa .

the primary goal of antisubmarine warfare is to protect u.s. ships and assets from enemy submarines .

undersea surveillance and detection of submarines are a critical part of this mission .

during the cold war , the navy relied on a combination of fixed , mobile , passive , and active sonar systems to detect enemy nuclear and diesel submarines , particularly those from the soviet union .

passive sonar systems “listen” or receive signals , whereas active systems send out signals to search for targets and receive an echo or response .

the systems are used on mobile platforms , such as navy surface ships , submarines , and aircraft , and in fixed arrays that are laid or buried across the ocean floor in various strategic locations .

however , because of technology advancements , the soviet union and other countries developed quieter submarines .

as a result , submarines became harder to detect , and the navy grew concerned that enemy submarines could get within effective weapons range of u.s. ships and assets .

the navy determined it needed a system that could detect quiet submarines at great distances .

in response to this need , the navy launched the surtass / lfa program in 1985 , which was originally designed for use in open oceans .

the surtass / lfa system operates in conjunction with the navy's existing passive surtass sonar system .

the two components , as illustrated in figure 1 , make up a mobile acoustic undersea surveillance system that is intended to provide detection , cueing , localization , and tracking information on modern quiet nuclear and diesel submarines for the battle group or other tactical commanders .

the passive component detects sounds or echoes from undersea objects through the use of hydrophones on a receiving array that is towed behind the ship .

the active or transmitting component of the system sends high - intensity , low frequency sonar from transducers suspended by a cable under the ship .

the active signal will produce a return echo that , when received , provides location and range data on submerged objects .

the system uses 18 pairs of undersea transducers and 18 shipboard high - power amplifiers .

the surtass / lfa system is heavy , weighing 327,000 pounds , and requires a specially designed ship to carry and operate it .

the navy plans to use two surtass / lfa systems .

the first was installed in 1992 on the research vessel cory chouest .

the other system , completed in 1993 , will be installed on the twin - hull auxiliary general - purpose ocean surveillance ship , t - agos - 23 , which the navy designed to carry the surtass system .

the ship was originally scheduled for delivery in 1994 , but construction was delayed due to the bankruptcy of the contractor and it will not be completed until late 2002 .

the navy estimates that it has cost approximately $375 million to develop and produce the two systems and that it will spend an additional $40 million to field and operate the systems through fiscal year 2009 .

these estimates do not include the cost of the ships .

during the course of developing and testing the surtass / lfa system , environmental interest groups , including the natural resources defense council , began to raise concerns that the system may cause harm to marine mammals .

environmentalists were concerned that the high - intensity sound emitted by the system could cause physical damage to marine mammals and adversely affect their behavior .

in august 1995 , in a letter to the secretary of the navy , the natural resources defense council questioned whether the navy had complied with all applicable environmental laws and regulations .

in response to growing public concerns and recognition that further assessment of the system was needed , the navy decided to initiate an environmental impact statement process .

as part of this process , the navy conducted a scientific research program from 1997 to 1998 to test the effects of low frequency sonar on a limited number of whale species off the coasts of california and hawaii .

the navy distributed a draft environmental impact statement for public comment in 1999 and issued a final environmental impact statement in 2001 .

the navy concluded in the environmental impact statement that the potential impact or injury to marine mammals from surtass / lfa is negligible .

as reflected in the environmental impact statement , this is based on using the system with certain proposed geographic restrictions and monitoring to prevent harm to marine mammals .

because there is some potential for incidental harm to marine mammals , the navy must obtain a letter of authorization from the national marine fisheries service before surtass / lfa can be used .

the national marine fisheries service issued a draft authorization for public comment in 2001 , which concurred with the findings of the navy's environmental impact statement .

if approved , the authorization would allow the navy to use the surtass / lfa system with certain specified mitigation measures and restrictions .

these measures include limiting ( 1 ) sonar sound levels to 180 decibels within 12 nautical miles of any coastline or in any designated biologically important offshore area and ( 2 ) sound levels to 145 decibels in known recreational or commercial dive sites .

in addition , the authorization would require the navy to monitor marine mammals from the ship visually and with passive and high frequency active sonar .

if marine mammals were detected , the navy would be required to shut down lfa operations to prevent , to the greatest extent possible , marine mammals' exposure to potentially harmful sound levels .

the decision on the authorization is expected later in 2002 .

notwithstanding the mitigation measures outlined by the letter of authorization , environmental organizations are still expected to oppose the use of the surtass / lfa .

they have indicated that although conclusive evidence has not been established regarding the harmful effects of the surtass / lfa on marine mammals , enough is known about the potential adverse effects of sound on marine mammals to warrant no further use of the system .

they have also questioned the usefulness of the system to the navy .

the navy has also recognized gaps exist in scientific knowledge about the impact of the system on marine mammals , but it considers that the risk is minimal and not enough to warrant ceasing its use .

in addition , the navy has stated that it has done an extensive amount of testing , research , and analysis regarding the use of surtass / lfa and marine mammals and that current information combined with the planned mitigation and monitoring procedures and ongoing research , support resuming surtass / lfa operations .

furthermore , the navy has emphasized that the need for a long - range detection capability still exists .

based on initial testing conducted to date , surtass / lfa appears to provide long - range undersea detection capabilities in the deep , open ocean that surpass any system planned or in existence .

however , the system may not be as effective in littoral waters .

a final operational evaluation must still be conducted to determine the overall effectiveness and suitability of the system , and while navy officials are developing a plan to evaluate the system , they have not yet defined what testing will be conducted in littoral areas .

the primary benefit of surtass / lfa is that it will provide a significant increase in long - range undersea detection capability in the open ocean .

active sonar at low frequencies is more effective and transmits further undersea because its absorption rate in water is relatively low .

because of this , a low frequency active signal can travel several hundreds of miles if unimpeded .

in contrast , mid frequency and high frequency sonar transmits on the order of tens of miles .

therefore , low frequency active sonar can potentially cover an area of the ocean vastly greater than sonar at higher frequencies .

in addition , a benefit of active sonar is its ability to seek out targets rather than wait passively for a target to approach .

as a result , a system such as surtass / lfa can provide the means to detect enemy submarines before they can get within the effective weapons range of u.s. ships .

also , because it is mobile , the system provides greater deployment flexibility and can detect target information in areas beyond the reach of fixed sonar systems according to navy officials .

moreover , the surtass / lfa technology can provide long - range detection with less assets and operators than other technologies .

surtass / lfa also has several operational limitations , including the amount of coverage it can provide and its vulnerabilities .

the navy plans to use a total of only two systems , with one deployed to the pacific fleet and the other to the atlantic fleet to support antisubmarine missions .

therefore , the amount of area the system can cover will be limited .

the navy recognizes that two systems are not sufficient to meet operational requirements and prefers to have more .

in addition , surtass / lfa may be vulnerable to attack because the ships carrying the systems will not have onboard defense systems .

the ships are also relatively slow and therefore incapable of remaining close enough to the transiting battlegroup to be protected .

furthermore , because surtass / lfa transmits an active , high volume signal , it can readily reveal its location , which further increases its vulnerability .

however , the navy concluded that the operational limitations are outweighed by the benefit of long - range detection .

results of surtass / lfa testing to date show that the system will increase the navy's capability to detect modern submarines at long range in deep , open ocean areas .

starting in 1989 through 1992 , the navy conducted a series of developmental tests on surtass / lfa that were focused on validating the performance of a demonstration system in these areas .

the objectives of these tests were to obtain an increased understanding of technical performance issues such as the long - range transmission of signals and signal processing techniques .

based on the successful results of these tests , the navy concluded the system performance requirements were achievable and decided to proceed with full - scale engineering development .

in 1992 , the navy began conducting operational tests using an engineering development model that more closely represented the operational surtass / lfa system .

the purpose of these tests was to determine the performance of the system under more realistic at - sea conditions and against more realistic threat scenarios , including quiet submarines .

numerous tests were performed to assess the system's capabilities in deep waters , such as in the middle of the atlantic ocean .

these tests concluded that surtass / lfa could detect targets at long range and resulted in recommendations that the program continue with its development .

in addition , a test in 1994 determined that the engineering development model performed well enough that the system could be introduced to the fleet as an interim capability .

however , operational testing revealed some reliability and maintainability problems with critical software .

navy officials told us that they intend to resolve these issues before the overall operational evaluation is complete .

while testing has demonstrated that surtass / lfa can increase detection in the open ocean , the system has shown limited capability in littoral waters .

tests indicate the system provides some detection capability in littoral waters but at a range that is significantly less than that achieved in the open ocean .

moreover , the effectiveness of surtass / lfa generally decreases closer to shore as the water becomes more shallow .

navy officials told us that these results were expected and can be attributed to system design and geographic characteristics .

the characteristics of low absorption rate and low frequency signal that make surtass / lfa effective for extended ranges in the deep , open ocean are the same characteristics that limit its effectiveness in littoral waters .

for example , littoral waters , particularly along coastlines , typically have more complex and prominent floor features than those in the open ocean .

in littoral areas , sonar signals may reverberate or rebound off the ocean floor making target detection difficult .

the littoral environment is also more acoustically harsh because it has shifting currents , variable water densities , and shallow water depth .

as a result , active sonar signals — particularly those at low frequency — reverberate and degrade more than they do in the open ocean .

in addition , the littoral environment has more magnetic anomalies , which can severely degrade bearing accuracy .

littoral waters also have more shipping traffic and greater ambient noise , making it much more difficult for the system to distinguish and detect threat submarines from other noise - generating vessels .

in addition , the presence of more shipwrecks and near shore debris in these locations increases the number of false targets and , therefore , increases the challenges to detect , locate , and distinguish threat submarines .

although the navy has largely completed developmental testing and conducted a series of initial operational tests of the surtass / lfa system , it must still complete a final operational test and evaluation to establish the operational effectiveness and suitability of the system .

currently , this evaluation is planned for fiscal year 2004 , providing the program receives authorization from the national marine fisheries service .

the navy planned for the evaluation to primarily focus on demonstrating the system's capabilities in the open ocean .

although the test evaluation master plan was updated in 1996 , the concept of operations and the original operational requirements have not been updated to reflect the navy's shift in focus to littoral threats .

in accordance with department of defense guidelines , a system should be tested under realistic conditions and in environments where it is intended to be used .

in addition , any testing and operations will have to be in compliance with applicable operating restrictions such as the national marine fisheries service letter of authorization .

currently , navy working groups are in the process of updating a concept of operations for the surtass / lfa system and developing the test evaluation master plan that will be used to conduct the operational evaluation .

however , they have not decided on the extent to which the system will be tested in littoral areas .

since the beginning of the program , the navy has considered a number of existing and potential alternatives to surtass / lfa , and each time it found that the system provides long - range detection capabilities other systems could not provide .

available technologies offer different capabilities and practical limitations .

although surtass / lfa provides increased detection ranges , the navy advocates a “tool box” approach that uses a mix of complementary technologies to detect enemy submarines .

existing passive , active , and nonacoustic technologies have a limited capability to detect submarines at long range .

passive sensors , for example , are effective at short range but have become more limited in their capability since the development of quieter submarines .

even though recent improvements to passive systems have extended their range , submarine quieting measures have lowered submarine noise levels to nearly the level of the ambient noise of natural sounds in the ocean .

as a result , the navy is concerned that an enemy submarine could get within effective weapons' range of u.s. forces before passive systems could make contact with an enemy submarine .

passive systems by the nature of how they operate are environmentally benign because they do not transmit sound .

active sensors systems that can be used from aircraft provide extended ranges and large area coverage , but large area coverage requires a high number of assets of both aircraft and sensors to be deployed .

antisubmarine warfare aircraft are expensive to operate , and they require shore - based facilities , which are limited because of continued decreases to the number of these installations .

a shipboard system , such as surtass / lfa , provides the advantage of extended range and duration of searches , but when it is used in a continuous search mode , it has the drawback of revealing the ship's position .

the navy determined that nonacoustic technologies , such as radar , laser , magnetic , infrared , electronic , optical , hydrodynamic , and biological sensors , have demonstrated some utility in detecting submarines .

their usefulness , however , is limited by range of detection , unique operating requirements , meteorological / oceanographic disturbances , and / or a requirement that the submarine be at or near the surface for detection .

today , nuclear submarines can remain submerged at considerable depths indefinitely , and new battery technology and air - independent propulsionhave increased the time that diesel submarines can remain at depth .

the capabilities of passive , active , and nonacoustic technologies vary depending on whether they are used on fixed , mobile , and deployable platforms .

during the cold war , the navy relied on a comprehensive system of fixed undersea acoustic sensors as its primary means of initial detection of enemy submarines .

in recent years , the navy's submarine surveillance program has undergone a major transition from emphasis on maintaining a large , dispersed surveillance force to detect and track soviet submarines to a much smaller force .

as a result , a number of fixed acoustic arrays have been turned off , placed in stand - by status , or damaged and not repaired .

fixed systems have a number of practical constraints such as requiring long lead times to install .

they are also expensive , require extensive maintenance , and run the risk of being discovered , avoided , or tapped into .

on the other hand , mobile systems are not limited to a specific location and can be deployed to areas of interest to the fleet at any time .

mobile systems also have the benefit of providing coverage in locations beyond the range of fixed systems or augmenting the capabilities of fixed systems .

in the late - 1990s , the navy prepared an evaluation of alternatives on the requirements for long - range active undersea surveillance in a white paper .

the evaluation examined expanding current technologies , developing new technologies , and improving the lfa system .

the paper concluded that increasing the numbers of antisubmarine warfare search , detection , and attack platforms in an attempt to flood the target area with search systems requires a high number of assets and a large number of operators and results in high costs due to the continued use of multiple systems ; increasing the number of assets also does not solve the problems of high false contact rates , short detection ranges , and danger to the sensor platform itself because an active signal discloses the ship's position ; developing new passive systems will have a marginal potential to improve sensor detection ranges unless a new technology , yet to be identified , emerges ; and improving the performance levels of active sonar systems like lfa addresses the critical issue of the range at which the threat submarine is detected .

more recently , in 2001 , the navy conducted a comprehensive evaluation of existing and emerging antisubmarine warfare technologies that involved several expert panels consisting of navy officials and representatives from the scientific , academic , and intelligence communities .

the objective of this evaluation was to assess current and planned detection technologies to determine where the navy has shortfalls in capability and where to invest future resources .

a total of 125 technologies and concepts were initially evaluated and 16 were selected for additional analysis .

the 16 technologies and concepts were analyzed against criteria that included robustness , operational suitability , survivability , technical maturity , potential operational effectiveness , deployment flexibility and responsiveness , and potential overall impact and military utility .

the surtass / lfa program received high ratings for all criteria except for survivability .

as a result of the panels' analyses , the navy determined that surtass / lfa provides the needed extended range coverage and deployment flexibility and reduces the need for multiple assets , all at a comparatively low operational and per unit cost .

with fewer assets devoted to submarine detection , naval commanders can use the additional assets to manage and control the undersea battle space .

because of these benefits , the navy plans to rely on the surtass / lfa to detect and locate enemy submarines at greater distances before they get within effective weapons range .

while surtass / lfa is effective at long range detection , navy officials still conclude that there is no single system capable of providing all navy submarine detection capabilities and advocate the use of multiple , complementary systems or a “tool box” approach to meet this need .

the most effective approach to conducting antisubmarine warfare operations is a “layered defense” beginning with a long detection range , early warning sensor , followed by short - range tactical active and passive sonars designed to coordinate the engagement of targets detected by the long - range system .

the navy continues to identify and develop new antisubmarine warfare technologies as well as explore new applications of existing technologies .

because no single antisubmarine technology or system meets all of the navy's undersea surveillance and detection requirements , the navy continues acquisition and development efforts to increase detection efficiency and to respond to new threat challenges .

a key focus of these efforts has been in developing antisubmarine warfare capabilities for littoral areas .

the navy is in the process of refining and developing a variety of alternatives to take advantage of lfa technology , but without its current limitations .

for example , the navy is exploring a higher frequency , lighter , and compact lfa system design , which incorporates several advantages to enhance performance in shallow water .

however , it is too soon to assess whether these new developments will improve submarine detection capabilities .

currently , the navy is preparing for the overall operational evaluation of the surtass / lfa but has not developed a test plan or decided on the extent to which the system will be tested in littoral waters .

without testing in littoral areas , the navy will not know whether the system is suitable and effective where the enemy threat is of increasing concern and detection is more challenging .

in addition , testing results would provide users with a better understanding of the system's capabilities and help the navy make more informed decisions about investments in future submarine detection efforts .

during our review , we noted to navy officials that if they intend on operating the system in littoral areas , then they should conduct testing to gain a better understanding of the system's advantages and limitations and how to use it most effectively in the navy's “tool box” approach to antisubmarine warfare .

in response , navy officials indicated they would reconsider what testing to include in the operational evaluation .

before the navy operates surtass / lfa in littoral areas , we recommend that the secretary of the navy direct program officials to establish a test plan and conduct testing of the system to demonstrate its capabilities in those areas .

in written comments to a draft of our report , dod agreed with our recommendation .

in addition , dod also provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate .

dod's comments appear in appendix i .

to acquire information about the surtass / lfa program , including requirements , alternatives , acquisition , development , operations , threat assessments , history , and current status , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the surtass program office ( pmw - 182 ) ; the space and naval warfare command's intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance directorate ( pd - 18 ) ; office of the principal deputy assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) ; office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy for mine and undersea warfare ; office of the chief of naval operations antisubmarine warfare requirements division ; office of the chief of naval operations undersea surveillance branch ; office of the commander submarines atlantic ; office of the commander undersea surveillance operations ; integrated undersea surveillance system command center ; tagos project office , military sealift command ; usns impeccable ( t - agos - 23 ) ; office of naval research ; office of naval intelligence ; defense intelligence agency ; and the naval undersea warfare center .

to obtain information about surtass / lfa operational testing , effectiveness , suitability , and performance , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the office of the director of operational testing and evaluation , office of the assistant secretary of defense ; the office of the navy commander operational test and evaluation ; and many of the above identified organizations .

to obtain information about environmental issues , requirements , assessments , and monitoring and mitigation plans , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the office of the assistant secretary of the navy for installations and environment ; office of the chief of naval operations , environmental planning and national environmental policy act compliance branch ; the state of california coastal commission ; the state of hawaii department of land and natural resources ; marine acoustics inc ; the national marine fisheries service ; the marine mammal commission ; the natural resources defense council ; rainbow friends animal sanctuary ; and the keystone center .

we performed our work from july 2001 through march 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the navy ; and the director , office of management and budget .

we also will make copies available to others upon request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4530 or john oppenheim at ( 202 ) 512-3111 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

other major contributors to this report were dorian dunbar , gary middleton , adam vodraska , and allen westheimer .

