the u.s .

postal service's ( usps ) cost structure has become unsustainable in part because its declining revenue is insufficient to cover the costs of operating usps's vast network of post offices and mail - processing centers .

usps reached its statutory $15 billion borrowing limit in september , 2012 , and usps's cash resources are so low that it is unable to meet all of its retiree health care prefunding obligations .

to reverse this course , usps has stated that it must better align its operational network with the realities of declining mail volume through a number of actions , including reducing the costs of operating post offices .

over the past year , gao has issued a series of reports examining how aspects of usps's current operations and financial obligations affect its costs and financial condition .

this report addresses usps's use of contract postal units ( cpus ) — independent retailers that , under contract with usps , provide customers with a broad range of the same products and services as post offices at the same prices , but at a potentially lower cost to usps .

cpus are one component of usps's broader efforts to expand access to usps products and services outside of traditional post offices .

usps has reported that many of its roughly 32,000 post offices do not generate sufficient revenue to cover their costs .

to better control retail costs , usps has examined expanding retail access to postal services in locations other than post offices , including cpus .

our past work has shown that replacing postal - owned and - operated facilities with privately owned and operated facilities is a strategy some foreign posts have used to restructure their retail networks to reduce facility and labor costs .

despite these potential benefits , the number of cpus in the united states has declined , from 5,290 in 2002 to 3,619 in 2011 .

in a recent effort to reduce costs , usps announced plans in may 2012 to reduce the hours of service to as little as 2 hours a day at over 13,000 underutilized post offices .

usps estimates potential savings of $500 million a year from these reduced hours .

given the potential for service reductions at post offices , expanding access through retail alternatives such as cpus takes on increased relevance .

the role of cpus is also addressed in postal reform legislation pending in both chambers of congress .

a bill passed in the senate would require usps to consider cpus as a replacement for post offices as it makes post office closure decisions .

a bill passed by the house of representatives committee on oversight and government reform would prohibit appeals of certain post office closures when a cpu is located within 2 miles .

given the retail service decisions facing usps and the potential usps reforms that congress is considering , you asked us to provide you with information on cpus .

this report describes: 1. how cpus supplement usps's post office network , 2 .

usps revenue from cpus and compensation to them from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 , and 3. challenges usps might face if it increases its use of cpus .

to answer these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and usps documents related to cpus .

we analyzed data from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 on cpu locations , dates of cpu closures , and cpu revenues and usps compensation to cpus .

this data comes from usps's contract postal unit technology ( cput ) database .

we analyzed data from usps's contract authoring management system ( cams ) on dates of cpu openings from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 .

we classified cpu locations as urban , suburban , large - town rural , or small - town rural based on rural - urban commuting area codes .

we used data on post office locations from usps's facilities database ( fdb ) to determine cpu locations relative to post offices .

we also analyzed fdb data on cpu and post office hours of service .

we interviewed usps officials and reviewed documentation regarding the procedures and controls used to ensure the reliability of data contained in cput , fdb , and cams and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

in addition , we interviewed cpu operators at 10 cpus in the chicago , illinois ; dallas - fort worth , texas ; southern california ; and washington , d.c. , regions .

we selected cpus to achieve diversity in the location type , the type of cpu contract , and the level of revenues .

we also interviewed usps officials in headquarters who manage the cpu program and staff in usps districts responsible for managing the cpus that we visited .

see appendix i for a more detailed description of our scope and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from january 2012 to november 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

usps has a universal service obligation , part of which requires it to provide access to retail services .

it is required to serve the public and provide a maximum degree of effective and regular postal services to rural areas , communities , and small towns where post offices are not self - sustaining .

usps is intended to be a financially self - sufficient entity that covers its expenses almost entirely through postal revenues .

usps receives virtually no annual appropriations but instead generates revenue through selling postage and other postal products and services .

retail alternatives are increasingly important to usps ; revenues from all retail alternatives — including self - service kiosks in post offices , usps's website , and cpus , among others — increased by about $1.6 billion from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 while post office revenues decreased by $3 billion .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

during this same period , usps's share of total retail revenues from all retail alternatives increased from about 24 percent to 35 percent .

usps projects that by 2020 , retail alternatives will account for 60 percent of its retail revenues .

given this growing importance and usps's planned - retail - network restructuring , we recommended in november 2011 that usps implement a strategy to guide efforts to modernize its retail network that addresses both post offices and retail alternatives .

according to usps officials , usps is currently in the process of finalizing its retail strategy .

the retail alternatives most similar to post offices are cpus .

they are privately owned , operated , and staffed and are usually colocated with a primary business , such as a convenience store or supermarket .

they provide most of the same products and services as post offices ( see fig .

2 ) at the same prices .

cpus typically have a counter with prominently displayed official usps signage , provided by usps , giving the cpu the look of a post office .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

according to usps , cpus offer potential service and financial benefits , and , as we have previously reported , some foreign posts have successfully used private partnerships similar to cpus to realize such benefits .

cpus can enhance service by being located closer to customers' homes and workplaces and operating at hours when post offices may not be open .

they can alleviate long lines at existing post offices and provide postal services to areas with rapid population growth or where opening new post offices may be cost prohibitive .

regarding financial benefits , usps has reported that the costs it incurs for cpus are less than those it incurs for post offices , relative to revenue earned .

usps estimated that in fiscal year 2011 , it incurred $0.17 in costs for each dollar of revenue at cpus and $0.51 in costs for each dollar of revenue at post costs are lower , in part because cpu operators , and not usps , offices.are responsible for their operating costs , such as rent , utilities , and wages for their employees .

cpus provide all their revenues from postal products and services to usps , and usps compensates cpus for providing postal services under the terms of their contracts .

the amount of compensation usps pays to a cpu operator depends in large part on the type of contract the cpu operates under .

currently there are two basic types of contracts: fixed - price , under which usps compensates the cpu a contractually determined amount regardless of sales , and performance - based , under which usps compensates the cpu a contractually determined percentage of sales .

usps's compensation to cpus — either the amount under a fixed - price contract or the percentage under a performance - based contract — is specific for each cpu contract and the result of negotiation between usps and the cpu operator .

cpu hours of service are also negotiated for each contract , although usps guidance on cpus , in line with usps's goal for cpus to provide increased access and convenience , states that their days and hours of service should exceed those at post offices .

other terms and conditions are standardized in all contracts .

for example , all cpus are required to offer the same basic set of products and services such as stamps , priority mail , express mail , and certified mail .

in addition , all cpus are contractually prohibited from selling services , including private mailboxes and others , that are competitive with usps's products , and all cpu contracts specify usps's rights to inspect the cpu at any time during operating hours .

cpu contracts are valid for an indefinite period , but cpu contracts specify that the cpu operator or usps can terminate a contract and close the cpu at any time with 120 days notice .

usps management and oversight of cpus , including identifying and justifying the need for new cpus , is done at the district and local levels .

staff at the district and local levels oversee day - to - day operations of cpus and identify the need for new cpus .

when a district identifies the need for a new cpu , it approaches local businesses in the targeted area as potential partners and engages in a competitive application process .

usps has other partnerships with private entities to provide retail postal services , similar to cpus .

usps launched a retail partnership called the village post office in july 2011 in which existing small businesses provide a limited range of postal products and services in small communities where underutilized yet costly post offices may close , be consolidated with another nearby post office , or have their hours of service reduced .

partnerships with national and regional retailers to provide postal services .

these partnerships differ from cpus in that they will not be subject to the same prohibitions as cpus on selling competing services , and with them , usps is attempting to expand access at a national or regional level as opposed to addressing specific local needs as cpus do .

village post offices sell a more limited range of usps products and services than cpus do .

local usps staff solicit a local business for a village post office opportunity and a usps contracting officer agrees to enter into a contract if they believe that the terms and conditions of that village post office present a best value to usps .

usps plans to launch these partnerships in test markets in early 2013 and will evaluate the effectiveness of these partnerships before making decisions whether to expand the program .

although total number of cpus has decreased in recent years , usps continues to use cpus to provide customers with access to postal services at additional locations and for more hours of service .

cpus are located in a variety of locations , both urban and rural , and range from very close to far from post offices , demonstrating how usps uses cpus to provide customers with alternatives located near crowded post offices — which are often found in urban areas — and to provide service where post offices are not conveniently located or may not be cost effective for usps , often in rural areas .

in addition , cpus allow usps to provide customer access at times often beyond the hours of service at post offices .

according to usps data , the number of cpus fell from 5,290 in 2002 to 3,619 in 2011 .

during the past 5 fiscal years , usps has opened new cpus , but a higher number of cpus have closed .

 ( see table 1. ) .

according to usps headquarters officials who manage the cpu program , economic conditions forced many businesses that operated cpus to close and declining mail volume and sales of postal products have been the primary factors behind the decrease in the number of cpus .

although usps does not track specific reasons for cpu closures in its contract postal unit technology ( cput ) database , retail managers in eight usps districts that we met with cited specific local issues resulting in cpu closures , including the following: the cpu operator retired or otherwise stopped working .

for example , an indiana cpu operator closed his primary business and moved out of the area .

the cpu operator moved the primary business to a new location and did not retain the cpu .

for example , the operator of a cpu in texas moved his primary business across the street , but the new space was too small to host a cpu .

the cpu operator sold the primary business .

for example , a california cpu operator sold his self - storage business , and the new operators were not interested in maintaining the cpu .

the cpu operator chose to close for financial considerations .

for example , a cpu operator in virginia closed the cpu because he felt it did not help his primary business .

usps initiated the closure because the cpu failed to meet the terms of the contract or usps determined that the cpu was not cost effective .

for example , usps determined that a maryland cpu that operated out of a private residence no longer brought in enough revenue to justify usps's compensation to the cpu , so usps closed the cpu .

consistent with usps's goal to use cpus to absorb excess demand at post offices , our analysis of the distance between cpus and post offices shows that more than 56 percent of cpus are less than 2 miles from the nearest post office and 26 percent are less than 1 mile .

 ( see table 2. ) .

for example , usps opened a cpu in frederick , maryland , to better meet demand and reduce customer wait times in lines at the local post office about one - half mile away .

conversely , about 14 percent of cpus are located 5 miles or more from the nearest post office , showing how cpus can be used to provide services where post offices are not conveniently located , such as a cpu in rural vigo park , texas , that is located 16 miles from the nearest post office .

similarly , usps opened a cpu in aubrey , texas , located about 5 miles from the nearest post office , in order to serve customers in a fast growing area .

consistent with the majority of cpus' being within 2 miles of a post office , cpus are also more likely to be in urban than rural areas , and recent cpu openings further demonstrate this pattern .

as shown in figure 4 , more than 60 percent of cpus active as of march 30 , 2012 , were in urban areas , as defined by the rural - urban commuting area codes we used for this analysis.cpus to reduce the time customers have to wait in line at a post office , more often in urban areas .

furthermore , more than three - fourths of new cpus in fiscal year 2011 were in urban locations .

this suggests that cpus may be most viable in urban areas with higher populations and customer traffic .

our analysis shows that cpus are rarer in suburban , large - town rural , and small - town rural locations .

in recent years , usps has intentionally shifted its means of compensating cpus from fixed - price contracts — in which compensation to cpus is a fixed amount regardless of sales — to performance - based contracts — under which compensation to cpus is a percentage of the cpu's postal sales — resulting in potentially greater revenue and less financial exposure to usps .

 ( see fig .

7. ) .

according to usps officials , since 2002 , usps has entered into performance - based contracts for most new cpus and has converted many fixed - price contracts to performance - based .

the purpose of the shift is to incentivize cpu operators to market postal products and services to increase postal revenues .

cpus with fixed - price contracts have limited incentive to sell more postal products , since their compensation is the same regardless of their sales .

furthermore , since usps compensates cpus with performance - based contracts a percentage of the cpu's sales , usps does not compensate these cpus more than it receives in revenues , a situation that can happen with cpus with fixed - price contracts .

the total revenues usps received from sales of postal products and services at cpusyear 2007 to $611 million in fiscal year 2011 , as shown in figure 8 .

however , as mentioned earlier , usps's revenues from post offices declined about 22 percent during this period .

the decline in cpu revenues is part because of the decrease in the number of cpus , as average cpu revenues decreased only 2 percent during this time .

the downward trend in mail volume was also a factor , according to usps officials .

several cpus we visited experienced declining sales in recent years .

for example , a cpu in cedar lake , indiana , saw cpu revenues decline 17 percent from fiscal year 2007 to 2011 .

several usps district retail managers cited cpus that closed because of low sales .

for example , a cpu in texas closed because neither the cpu nor the primary business generated sufficient revenue for the operator to stay in business .

our analysis of usps data found that cpus with lower than declined about 9 percent from $672 million in fiscal average revenues were more likely to close than were those with higher revenues .

on average , cpus that closed from fiscal years 2008 to 2011 generated roughly 26 percent less revenue on average in the year prior to closure than the average cpu revenue for that year .

individual cpu revenues vary widely , as shown in figure 9 .

on average , usps's revenue from individual cpus averaged about $160,000 in revenue in fiscal year 2011 , but a substantial number ( 41 percent ) generated less than $50,000 .

moreover , low revenue cpus are more likely to be located in rural areas where population is sparse and demand for services is lower ; 22 percent of small - town rural and large - town rural cpus had revenues under $5,000 in fiscal year 2011 .

high - revenue cpus — such as the 7 percent that earned $500,000 or more in fiscal year 2011 — are mostly located in urban areas where demand is likely higher and post offices are more likely to have long wait times .

for instance , we visited one cpu in downtown los angeles with $1.8 million in revenues in fiscal year 2011 .

the ability to generate high revenues at this cpu led it to increase capacity by adding postal windows to keep pace with demand .

usps compensation to cpus increased about 6 percent from $75.4 million in fiscal year 2007 to $79.9 million in fiscal year 2011 .

however , usps compensation to cpus has decreased every fiscal year from 2008 to 2011 .

 ( see fig .

10 ) .

according to usps officials , the increase in compensation from fiscal years 2007 and 2008 was because of larger numbers of performance - based contracts , fewer public service contracts , which are generally less expensive , individual cpus' petitions for increased compensation because of increased cost of doing business , and economic conditions .

the subsequent decline in usps compensation to cpus from fiscal years 2008 to 2011 was because of declining numbers of cpus during the time .

as with cpu revenues , usps compensation to individual cpus varies widely .

 ( see fig .

11. ) .

for example , 326 cpus received no more than $100 in annual compensation in fiscal year 2011 .

on the other hand , that same year , 55 high - revenue cpus with performance - based contracts received over $100,000 in compensation .

in fiscal year 2011 , usps compensated cpus an average of about $21,000 , but compensated more than a quarter of cpus less than $5,000 .

as usps undertakes actions to achieve a sustainable cost structure , it will be important to understand the implications of cpus for usps's costs and revenues .

currently , usps retains most of the revenues generated by cpus , its major expense being compensation payments to cpu operators .

as we described previously , in fiscal year 2011 , usps earned a total of $610.5 million in revenues from cpus and , in return , compensated cpus a total of $79.9 million , allowing usps to retain $530.6 million in cpu revenues .

measured in another way , after compensating cpus , usps retained $0.87 of every dollar of cpu revenues .

however , for individual cpus , the amount of revenues usps retains after compensating the cpu varies significantly .

usps's target for individual cpus is to retain , after compensation , $0.80 for every dollar in revenues .

percent of the roughly half of cpus that have fixed - price contracts .

 ( see fig .

12. ) .

moreover , for 23 percent of cpus with fixed - price contracts in fiscal year 2011 , usps did not retain any revenues as it compensated the cpu an amount greater than the revenue usps received from the cpu .

most of these cpus were in rural areas .

forty - nine percent of small - town rural cpus with fixed - price contracts generated less revenue for usps than the compensation usps provided in fiscal year 2011 .

according to usps officials , while usps does not retain any revenue from these cpus after compensating them , operating a post office in the same locations would be more onerous from a cost perspective .

because usps compensates the roughly 45 percent of cpus with performance - based contracts with a percentage of their sales — usually between 9 and 12 percent — usps's revenues from cpus with performance - based contracts will , by definition , always be greater than the amount of usps compensation to them .

usps officials said that they review cpus in which usps retains less than $0.80 per dollar of revenue and attempts to take action to decrease cpu compensation or terminate the cpu if necessary .

usps is embarking on a substantial makeover of its retail network , including reducing hours of service at thousands of underutilized post offices and expanding the use of retail alternatives through partnerships with national and regional retailers .

according to usps officials , at this time there are no plans to strategically increase the number of cpus to help enhance service in the changing postal retail landscape .

usps officials said that they plan to continue to use cpus to meet specific local needs identified by local and district officials .

at the same time , pending legislation in the senate would require usps to consider opening cpus as replacements for post offices that it closes.pared down its plans to close post offices by instead reducing their hours , to the extent that usps closes post offices in the future , this requirement may put more pressure on usps to open more cpus .

furthermore , some district retail managers we spoke with said that they see a potentially larger role for cpus in the future as usps transforms its traditional retail network .

however , we identified a number of challenges usps might face in its future use of cpus: limited potential business partners .

usps may face limited private interest in opening cpus in certain areas .

usps planned to open thousands of village post offices , which , similar to cpus , involve partnerships with private businesses , by the end of 2012 .

however , as of august 20 , 2012 , usps has opened only 41 village post offices in part because of a lack of interested private parties .

usps officials said that this lack of interested parties is because in some rural areas , there may not be any businesses to host a village post offices and in other rural areas , businesses may not want to partner with usps in what some communities may perceive as a reduction in services they receive .

in addition , some district retail managers told us there are a number of reasons that some interested businesses do not become cpus , including financial instability and not wanting to meet the conditions of new cpu contracts , such as space requirements or prohibiting sales of competitors' products and services .

as a result , district staff are not always able to open as many new cpus as they would like .

limited staff resources in usps districts .

as we have previously mentioned , local and district - level usps officials identify and justify the need for new cpus , determining when and where to approach businesses as potential cpu partners .

some usps district retail managers we spoke with told us that although there are unmet needs for cpus in their districts , compared to prior years , they now have fewer staff and less time to seek out opportunities for new cpus .

given the resources required to seek opportunities and open new cpus , usps may be unable to meet all local needs for cpus with existing resources .

risk of service disruptions from cpu closures .

because cpus can close at any time — unlike post offices , which must undergo a lengthy review process including a public comment period prior to closure — there is a risk in relying on cpus to provide service , especially in underserved areas where there may be a limited number of potential cpu partners and other post office alternatives .

as discussed earlier , cpu operators can decide to close their cpus for a variety of reasons .

although cpu contracts require cpus to provide 120 days notice to usps before closing , some district retail managers we spoke with said that cpu operators often provide much less notice , often as little as one week .

given the other challenges in opening new cpus , usps may have trouble replacing the lost service from unexpectedly closed cpus .

cpus can play an important role in helping usps provide universal service as it cuts costs to improve its financial condition — at times two conflicting goals .

cpus can help usps reach customers in convenient locations during convenient hours at a potentially lower cost than through post offices .

usps data show that an increasing proportion of retail revenue is generated through channels other than post offices , which indicates a growing level of customer acceptance of these non - traditional means of accessing postal services .

while usps plans to continue to use cpus as one alternative to post offices to fill local needs for postal services , it is exploring planned national and regional partnerships to more broadly expand access to convenient retail alternatives nation - wide .

as usps develops these regional and national partnerships , reduces hours of service at many post offices , and continues to use cpus to fill specific local needs , it is important for usps to consider cpus' continuing role in usps's evolving national retail network .

we recommended in november 2011 that usps develop and implement a retail network strategy that would address usps customer access to both post offices and retail alternatives.officials told us that as of july 2012 , the agency is in the process of finalizing this retail strategy .

we continue to believe , as we stated in november 2011 , that it is important that such a strategy discuss how usps plans to increase its use of retail alternatives — including cpus — while considering significant changes to its network of post offices and the means through which it provides access to usps's customers .

as usps continues to develop this retail strategy , we believe that usps can capitalize on growing acceptance of retail alternatives by using information about cpus to inform its decisions .

for example , by considering factors , such as the distance of cpus to existing post offices , cpu hours and days of service , and usps's costs of compensating cpus , usps could better inform its retail strategy in order to make better strategic use of cpus in its future retail network , which will likely include reduced hours at thousands of post offices .

we provided a draft of this report to usps for review and comment .

usps provided a written response ( see appendix iii ) in which they discussed usps's efforts beyond cpus to provide customers with sufficient and convenient access to its products and services through other types of partnerships and alternatives to post offices .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the postmaster general , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

to determine how contract postal units ( cpus ) supplement the u.s .

postal service's ( usps's ) network of post offices , we analyzed data from usps's contract postal unit technology ( cput ) database .

this database contains information for individual cpus , including location , contract number , revenues , compensation , cpu contract type ( fixed - price or performance - based ) , contract termination dates , and if the cpu is in active service .

location data for each cpu in cput includes a physical address including city , state , and zip+4 code .

usps provided us these data on march 30 , 2012 .

in determining the number of active cpus , we encountered some duplicate cpu records .

to avoid double counting , we used the cpu contract number to keep the record for only the oldest contact associated with each cpu .

based on the physical address , including zip+4 code , we determined the location type for each cpu by using the department of agriculture's economic research service's rural - urban commuting area ( ruca ) codes .

ruca codes classify a given location based on patterns of urbanization , population density , and daily commuting patterns .

we classified cpu locations as one of four types: urban , suburban , large - town rural , and small - town rural .

we also determined how many cpus were located in each state using the state data in cput .

based on data from cput , we identified which cpus closed from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 .

we identified which cpus opened during this time period based on contract start dates from usps's contract authoring management system ( cams ) .

contract start dates generally do not match the date that a cpu opens because , according to usps officials , it usually takes 4 to 6 months for a cpu to open after usps initiates a solicitation .

we determined this date to be a reasonable approximation of when a cpu opens .

we determined the number of cpus that opened or closed in each fiscal year by counting the number of contract start dates and closure dates for each year .

in addition , we obtained data from usps's facilities database ( fdb ) on all post office locations including physical street address , city , state , and zip+4 .

usps provided us these data on december 19 , 2011 .

we determined the distance between the list of active cpus as of march 30 , 2012 , and post offices as of december 19 , 2011 , using the latitude and longitude for each cpu and each post office and measuring the straight - line distance between the two points .

we then determined which post office was closest to each cpu and by what distance .

we also counted the number of post offices in each state and , along with using data on the number of cpus in each state , to determine the number of cpus per 100 post offices in each state .

we analyzed fdb data to determine the number of hours of service per day and per week for each cpu and post office , and how many locations are open at certain times , such as on sundays .

usps provided these data for cpus on june 7 , 2012 , and for post offices on june 27 , 2012 .

we also visited 10 cpus in the following regions: chicago , illinois ; dallas - fort worth , texas ; southern california ; and washington , d.c. we selected those regions and the 10 cpus to ensure diversity in geographic location , location type ( urban , suburban , and rural ) , cpu revenue levels , and type of cpu contract ( fixed - price and performance - based ) .

we also selected locations close to gao office locations in order to minimize the use of travel funds by gao staff on this engagement .

during our visits , we interviewed each cpu operator .

we also interviewed district retail managers in each of the usps districts responsible for managing these cpus .

during these interviews as well as interviews with usps headquarters staff in charge of managing the cpu program , we discussed the reasons for and benefits from using cpus , the reasons why cpus have closed , and factors that affect cpu revenues and compensation .

we also reviewed gao reports and usps documents detailing the cpu program , including usps guidance on cpus and standard cpu contracts .

to determine usps revenue from cpus and usps's compensation to them from fiscal years 2007 to 2011 , we analyzed data from cput .

we encountered numerous duplicate records for a single cpu address .

to avoid double counting , we merged all financial data for a given contract number into a single record by summing up data for each unique contract number .

as cput stores cpu revenue and compensation data on a monthly basis , we summed monthly data to determine the total revenues and usps compensation for each cpu for each fiscal year .

we determined the amount of revenues usps retains after compensating cpus in each fiscal year by subtracting cpu compensation from cpu revenues and dividing that by cpu revenues .

finally , we linked data from cams on contract start dates to this financial data from cput by using the contract number for each cpu .

as a result , we were able to determine the revenues and usps compensation to each cpu for cpus that opened in each fiscal year .

we did the same for closed cpus by using cpu closure dates included in cput .

we assessed the reliability of each of the data sources we used by interviewing responsible usps officials about procedures for entering and maintaining the data and verifying their accuracy .

we manually reviewed all data provided by usps for any obvious outlying data .

after reviewing this information , we determined that the cput data were sufficiently reliable for evaluating revenue and compensation trends , closure dates , and cpu locations .

we did find that cput reported outlying data on revenues in certain months for four cpus in fiscal year 2007 .

to address these outlying data , we averaged the revenues for each of the four cpu in the other months , where reported revenues seemed normal , and assumed that the cpu earned the average level of revenue in the outlying months .

we determined that the cams data were sufficiently reliable for evaluating cpu start dates .

we determined that the fdb post office and cpu hours - of - service data were sufficiently reliable for overall comparison purposes .

as previously stated , the fdb included hours - of - service data for 3,320 cpus as of june 27 , 2012 , 6.3 percent less than 3,542 cpus indicated by our analysis of cput as of march 30 , 2012 .

in discussing the discrepancy with usps officials , we determined that there was no indication that the cpu records missing from the fdb differed from the general population and were therefore unlikely to affect the outcome of our analysis .

to determine challenges usps might face if it increases its use of cpus , we reviewed relevant legislation , usps documents related to managing cpus , prior gao reports , and usps office of inspector general reports .

we also interviewed usps officials responsible for implementing the cpu program , cpu operators , and usps district retail managers at the sites and districts discussed earlier regarding current cpu operations and challenges the cpu program might face going forward .

table 5 provides the number of contract postal units ( cpus ) and post offices in each state , as well as the number of cpus per 100 post offices in each state as a measure of how reliant each state is on cpus for providing access to postal services .

lorelei st. james , ( 202 ) 512-2834 or stjamesl@gao.gov .

in addition to the individual named above , heather halliwell , assistant director ; patrick dudley ; john mingus ; jaclyn nelson ; joshua ormond ; matthew rosenberg ; amy rosewarne ; kelly rubin ; and crystal wesco made key contributions to this report .

