i am pleased to be here today to discuss challenges that the department of defense ( dod ) faces to achieving better acquisition outcomes .

with dod spending well over $250 billion annually to acquire products and services , prudence with taxpayer funds , widening deficits , and growing long - range fiscal challenges demand that dod maximize its return on investment and provide the warfighter with needed capabilities at the best value for the taxpayer .

dod needs to ensure that its funds are spent wisely , and , in doing so , it needs to ensure that it is buying the right things , the right way .

several elements are essential to achieving this objective , including a sound business case supporting executable programs , sound business arrangements , and clear lines of responsibility and accountability .

my testimony today is based on work we have completed over the past 6 years that covered a range of acquisition and contracting issues and which was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

my testimony will focus on ( 1 ) dod's recent contracting trends , such as the spending on goods and services and the environment in which this activity takes place ; and ( 2 ) selected practices which undermine dod's ability to establish solid business arrangements , particularly those involving the selection and oversight of dod's contractors and incentivizing their performance .

as requested , we have included briefing slides that we previously gave to your staff regarding these issues and i will make reference to specific slides during the course of my testimony .

first , i would like to reiterate the broader context .

given current policies , in the next few decades the nation will face large and growing structural deficits due to known demographic trends , rising healthcare costs and current revenue - to - expenditure gaps .

at the same time , weapons programs are commanding more and more resources as dod undertakes increasingly ambitious efforts to transform its ability to confront current and potential threats .

further , managing dod is a challenge as it is one of the world's largest and most complex organizations , spending billions of dollars each year to sustain key business operations that support our forces .

while dod has embarked on a series of efforts to reform its business operations , serious challenges and inefficiencies remain .

in fact , eight individual areas that gao considers to be high risk because of their greater vulnerabilities to fraud , waste , abuse and mismanagement are specific to dod .

some of these issues are long - standing ; for example , we have identified dod weapon systems acquisition and contract management as high - risk areas for more than a decade .

in a report issued in july , we concluded that , with awards to contractors large and growing , dod will continue to be vulnerable to contracting fraud , waste or misuse of taxpayer dollars , and abuse .

while dod has acknowledged its vulnerabilities and taken some actions to address them , many of the initiatives are still in their early stages and it is too soon to tell what impact they may have .

further , there are numerous factors that can contribute to poor acquisition outcomes , which in turn erode dod's buying power .

we list some of these factors on slide 2 .

this list is illustrative and not intended to be exhaustive , and the risk these factors pose may manifest itself differently depending on the nature of the acquisition .

to start , dod's tendency to look for revolutionary solutions that depend on the maturation and availability of critical technologies often results in programs taking longer , costing more and delivering less capability than originally promised to the warfighter .

further , dod wants often do not reflect “true” requirements — in other words , based on credible threats and risk - based needs — resulting in a mismatch between wants , needs , affordability and sustainability .

once true requirements are established , they need to be stable .

at times , dod has allowed new requirements to be added well into the acquisition cycle , significantly stretching technology and creating design challenges , and exacerbating program budget overruns .

of course , defining requirements , managing contracts and overseeing contractors requires a capable workforce that is up to meeting these challenges , adheres to sound contracting practices , and provides contractors with incentives that are based on results , rather than attitudes and efforts .

with this context in mind , i would like to turn now to recent trends in dod's contracting activities .

if you would turn to slide 4 , dod's spending on goods and services has increased by 88 percent since fiscal year 2000 .

in fiscal year 2005 , dod obligated nearly $270 billion on contracts for products , research and development efforts , and services , such as for information technology and management support .

all indications are that this upward trend will continue .

aside from growth in dollar value , there have also been changes in what dod is buying .

dod's new weapon system programs are expected to be the most expensive and complex ever , and will consume an increasingly large share of dod's budget .

to illustrate , in the last 5 years dod has doubled its commitment to major weapon systems from $700 billion to $1.4 trillion .

dod is counting on these efforts to fundamentally transform military operations .

the army , for example , is undertaking the future combat systems program — a family of weapons , including 18 manned and unmanned ground vehicles , air vehicles , sensors and munitions , that will be linked by an information network — to enable its combat force to become lighter , more agile , and more capable .

future combat systems' procurement will represent 60 to 70 percent of army procurement from fiscal years 2014 to 2022 .

the army , however , is not alone in pursuing complex and costly systems .

for example , the air force is modernizing its tactical aircraft fleet as part of the $200 billion joint strike fighter program and the f - 22a raptor aircraft , which is expected to cost more than $65 billion .

similarly , the navy's virginia class submarine is expected to cost about $80 billion , while the ddg - 51 class of destroyer is expected to cost some $70 billion .

dod's development of such systems requires more funds than may reasonably be expected to be available .

for example , we testified in april 2006 that the navy's shipbuilding plan projects a supply of shipbuilding funds that will double by 2011 and will stay at high levels for years to follow .

as overall obligations have increased , so has dod's reliance on the private sector to provide services to fulfill dod's missions and support its operations .

in some cases , the growth in services reflects that dod is using a different acquisition approach to support its missions .

for example , dod is now buying launch services , rather than rockets .

service contracts pose a number of challenges in terms of defining requirements , establishing expected outcomes , and assessing contractor performance .

additionally , in recent years , federal agencies including dod have moved away from using in - house contracting capabilities and are making greater use of existing contracts awarded by other agencies .

if you would turn now to slide 7 , these interagency contracts are intended to leverage the government's buying power ; provide a faster and easier method for procuring commonly used goods and services , and reduce initial contracting administrative costs .

dod is the largest user of these interagency contracting vehicles , and their availability has enabled dod to save time by paying other agencies to award and administer contracts for goods and services on its behalf .

dod , however , lacks complete information about purchases made through other agencies' contracts .

moreover , our work and that of some agency inspectors general have uncovered instances of improper use of interagency contracts , including issuing orders that were outside the scope of the underlying contract , failing to follow procedures intended to ensure best pricing , and failing to establish clear lines of accountability and responsibility .

further , in some instances fee - for - service arrangements may have led to an inordinate focus on meeting customer demands at the expense of complying with sound contracting policy and required ordering procedures .

these and other issues led us to designate management of interagency contracting a governmentwide high - risk issue in january 2005 .

ensuring the proper use of interagency contracts must be viewed as a shared responsibility which requires that agencies clearly define responsibilities and adopt clear , consistent , and enforceable policies and processes that balance the need for customer service with the requirements of contract regulations .

at the same time that the amount , nature , and complexity of contract activity has increased , dod's acquisition workforce has remained relatively unchanged in size and faces certain skill gaps and serious succession planning challenges .

dod's acquisition workforce must have the right skills and capabilities if it is to effectively implement best practices and properly manage the goods and services it buys .

we noted in a report issued in 2003 , and again in july 2006 , however , that procurement reforms , changes in staffing levels , workload , and the need for new skill sets have placed unprecedented demands on the acquisition workforce .

moreover , dod's current civilian acquisition workforce level reflects the considerable downsizing that occurred in the 1990s .

dod's approach to acquisition workforce reduction during the 1990s was not oriented toward shaping the makeup of the workforce ; rather , dod relied primarily on voluntary turnover and retirements , freezes on hiring authority , and its authority to offer early retirements and buyouts to achieve reductions .

indeed , during our work on the early phases of dod downsizing , some dod officials voiced concerns about what was perceived to be a lack of attention to identifying and maintaining a balanced , basic level of skills needed to maintain in - house capabilities .

i would like to turn now to briefly discuss some of dod's practices in three areas — ( 1 ) competition and sound pricing ; ( 2 ) incentivizing contractors ; and ( 3 ) contract oversight — that increase risks and undermine dod's ability to establish sound business arrangements .

our work has identified a number of issues related to competition and pricing in dod's efforts to obtain needed goods and services .

under the competition in contracting act of 1984 , dod contracting officers are , with certain exceptions , to solicit offers and award contracts using full and open competition , in which all responsible sources are permitted to compete .

as shown on slide 10 , dod reports that only forty - one percent of its contract obligations in fiscal year 2005 were made on contracts that were awarded using full and open competition .

the impact of not using full and open competition is reflected in one recent example involving the army's award of sole - source contracts for security guards .

in this case , we found that the army devoted twice as many contract dollars — nearly $495 million — to sole - sourced contracts for security guards at 46 of 57 army installations , despite the army's recognition that it was paying about 25 percent more for its sole - source contracts than for those it previously awarded competitively .

gao , defense acquisitions: dod has paid billions in award and incentive fees regardless of acquisition outcomes , gao - 06-66 ( washington , d.c.: dec. 19 , 2005 ) ; and gao , defense acquisitions: dod wastes billions of dollars through poorly structured incentives , gao - 06-409t ( washington , d.c.: april 5 , 2006 ) .

another element of a sound business arrangement is the fee mechanism used to incentivize excellent contractor performance .

in december 2005 , we reported that dod gives its contractors the opportunity to collectively earn billions of dollars through monetary incentives .

unfortunately , we found dod programs routinely engaged in practices that failed to hold contractors accountable for achieving desired outcomes and undermined efforts to motivate results - based contractor performance , such as evaluating contractor performance on award - fee criteria that are not directly related to key acquisition outcomes ( eg , meeting cost and schedule goals and delivering desired capabilities to the warfighter ) ; paying contractors a significant portion of the available fee for what award - fee plans describe as “acceptable , average , expected , good , or satisfactory” performance , which sometimes did not require meeting the basic requirements of the contract ; and giving contractors at least a second opportunity to earn initially unearned or deferred fees .

as a result , dod has paid out an estimated $8 billion in award fees on contracts in our study population , regardless of whether acquisition outcomes fell short of , met , or exceeded dod's expectations .

on slide 15 , we have included four cases in which contractors that were behind schedule and over cost were paid between 74 and 100 percent of the available award fee .

despite paying billions of dollars in award and incentive fees , dod has not compiled data or developed performance measures to evaluate the validity of its belief that award and incentive fees improve contractor performance and acquisition outcomes .

dod's strategies for incentivizing its contractors , especially on weapon system development programs , are symptomatic of a lack of discipline , oversight , transparency , and accountability in dod's acquisition process .

i would like to briefly discuss the third element of sound business arrangements , dod's oversight of its service contracts .

government monitoring and inspection of contractor activity , if not done well , can contribute to a lack of accountability and poor acquisition outcomes .

in 2005 , we reported that dod's monitoring of nearly a third of the 90 service contracts we reviewed was insufficient .

in these cases , we identified a number of contributing factors , including dod's failure to assign government performance monitors and the fact that personnel are usually assigned such duties on a part - time basis and not evaluated on how well they performed their duties .

dod and senior military acquisition policy officials acknowledged that the priority of contracting offices is awarding contracts , not ensuring that trained performance monitors are assigned early so that contract oversight can begin upon contract award .

ultimately , however , if appropriate monitoring is not being done , dod is at risk for paying contractors more than the value of the services they performed .

in closing , these three illustrative business arrangement issues , along with those we have identified in dod's acquisition and business management processes , present a compelling case for change .

in short , it takes a myriad of things to go right for acquisitions to be successful , but only a few things to go wrong to cause major problems .

slide 17 provides examples of the impact that these problems can have on reducing the government's buying power .

such examples illustrate the outcomes of poor acquisition executions .

the debate now centers on future investments and what return on investment will be realized .

finally , on slide 18 you will find a number of actions that can and should be taken to improve acquisition outcomes .

by implementing the recommendations we have made on individual issues , dod can improve specific processes and activities and save huge amounts of taxpayer dollars .

at the same time , by working more broadly to improve its acquisition practices , dod can set the right conditions for becoming a smarter buyer , getting better acquisition outcomes , and making more efficient use of its resources in what is sure to be a more fiscally constrained environment .

dod's written acquisition policies reflect many of our recommendations and often incorporate best practices .

as such , the policies provide the basis for sound decisions and actions .

the policies , however , are not consistently manifested on decisions made on individual acquisitions .

in these cases , officials are rarely held accountable when acquisitions go astray .

it is essential to create an environment conducive to changing behaviors and to recognize that achieving sound acquisition outcomes are a shared responsibility between the congress , dod , and the contractor community .

unless changes are made , dod will continue on a path where wants , needs , affordability and sustainability are mismatched , with predictably and recurring unsatisfactory results .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my testimony .

i would be happy to answer any questions you may have .

in preparing for this testimony , we relied principally on previously issued gao reports .

we also obtained data on dod's contract activity from dod's dd350 database and from the general services administration's federal procurement data system .

we have previously expressed concerns about the accuracy of the data contained in the federal procurement data system .

we determined , however , that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this testimony .

we also obtained data from the office of personnel management regarding dod's acquisition workforce .

for the purposes of this report , we selected 14 occupation series including contracting , business , purchasing , quality assurance and supply and inventory management personnel .

we conducted our work in april and july 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact katherine v. schinasi at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or schinasik@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

key contributors to this report were lily chin , david e. cooper , brendan culley , thomas denomme , timothy dinapoli , paul francis , alan frazier , christopher kunitz , michele mackin , william russell , adam vodraska , and karen zuckerstein .

do the business of government .

the work of the government is increasingly performed by the private sector under contract .

dod's spending on goods and services has grown significantly since fiscal year 2000 , and all indications are the trend will continue .

dod's weapon systems acquisition and contract management processes have been on gao's high - risk list for more than a decade .

gao designated the management of interagency contracting a governmentwide high - risk issue in january 2005 ; dod is the largest user of interagency contracting vehicles .

workforce: gao analysis of opm data of 14 acquisition - related job series .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , increased security requirements and deployment of active duty and reserve personnel resulted in dod having fewer military personnel to protect domestic installations .

the u.s. army awarded contracts worth nearly $733 million to acquire contract guards at 57 installations .

the air force historically bought space launch vehicles , such as the delta and titan rockets , as products ; under the evolved expendable launch vehicle program , the air force purchases launch services using contractor - owned launch vehicles .

projected program cost is $28 billion .

defining requirements , establishing expected outcomes , and assessing contractor performance is often more complicated compared with contracting for supplies and equipment .

changes to the scope and cost of the work .

use of task order contracts and time - and - materials contracts provides dod flexibility to add work to contracts once needs are defined but may pose additional management and oversight risks .

dod may authorize contractors to begin work before reaching agreement on terms and conditions , including scope of work , specifications , and price , under agreements termed letter contracts or undefinitized contract actions .

dod obligated nearly $6.5 billion under letter contracts in fiscal year 2004 .

allows dod to initiate work quickly to meet urgent operational needs , but contract incentives to control costs are likely to be less effective .

this enables the government to rely on competitive market forces to obtain needed goods and services at fair and reasonable prices .

use of other than full and open competition must be justified in writing and must cite specific statutory authority .

46 of 57 installations resulted in the army paying 25 percent more for its sole - source contracts than for those it previously awarded competitively .

february 2005 review of sole - source awacs spare parts found that dod did not obtain or evaluate appropriate pricing information , such as sales data for items asserted to be commercial , or adequately consider analyses conducted by the defense contract audit agency or defense contract management agency .

in the absence of adequate price competition , the truth - in - negotiations act enables dod to obtain certified cost and pricing data for negotiated contracts exceeding $550,000 that are not for commercial items .

gao reviewed 20 contract actions valued at $4.4 billion in which dod waived the requirement for cost and pricing data .

dod lacked guidance to help contracting officers determine whether a waiver should be granted , what constitutes acceptable data and analyses , or the need for assistance .

range of responsibilities than traditional prime contractors .

examples include: the army's $200 billion future combat systems , in which the contractor is acting as a lead system integrator .

contractor is assuming greater responsibility for requirements development , design , and source selection of major system and subsystem contractors , and trade - off decisions .

in an interagency contract for construction services , dod paid 7 percent to treasury to award a contract to a staffing company , which then subcontracted to a construction firm .

in combination , army paid 17 percent more than subcontractor's proposed price .

historically , dod has limited visibility over the cost impact associated with using multiple layers of contractors to perform work .

contractors the opportunity to collectively earn billions of dollars through monetary incentives known as award and incentive fees .

on award - fee contracts , dod personnel conduct periodic evaluations of the contractor's performance against specified criteria and recommend the amount of fee to be paid .

criteria and evaluations tend to be subjective .

incentive - fee contracts typically apply a formula , specified in the contract , that adjusts the fee based on an objective evaluation of the contractor's performance .

dod reports it obligated more than $75 billion on award - and incentive - fee contracts in fiscal year 2004 .

programs engaged in practices that undermined efforts to motivate contractor performance and that did not hold contractors accountable for achieving desired outcomes .

dod frequently paid most of available award fees regardless of whether acquisition outcomes fell far short of , met , or exceeded expectations ; allowed contractors at least a second opportunity to earn initially unearned or paid significant amount of fee for “acceptable , average , expected , good , or satisfactory” performance .

contracts with incentive fees provided a clearer link to acquisition outcomes ; however , about half of the contracts failed or are projected to fail to complete the acquisition at or below the target price .

despite paying billions in fees , dod has little evidence to support its contention that these fees improved contractor performance .

*when calculating the percentage of award fee paid ( i.e .

percentage of award paid = total fee paid to date / ( total fee pool – remaining fee pool ) ) , we included rolled - over fees in the remaining fee pool when those fees were still available to be earned in future evaluation periods .

if monitoring and inspection is not performed , not sufficient , or not well documented , dod is at risk of being unable to identify and correct poor contractor performance in a timely paying contractors more than the value of the services performed .

dod personnel performed insufficient monitoring on nearly a third of the 90 service contracts reviewed in march 2005 report .

dod personnel failed to assign personnel to perform monitoring or did not document monitoring and some monitoring personnel were not formally trained ; monitoring is not perceived as important as awarding contracts ; and personnel are usually assigned monitoring duties as a part - time responsibility and are not evaluated on how well duties were performed .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

