in march 2014 , the world health organization ( who ) initially reported the occurrence of a rapidly evolving ebola virus disease outbreak in west africa .

by august 2014 , the outbreak had become the largest since the virus was first discovered , according to who .

although ebola outbreaks have occurred sporadically in africa since 1976 , there were more ebola cases and deaths during the 2014 outbreak than in all of the previous outbreaks combined .

in august 2014 , the who director - general declared the ebola outbreak in west africa a public health emergency of international concern .

as of june 2016 , the outbreak had resulted in more than 28,600 confirmed , probable , or suspected cases of ebola and more than 11,300 deaths in the west african countries primarily affected — guinea , liberia , and sierra leone , according to who .

these countries were particularly vulnerable because they had weak health systems and only recently emerged from long periods of conflict and instability .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) noted that the outbreak caused second - order effects , including immediate disruptions to the three countries' health systems , reduced economic activity , job loss , and food insecurity .

in response to the outbreak , usaid and the department of state ( state ) , along with other u.s. agencies and international and nongovernmental organizations , took urgent steps to reduce the transmission of the ebola virus and provide emergency treatment and care to infected persons .

in addition , usaid and state initiated efforts to address second - order effects and better prepare international health systems for future outbreaks .

usaid and state initiated ebola response and preparedness activities ( ebola activities ) using current and prior year appropriations .

in december 2014 , congress enacted the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 ( the act ) , which provided approximately $2.5 billion to usaid and state for necessary expenses to prevent , prepare for , and respond to an ebola outbreak .

the act also directed state , in consultation with usaid , to submit periodic reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations on the proposed uses of these funds on a country and project basis .

in addition , the act authorized usaid and state to use the funds to reimburse accounts for the obligations made for ebola activities prior to the december 16 , 2014 , enactment of the legislation .

the act also included a provision for gao to conduct oversight of usaid and state activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak and reimbursements made pursuant to specific provisions in the act .

this report examines ( 1 ) usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities and ( 2 ) the extent to which usaid made reimbursements in accordance with the requirements of the fiscal year 2015 appropriations act .

to examine usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities , we analyzed the agencies' funding data from their reports to congress to determine each agency's allocations , obligations , and disbursements for ebola activities from the fiscal year 2015 appropriation .

we also reviewed the agencies' reports to congress to identify agencies' reported use of the funds .

to examine usaid's reimbursements , we analyzed usaid data and documentation to determine the dates and amounts of obligations that the agency incurred for ebola activities prior to the enactment of the act , the appropriation accounts that funded the obligations , and the amounts of the reimbursements .

in addition , we interviewed usaid and state officials about the collection and reporting of the funding data and the agencies' use of funding for ebola activities .

we also reviewed usaid policies for financial management .

finally , we assessed the extent to which the reimbursements were consistent with the provisions of the act and met internal control standards .

to assess the reliability of the funding data , we obtained data from the financial data system that usaid used to report the funding data and conducted interviews with usaid and state officials .

when we found data discrepancies , we contacted agency officials and collaborated with them to resolve the discrepancies .

we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

see appendix i for more information about how we assessed the data's reliability and our overall scope and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to november 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the ebola outbreak was first identified in the remote guinean village of meliandou in december 2013 and subsequently spread to neighboring sierra leone and liberia and later to other african countries , including mali , nigeria , and senegal ( see fig .

1 ) .

guinea , liberia , and sierra leone experienced the largest number of confirmed , probable , or suspected cases and deaths .

as of june 2016 , who reported 28,616 confirmed , probable , or suspected ebola cases and 11,310 deaths in these three countries since the onset of the outbreak ( see fig .

2 ) .

who reported the majority of these cases and deaths between august 2014 and december 2014 .

after 2014 , the number of new cases began to decline , and on march 29 , 2016 , the who director - general terminated the public health emergency of international concern designation related to ebola in west africa and recommended lifting the temporary restrictions to travel and trade with guinea , liberia , and sierra leone .

however , seven confirmed and three probable cases were reported in guinea , and three confirmed cases of ebola were reported in liberia in march 2016 and april 2016 , respectively .

figure 3 shows the numbers of confirmed , probable , and suspected ebola cases and deaths in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone by month from august 2014 to december 2015 .

usaid noted that the ebola outbreak caused disruptions to health systems and adverse economic impacts in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone .

health - care resources in these countries were diverted from other programs to ebola response efforts , and some patients and health - care workers avoided health facilities for fear of contracting the disease .

usaid also noted that these countries experienced job loss , disruptions to trade , reduced agricultural production , decreased household purchasing power , and increased food insecurity as a consequence of the outbreak .

the closure of international borders in response to the outbreak hampered economic activity by limiting trade and restricting the movement of people , goods , and services .

in addition , the ebola outbreak occurred at the beginning of the planting season , which affected agricultural markets and food supplies .

u.s. efforts to respond to the ebola outbreak in west africa began in march 2014 when the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) deployed personnel to help with initial response efforts .

in august 2014 , the u.s. ambassador to liberia and the u.s. chiefs of mission in guinea and sierra leone declared disasters in each country .

following the declarations , usaid and cdc deployed medical experts to west africa to augment existing staff in each of the affected countries .

in august 2014 , a usaid - led disaster assistance response team ( dart ) deployed to west africa .

usaid - funded organizations began to procure and distribute relief commodities and establish ebola treatment units , and cdc began laboratory testing in west africa .

in september 2014 , the department of defense ( dod ) began direct support to civilian - led response efforts under operation united assistance .

in september 2014 , the president announced the u.s. government's strategy to address the ebola outbreak in the three primarily affected west african countries .

the national security council , the office of management and budget , usaid , and state developed an interagency strategy that has been revised over time to reflect new information about the outbreak and changes in international response efforts .

the strategy is organized around four pillars and their associated activities ( see table 1 ) .

multiple u.s. agencies have played a role in the u.s. government's response to the ebola outbreak in west africa .

usaid managed and coordinated the overall u.s. effort to respond to the ebola outbreak overseas , and state led diplomatic efforts related to the outbreak .

cdc led the medical and public health component of the u.s. government's response efforts .

for example , cdc provided technical assistance and disease control activities with other u.s. agencies and international organizations .

in addition , cdc assisted in disease surveillance and contact tracing to identify and monitor individuals who had come into contact with an ebola patient .

dod coordinated u.s. military efforts with other agencies , international organizations , and nongovernmental organizations .

dod also constructed ebola treatment facilities , transported medical supplies and medical personnel , trained health - care workers , and deployed mobile laboratories to enhance diagnostic capabilities in the field .

other federal agencies , including the department of agriculture , also contributed to the overall u.s. response .

although u.s. response efforts have focused primarily on liberia , the united states has been engaged in all three primarily affected west african countries .

the u.s. government also undertook response efforts in mali following an ebola outbreak in that country in october 2014 .

currently , u.s. response efforts include regional activities that encompass multiple countries , including activities to build the capacity of west african countries to prepare for and respond to infectious disease outbreaks .

prior to the fiscal year 2015 appropriation , usaid and state funded activities in response to the ebola outbreak using funds already appropriated .

on december 16 , 2014 , congress appropriated approximately $5.4 billion in emergency funding for ebola preparedness and response to multiple u.s. agencies as part of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( the fiscal year 2015 consolidated appropriations act ) .

within the fiscal year 2015 consolidated appropriations act , congress provided approximately $2.5 billion to usaid and state for necessary expenses to assist countries affected by , or at the risk of being affected by , the ebola outbreak and for efforts to mitigate the risk of illicit acquisition of the ebola virus and to promote biosecurity practices associated with ebola outbreak response efforts .

these funds were made available from different accounts and are subject to different periods of availability ( see table 2 ) .

the act requires state , in consultation with usaid , to submit reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations on the proposed uses of the funds on a country and project basis , for which the obligation of funds is anticipated , no later than 30 days after enactment .

these reports are to be updated and submitted every 30 days until september 30 , 2016 , and every 180 days thereafter until all funds have been fully expended .

the reports are to include ( 1 ) information detailing how the estimates and assumptions contained in the previous reports have changed and ( 2 ) obligations and expenditures on a country and project basis .

in addition , section 9002 of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 , authorized usaid and state to use funds appropriated for the global health programs ( ghp ) , international disaster assistance ( ida ) , and economic support fund ( esf ) accounts to reimburse appropriation accounts administered by usaid and state for obligations incurred to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak prior to enactment of the act .

usaid reports that it has made reimbursements totaling $401 million for obligations made prior to the act , using $371 million from the ida account and $30 million from the esf account of the fiscal year 2015 appropriation .

usaid reports that these obligations were incurred by the office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) ; the office of food for peace ( ffp ) ; the bureau for global health ; and missions in liberia , guinea , and senegal .

figure 4 shows usaid's reported obligations by office and bureau .

state reported that it did not reimburse funding for obligations made prior to the act .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid and state had obligated 58 percent and disbursed more than one - third of the $2.5 billion appropriated by the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 for ebola response and preparedness activities .

usaid and state obligated funds from various appropriation accounts for ebola activities during different stages of the response , with the largest shares of funding going to pillar 1 activities to control the outbreak and to support regional ebola activities in multiple countries .

in response to the ebola outbreak , usaid obligated funds from the ida account , and state obligated funds from the diplomatic & consular programs ( d&cp ) account .

as the u.s. government shifted its focus to mitigating second - order impacts and strengthening global health security , usaid obligated funds from the esf and ghp accounts , and state obligated nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) account funds for biosecurity activities .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid and state had obligated a total of almost $1.5 billion ( 58 percent ) and disbursed $875 million ( 35 percent ) of the $2.5 billion appropriated for ebola response and preparedness activities ( see fig .

5 ) .

usaid and state used different appropriation accounts to fund ebola activities .

as shown in table 3 below , usaid allocated the greatest amount of funding for ebola activities from the ida account , followed by the esf and ghp accounts .

state allocated funding from the nadr account and d&cp account for ebola activities .

usaid notified the relevant congressional committees on april 8 , 2016 , that it intended to obligate $295 million in esf ebola funds , of which usaid and state would reprogram $215 million for international response activities related to zika , including $78 million to the cdc for zika response activities , and $80 million for the cdc's international coordination of response efforts related to ebola .

as usaid obligates funding for zika activities , the unobligated balances in the esf account will continue to decrease .

esf funds appropriated in the act must have been obligated by september 30 , 2016 .

see figure 6 below for obligations and disbursements by appropriation account , as of july 1 , 2016 .

usaid and state used different appropriation accounts to fund ebola activities across the four pillars of the u.s. government's ebola strategy .

for example , usaid primarily used ida account funds to control the outbreak ( pillar 1 ) , esf account funds to mitigate second - order impacts of ebola ( pillar 2 ) , and ghp account funds to strengthen global health security ( pillar 4 ) .

usaid allocated all of the funding from the operating expenses account to building coherent leadership and operations ( pillar 3 ) .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid had obligated more than 60 percent of funds allocated for pillars 1 , 2 , and 4 and obligated just under 50 percent of the funds allocated for pillar 3 ; usaid and state had disbursed 85 percent of pillar 1 obligations .

see table 4 for the status of allocated funding by ebola strategy pillar .

usaid allocated the greatest amount of funding to activities to control the ebola outbreak ( pillar 1 ) and allocated approximately similar amounts of funding to mitigate the second - order impacts of ebola ( pillar 2 ) and to strengthen global health security ( pillar 4 ) .

figure 7 shows allocations , obligations , and disbursements by ebola strategy pillar , as of july 1 , 2016 .

see appendix ii for trends in obligations and disbursements by ebola strategy pillar , as of july 1 , 2016 .

usaid allocated the largest share of its funding to support regional ebola activities .

ebola funding for regional activities includes all five appropriation accounts administered by usaid from the fiscal year 2015 appropriation ( ida , esf , ghp , usaid operating expenses , and usaid's office of inspector general ) and state's nadr account .

the ghp account represents 42 percent of obligated funding for regional activities , while esf and ida represent approximately 29 percent and 21 percent of such funding , respectively .

see table 5 below for the status of allocated ebola funding by geographic area .

of the three countries most affected by the ebola virus , usaid obligated and disbursed the most funding for liberia , as the u.s. government took a lead role in ebola response efforts in this country .

figure 8 shows allocations , obligations , and disbursements for liberia , compared with sierra leone and guinea .

see appendix iii for trends in obligations and disbursements for each country , as of july 1 , 2016 .

prior to the enactment of the act in december 2014 , usaid had obligated $401 million to respond to the ebola outbreak .

usaid obligated the majority of this funding from the ida account for pillar 1 activities to control the outbreak in liberia .

state did not obligate any funding prior to the act but began obligating d&cp funding to respond to the ebola outbreak in april 2015 .

during the early stages of the response to the ebola outbreak , usaid obligated ida funds for the majority of its ebola activities , both before and after it received funding for ebola activities from the act .

by february 2015 , usaid had obligated more than $550 million in ida funding .

usaid obligated ida account funding at a lower rate after july 1 , 2015 , as usaid began to shift its focus to recovery activities .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid had obligated more than 60 percent of ida account funding and disbursed more than 80 percent of obligations .

usaid used the majority of ida funds to control the outbreak in liberia ( pillar 1 ) .

activities to control the outbreak included providing care to ebola patients ; supporting safe burials ; promoting infection prevention and control at health facilities ; distributing ebola protection and treatment kits ; and conducting ebola awareness , communication , and training programs .

usaid obligated approximately 60 percent of ida funds for liberia as of july 1 , 2016 , which reflects the u.s. government's lead role in responding to the ebola outbreak in that country .

usaid plans to use the remaining approximately 40 percent of unobligated ida funds for future ebola response activities as needed .

according to usaid officials , since april 2016 , ofda has programmed ida funding to provide support for maintaining a residual response capacity and for transitioning to long - term development efforts .

according to ofda officials , these activities will require a modest amount of funding in fiscal year 2017 .

ofda officials also noted that the unobligated ida balance would remain available to address any new cases or outbreaks of ebola that spread beyond the ability of the host governments to contain them .

state obligated most of its d&cp account funding to respond to the ebola outbreak in early 2015 .

in february 2015 , state notified the relevant congressional committees of its intention to allocate $33 million of $36 million in d&cp account funding to the office of medical services .

by the end of may 2015 , the office of medical services had obligated 97 percent of its allocated funding and disbursed all of its obligated funding for medical evacuations ; overseas hospitalization expenses ; and personal protective equipment , among other things .

state's bureau of administration , which provided grants to international schools affected by the ebola outbreak , obligated 95 percent of its allocated d&cp funding by the end of april 2015 .

state's africa bureau also obligated funding in the early stages of the ebola response , as it provided support for state's ebola coordination unit and u.s. embassies affected by ebola .

the africa bureau obligated more than half of its d&cp funding for ebola activities by the end of july 2015 .

as of june 30 , 2016 , state had obligated 94 percent of the d&cp account funding and disbursed 99 percent of its obligated funding .

usaid started to focus its efforts on mitigating second - order impacts of the outbreak and strengthening global health security between june 1 , 2015 , and october 1 , 2015 , using funding from the esf and ghp accounts .

as of may 1 , 2015 , state began obligating nadr funds for biosecurity activities .

usaid increased obligations of esf by approximately $68 million between june 1 , 2015 , and october 1 , 2015 , as usaid offices such as the bureau for global health and the u.s .

global development lab obligated esf funds for activities to mitigate the second - order impacts of the outbreak ( pillar 2 ) .

usaid disbursements of esf funding were less than $5 million until september 1 , 2015 .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid had obligated $251 million from the esf account for ebola activities , which represented 35 percent of its total allocated funding from the esf account .

of the esf funding that usaid obligated to mitigate the second - order impacts of ebola , usaid obligated the majority of such funding for activities in liberia , sierra leone , and guinea .

such activities included the development of facilities to decontaminate health - care workers and equipment , restoring routine health services , and strengthening health information systems to better respond to future disease outbreaks .

approximately 45 percent of obligated esf funds supported such activities in liberia , while 22 percent and 17 percent funded activities in sierra leone and guinea , respectively .

as the numbers of new ebola cases declined , usaid also began to focus on longer - term efforts to strengthen global health security , using funding from the ghp account .

accordingly , usaid reported no obligations of ghp funding before june 1 , 2015 and no disbursements until august 1 , 2015 .

as of july 1 , 2016 , usaid had obligated 59 percent and disbursed 10 percent of its ghp account funds for ebola response activities .

the bureau for global health , which programs the majority of ghp funding , added all of its ghp funding for ebola activities to existing awards .

because of the method of payment used for these awards , funding from older appropriations is used first .

as a result , the percentage of ghp funding that usaid has disbursed from the fiscal year 2015 appropriation for ebola activities is the lowest ( 10 percent ) of any account .

ghp funding appropriated in the act does not expire , so usaid can obligate and disburse these funds in future fiscal years .

usaid has obligated all of the funding in the ghp account to strengthen global health security ( pillar 4 ) .

such activities included building laboratory capacity , strengthening community surveillance systems to detect and monitor ebola and other diseases , and building the capacity of west african governments to prepare for and respond to infectious disease outbreaks .

nearly all ghp funding is regional funding rather than funding for a specific ebola - affected country .

for trends in obligations and disbursements of ida , esf , and ghp funds for ebola from february 3 , 2015 to july 1 , 2016 , see appendix iv .

state's bureau of international security and nonproliferation did not begin obligating funding from the nadr account until may 1 , 2015 , and did not disburse any nadr funds until september 1 , 2015 , for biosecurity activities .

such activities included training on biosecurity best practices and strategies for ebola sample management as well as conducting biosecurity risk assessments .

all nadr funding supports regional activities in west africa rather than activities in a single country .

as of july 1 , 2016 , state had obligated all of its nadr funding and disbursed 40 percent of obligated funding from this account .

twenty - one of usaid's 271 reimbursements for obligations incurred prior to the enactment of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 , were not in accordance with the reimbursement provisions of the act .

these 21 transactions account for over $60 million , or roughly 15 percent , of the approximately $401 million reimbursed .

because usaid did not have the legal authority to make the reimbursements that were not in accordance with the reimbursement provisions in the act , these reimbursements represent unauthorized transfers .

as of october 2016 , usaid had not determined whether it had budget authority to support the obligations against the accounts that were improperly reimbursed , possibly resulting in a violation of the antideficiency act .

in addition , usaid has not developed written policies or procedures to guide staff on appropriate steps to take for the reimbursement process .

such policies or procedures could provide usaid with reasonable assurance that it will comply with reimbursement provisions and mitigate the risk of noncompliance .

of 271 reimbursements that usaid made for obligations incurred prior to the enactment of the act , usaid made 21 reimbursements ( totaling over $60 million ) that were not in accordance with the act .

these 21 reimbursements represent roughly 15 percent of the approximately $401 million that usaid obligated for reimbursements , of the almost $1.5 billion that had been obligated as of july 1 , 2016 .

usaid made the other 250 reimbursements ( totaling about $341 million ) in accordance with the reimbursement provisions of the act for funds that ofda and ffp obligated prior to enactment of the act .

to assess whether usaid's reimbursements were in accordance with the act , we reviewed usaid documentation to determine whether each reimbursement met the four provisions described in the text box below .

reimbursement provisions of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 the reimbursement was made to the same appropriation account as the account from which the u.s. agency for international development originally obligated the funds .

the obligation was incurred prior to the december 16 , 2014 , enactment of the act .

the obligation was incurred to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

the reimbursement was made from the international disaster assistance , economic support fund , and global health programs accounts of the fiscal year 2015 appropriation .

for the 21 reimbursements ( totaling over $60 million ) , usaid did not reimburse the same appropriation accounts as the accounts from which usaid originally obligated the funds .

moreover , for 4 of the 21 reimbursements , usaid reimbursed obligations for which it did not document that it incurred the obligation to prevent , prepare for , or respond to the ebola outbreak .

specifically , usaid did not reimburse the same appropriation account as the account from which usaid originally obligated the funds .

the bureau for global health ; ffp ; and the missions in guinea , liberia , and senegal incurred over $60 million in obligations from the ghp , title ii of the food for peace act ( title ii ) , and development assistance accounts .

although usaid used funding from the esf and ida accounts of the fiscal year 2015 appropriation to make 21 reimbursements for these obligations , the agency did not reimburse the ghp , title ii , and development assistance accounts from which usaid originally obligated the funds , in accordance with the act ( see table 6 ) .

instead , usaid reimbursed the office , bureau or mission that originally obligated the funds .

these reimbursements were made to different accounts , with different spending authorities , than those from which the original obligation was made .

for example , ffp obligated approximately $30 million in title ii account funds for the world food program's regional program to address the urgent food needs of populations affected by the ebola outbreak , but usaid used approximately $30 million in ida account funds from the fiscal year 2015 appropriation to reimburse ffp and credited the funds to ffp's ida account .

usaid reimbursed obligations for which it did not document that it incurred the obligation to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

usaid made four reimbursements , totaling about $3.3 million , for which usaid was unable to provide documentation showing that the original obligations funded activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

for example , usaid reimbursed approximately $1.3 million for an obligation incurred by the bureau for global health in september 2014 .

however , usaid officials noted that they did not document the amount or purpose of the obligation at the time the funds were obligated .

in july 2016 , in response to our inquiry , usaid prepared a memorandum to attest that the original obligation was approximately $1.3 million and funded technical assistance for ebola preparedness to 13 african countries .

in another instance , usaid reimbursed $500,000 for an obligation incurred for the preparation of laboratories to detect middle east respiratory syndrome ( mers ) and other acute respiratory infections in the africa region .

however , usaid was unable to provide us documentation showing how the obligation funded activities related to the ebola outbreak .

because usaid did not have the legal authority to make the reimbursements that were not in accordance with the reimbursement provisions in the act , these 21 reimbursements represent unauthorized transfers .

further , the antideficiency act prohibits an agency from obligating or expending more than has been appropriated to it .

as of october 2016 , usaid had not determined whether it had the budget authority to support the obligations against the accounts that were improperly reimbursed .

see appendix v for a complete list of usaid's reimbursements for obligations incurred prior to the fiscal year 2015 appropriation .

the concerns we identified with the 21 reimbursements could partly be attributed to the fact that usaid has not developed written policies or procedures to guide staff on appropriate steps to take to make reimbursements and document them .

internal control standards require that management design control activities — actions established through policies and procedures — to achieve objectives and respond to risks and implement such activities through policies .

by developing written policies and procedures , offices and bureaus would know what steps they should take to ensure that reimbursements are made in accordance with an appropriation act and other applicable appropriations laws and are recorded in a manner that allows documentation to be readily available for examination .

such written policies and procedures could provide usaid with reasonable assurance that it is complying with reimbursement provisions and help mitigate the risk of noncompliance .

without written policies and procedures , usaid does not have a process in place for making reimbursements and maintaining documentation to show that it complied with the reimbursement provisions of the act .

our review found that usaid made 21 reimbursements that it did not have the legal authority to make , possibly resulting in the obligation or expenditure of funds in excess of appropriations , which would violate the antideficiency act .

in addition , because usaid did not have written policies and procedures for maintaining documentation of the reimbursements , usaid officials spent several months locating records to demonstrate to us that usaid had reimbursed 250 obligations in a manner consistent with the provisions of the act .

usaid officials also noted that because they did not document the purpose of some obligations at the time the funds were obligated , usaid officials had to create a memorandum to explain how two reimbursed obligations funded usaid activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

west africa has experienced the largest and most complex ebola outbreak since the virus was first discovered , resulting in more than 11,000 deaths .

the outbreak not only disrupted the already weak health - care systems in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone but also contributed to reduced economic activity , job loss , and food insecurity in these countries .

usaid and state have funded a range of activities to control the outbreak and will continue to fund longer - term efforts to mitigate the second - order effects and strengthen global health security .

the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 , authorized the reimbursement of obligations incurred prior to enactment to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

while most of usaid's reimbursements were made in accordance with the reimbursement provisions of the act , roughly 15 percent of the funds that usaid reimbursed were not .

in particular , usaid did not in all cases reimburse the same appropriation accounts from which it obligated funds as required by the act , and in several instances it made reimbursements for obligations for which it did not document that it incurred the obligation to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

as a result , usaid may not have the budget authority to support the obligations against the accounts that were erroneously reimbursed , which may result in a violation of the antideficiency act .

furthermore , without written policies and procedures , usaid risks the possibility of noncompliance recurring should usaid be granted reimbursement authority in the future .

to ensure that usaid reimburses funds in accordance with section 9002 of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 , we recommend that the administrator of usaid take the following three actions: 1 .

reverse reimbursements that were not made to the same appropriation account as the account from which usaid obligated the funds .

2 .

reverse reimbursements for which there is no documentary evidence that the obligation was incurred to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak .

3 .

determine whether reversing any of these reimbursements results in the obligation of funds in excess of appropriations in violation of the antideficiency act and , if so , report any violations in accordance with law .

to help ensure that usaid complies with reimbursement provisions that may arise in future appropriations laws , we recommend that the administrator of usaid develop written policies and procedures for the agency's reimbursement process .

we provided a draft of this report to usaid and state for comment .

in its written comments , reproduced in appendix vi , usaid agreed with our findings and recommendations .

usaid noted that it would reverse reimbursements that were not made to the same appropriation account as the account from which usaid originally obligated funds , and that it is reviewing whether it has violated the antideficiency act .

state did not provide formal comments .

usaid and state also provided technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the report , as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the u.s. agency for international development , the department of state , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii .

the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 ( the act ) , included a provision for us to conduct oversight of the u.s. agency for international development's ( usaid ) and the department of state's ( state ) activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the 2014 ebola outbreak and reimbursements made .

we examined ( 1 ) usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities and ( 2 ) the extent to which usaid made reimbursements in accordance with the requirements of the fiscal year 2015 appropriations act .

to examine usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements for ebola activities , we analyzed each agency's allocation , obligation , and disbursement data for ebola response and preparedness activities reported in usaid's and state's reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations mandated by the act .

we analyzed usaid's and state's reported data on allocations , obligations , and disbursements that usaid and state reported from february 3 , 2015 , to july 1 , 2016 .

we obtained and analyzed the data from usaid for the international disaster assistance ; global health programs ; economic support fund ; usaid operating expenses ; nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ; and usaid office of inspector general appropriation accounts .

we obtained and analyzed the data for the diplomatic & consular programs account from state , which state reported separately .

we reviewed each agency's reports to congressional committees to determine the activities funded and reasons for any changes in the agencies' cost estimates and use of the funds .

we interviewed usaid and state officials in washington , d.c. , from each bureau and office that administers funding from accounts of the fiscal year 2015 appropriation to discuss the status of the agencies' obligations and disbursements for activities to prevent , prepare for , and respond to the ebola outbreak in west africa , methods for reporting the funding data , and plans for obligating and disbursing the funds .

we also interviewed officials from each of usaid's and state's offices that report on the funds to obtain information about their budgeting process and terms to determine the best method for analyzing the data across accounts .

we then reviewed the data and information reported and consulted with usaid and state officials on the accuracy and completeness of the data and information .

when we found data discrepancies , we contacted relevant agency officials and obtained information from them necessary to resolve the discrepancies .

to assess the reliability of the data provided , we requested and reviewed information from agency officials regarding the underlying financial data systems and the checks and reviews used to generate the data and ensure its accuracy and reliability .

to further ensure the reliability of the data , we obtained from usaid officials data from the financial data system that usaid used to report obligation and disbursement data and compared them to a sample of the data that we analyzed .

we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes of examining usaid's and state's obligations and disbursements of the funds .

to examine the extent to which usaid made reimbursements in accordance with the act , we reviewed usaid's reports to the senate and house committees on appropriations mandated by the act to determine the obligations that the agency incurred prior to enactment and the reimbursements that usaid made for the obligations .

we obtained data and documentation from each usaid bureau and office that administered the appropriation accounts for the obligations incurred prior to the fiscal year 2015 appropriation .

to assess the reliability of the data provided , we requested and reviewed information from usaid officials regarding the underlying financial data systems and the checks and reviews used to generate the data and ensure its accuracy and reliability .

we determined that the data we used were sufficiently reliable for our purposes of examining usaid's reimbursements .

we analyzed these data and reviewed documents to determine the dates and amounts of the obligations , the activities that the obligations funded , and the appropriation accounts used for the obligations .

we also analyzed the data and reviewed documents to determine the amounts of the reimbursements , the appropriation accounts from the fiscal year 2015 appropriation that usaid used for the reimbursements , and the appropriation accounts to which usaid reimbursed the funds .

we reviewed usaid's congressional notifications and award documentation to determine the amounts , purposes , and appropriation accounts for the obligations that usaid incurred prior to the enactment of the act as well as the amounts and appropriation accounts from which usaid reimbursed the funds .

we interviewed usaid and state officials about the extent to which the agencies incurred obligations prior to the appropriation and reimbursed the funds .

we also interviewed usaid officials and reviewed usaid's policies for the management of funds to determine the extent to which the agency had developed and implemented written policies or procedures for the reimbursement process .

we assessed the extent to which the obligations and reimbursements were consistent with the provisions of the act as well as the extent to which the procedures usaid used met relevant internal control standards .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2015 to november 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as of july 1 , 2016 , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the department of state ( state ) had obligated the largest share of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 ( the act ) ebola funding for activities to control the outbreak ( pillar 1 ) .

usaid had obligated lesser amounts of funding for activities to mitigate second - order impacts of ebola ( pillar 2 ) and activities to strengthen global health security ( pillar 4 ) .

usaid obligated a minimal amount of funding for building coherent leadership and operations ( pillar 3 ) .

for all strategy pillars , the largest percentage increase in obligations occurred between april 1 , 2015 , and july 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

9 ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) obligated funding from the international disaster assistance ( ida ) and economic support fund ( esf ) accounts for almost all of its country - specific ebola funding .

more than 80 percent of the funding that usaid has obligated for ebola activities in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone is from the ida account .

since usaid began its reporting to congress on ebola funding in february 2015 , ida obligations for liberia show the greatest increase between february 3 , 2015 , and july 1 , 2015 , and esf obligations for liberia show the greatest increase between april 1 , 2015 , and october 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

10 ) .

esf disbursements do not begin before july 1 , 2015 .

usaid deobligated and reprogrammed ida funding for liberia between january 1 , 2016 , and july 1 , 2016 , as it needed fewer funds to control the outbreak .

consistent with liberia , since usaid began reporting to congress on its ebola funding in february 2015 , usaid obligations of ida funding for sierra leone show the greatest increases between february 3 , 2015 , and july 1 , 2015 .

however , usaid made no obligations of esf funding before april 1 , 2015 , and no disbursements of esf funding until after july 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

11 ) .

since usaid began reporting to congress on its ebola funding in february 2015 , the greatest increase in obligations from the ida account for guinea occurred between february 3 , 2015 , and july 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

12 ) .

the international disaster assistance ( ida ) account represents the majority of funding obligated and disbursed for ebola activities to control the outbreak .

after the enactment of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 , obligations and disbursements from the ida account increased the most between april 1 , 2015 , and july 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

13 ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) deobligated and reprogrammed ida funding between january 1 , 2016 , and july 1 , 2016 , as it needed fewer funds to control the outbreak ( see fig .

13 ) .

the office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) programmed the majority of ida funding .

the economic support fund ( esf ) account represents the majority of funding obligated and disbursed for activities to mitigate the second - order impacts of ebola .

usaid increased obligations of esf significantly between april 1 , 2015 , and october 1 , 2015 , as new cases of ebola decreased .

disbursements of esf funding did not increase significantly until after july 1 , 2015 ( see fig .

14 ) .

usaid's bureau for global health and global development lab programmed the majority of esf funding .

the global health programs ( ghp ) account represents the majority of funding obligated and disbursed for activities to strengthen global health security .

usaid did not obligate any ghp funding between february 3 , 2015 , and april 1 , 2015 , and did not report disbursements until august 1 , 2015 , as usaid intends ghp to fund longer - term activities to respond to future outbreaks ( see fig .

15 ) .

the bureau for global health programs almost all ghp funding .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) made 271 reimbursements for the approximately $401 million total obligations that usaid's bureau for global health ; office of food for peace ( ffp ) ; office of u.s. foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) ; and the missions in guinea , liberia , and senegal incurred prior to the enactment of the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2015 ( the act ) .

of the 271 reimbursements , usaid made 250 reimbursements ( totaling about $341 million ) in accordance with the reimbursement provisions of the act .

usaid made these 250 reimbursements for funds that ofda and ffp obligated prior to enactment of the act .

however , usaid made 21 reimbursements ( totaling over $60 million ) that did not accord with the reimbursement provisions of the act .

usaid made these 21 reimbursements for funds that the bureau for global health , ffp , and the missions obligated prior to enactment of the act .

tables 7 through 9 provide information about these 21 reimbursements and the requirements of the act that each of the reimbursements did not meet .

in addition to the contact named above , valérie l. nowak ( assistant director ) , bradley hunt ( analyst - in - charge ) , ashley alley , bryan bourgault , debbie chung , neil doherty , rachel dunsmoor , jill lacey , amanda postiglione , and matthew valenta made key contributions to this report .

