thank you for inviting us to testify today on the economic state of the airline industry .

just over a year ago , we testified before this committee on guidelines for providing financial assistance to the industry .

the congress has long recognized that the continuation of a strong , vibrant , and competitive commercial airline industry is in the national interest .

a financially strong air transport system is critical not only for the basic movement of people and goods , but also because of the broader effects this sector exerts throughout the economy .

in response to the industry's financial crisis generated by the events of last september , the congress passed the air transportation safety and system stabilization act .

thus , it is fitting that we now return to this committee to review the state of the industry's financial health and competitiveness .

over the past several years , we have issued a number of reports that focus on changes within the airline industry .

they include analyses of the potential impacts on consumers of airline mergers and alliances , carriers' use of regional jets , and changes in service to the nation's smaller communities .

our statement today builds on that body of work and provides a current overview of ( 1 ) the financial condition of major u.s. commercial passenger airlines ; ( 2 ) steps taken by airlines to improve their financial condition ; and ( 3 ) some public policy issues related to current conditions and changes in the aviation industry's competitive landscape .

many , but not all , major u.s. passenger airlines are experiencing their second consecutive year of record financial losses .

in 2001 , the u.s. commercial passenger airline industry reported losses in excess of $6 billion .

for 2002 , some wall street analysts recently projected that u.s. airline industry losses will approach $7 billion , and noted that the prospects for recovery during 2003 are diminishing .

such projections could worsen dramatically in the event of additional armed conflict , if travel demand drops and fuel prices rise .

several carriers have entered carriers have taken many actions to lower their costs and restructure their operations .

since september 2001 , carriers have furloughed an estimated 100,000 staff , renegotiated labor contracts , and streamlined their fleets by retiring older , costlier aircraft .

carriers have reduced capacity by operating fewer flights or smaller aircraft , such as substituting “regional jets” for large “mainline” jet aircraft .

in some cases , carriers eliminated all service to communities .

for example , since september 2001 , carriers have notified the department of transportation ( dot ) that they intend to discontinue service to 30 small communities .

at least two carriers are modifying their hub operations to use resources more efficiently by spreading flights out more evenly throughout the day .

finally , to increase revenues , some carriers have proposed creating marketing alliances under which the carriers would operate as code - sharing partners .

united airlines and us airways announced plans to form such an alliance on july 24 , 2002 , as did continental airlines , delta air lines , and northwest airlines one month later .

as the aviation industry continues its attempts to recover , the congress will be confronted with a need for increased oversight of a number of public policy issues .

first , airlines' reactions to financial pressures will affect the domestic industry's competitive landscape .

some changes , such as extending airline networks to new markets through code sharing alliances , may increase competition and benefit consumers .

others , such as carriers' discontinuing service to smaller communities , may decrease competition and reduce consumers' options , particularly over the long term .

second , airlines' reductions in service will likely place additional pressure on federal programs supporting air service to small communities , where travel options are already limited .

finally , while domestic travel has been the focus of our concern today , there are numerous international developments — especially regarding the european union ( eu ) — that may affect established international “open skies” agreements between the united states and eu member states .

various studies have illustrated the benefits to both consumers and carriers that flow from liberalizing aviation trade through such agreements .

as international alliances are key components of major domestic airlines' networks , international aviation issues will affect the overall condition of the industry .

the airline deregulation act of 1978 has led to lower fares and better service for most air travelers , largely because of increased competition .

the experiences of millions of americans underscore the benefits that have flowed to most consumers from the deregulation of the airline industry , benefits that include dramatic reductions in fares and expansion of service .

these benefits are largely attributable to increased competition , which has been spurred by the entry of new airlines into the industry and established airlines into new markets .

at the same time , however , airline deregulation has not benefited everyone ; some communities have suffered from relatively high airfares and a loss of service .

the airline industry is a complex one that has experienced years of sizable profits and great losses .

the industry's difficulties since september 11 , 2001 , do not represent the first time that airlines have faced a significant financial downturn .

in the early 1990s , a combination of factors ( eg , high jet fuel prices due to iraq's invasion of kuwait and the global recession ) placed the industry in turmoil .

between 1990 and 1992 , u.s. airlines reported losses of about $10 billion .

all major u.s. airlines except southwest reported losses during those years .

in addition , several airlines — most notably braniff , eastern , and pan am — went out of business , and trans world airlines , northwest airlines , and continental airlines entered bankruptcy proceedings .

by the start of 1993 , the industry had turned the corner and entered a period during which nearly all major u.s. airlines were profitable .

the industry rebounded without massive federal financial assistance .

the events of september 11th accelerated and aggravated negative financial trends that had begun earlier in 2001 .

congress responded quickly to address potential instability in the airline industry by enacting the air transportation safety and system stabilization act .

among other things , that act authorized payments of $5 billion in direct compensation ( grants ) to reimburse air carriers for losses sustained as a direct result of government actions beginning on september 11 , 2001 , and for incremental losses incurred between september 11 and december 31 , 2001 as a direct result of the terrorist attacks .

the act provided $10 billion in loan guarantees to provide airlines with emergency access to capital and established the air transportation stabilization board ( the board ) to administer the loan program .

the board is tasked not only with providing financial assistance to airlines but also with protecting the interests of the federal government and american taxpayer .

the act requires the board to ensure that airlines are compensating the government for the financial risk in assuming guarantees .

this requirement defines the loan guarantee as a mechanism for supporting airlines with reasonable assurances of financial recovery .

in addition to the grants and loan guarantees , the federal government has also established other ways to ease the airlines' financial condition .

many major u.s. passenger airlines are experiencing their second consecutive year of record financial losses .

in 2001 , the industry reported a net loss of over $6 billion , even after having received $4.6 billion from the federal government in response to september 11th .

for 2002 , some wall street analysts have projected that u.s. airline industry losses will total about $7 billion , but this projection may worsen in the event of additional armed conflict , particularly if this results in decreasing travel demand and rising fuel prices .

according to industry data , airlines' revenues have declined 24 percent since 2000 , while costs have remained relatively constant .

us airways and vanguard airlines filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy during this summer .

united airlines officials stated that they are preparing for a potential chapter 11 bankruptcy filing this fall .

furthermore , some wall street analysts predict that it will likely take until 2005 for the industry to return to profitability .

attachment i summarizes the financial condition of major network and low - fare carriers .

major airline carriers' revenues have fallen because of a combination of a decline in passenger enplanements and a significant decrease in average fares .

as figure 1 shows , major carriers' enplanements increased for every quarter of 2000 compared to the same quarter of the previous year , but flattened in the first quarter of 2001 and then dropped , with the steepest drop occurring in the quarter following september 11 , 2001 .

over the same period , major airlines have also received lower average fares .

data from the air transport association indicate that the average fare for a 1,000-mile trip dropped from $145 in june 2000 to $118 in june 2002 , a decrease of about 19 percent ( see fig .

2 ) .

average fares started dropping noticeably in mid - 2001 and have not risen significantly since .

industry data suggest that the decline is due to the changing mix of business and leisure passenger traffic , and particularly to the drop in high - fare business passengers .

through june 2002 , all major network carriers generated negative net income , while low - fare carriers southwest airlines , jetblue , and airtran returned positive net income .

like the major carriers , these low - fare carriers' passenger enplanements dropped in the months immediately following september 2001 .

attachment ii summarizes passenger enplanements for individual major and low - fare carriers for 2000 , 2001 , and the first 5 months of 2002 .

why have some low - fare carriers been able to earn positive net income in current market conditions , while network carriers have not ? .

the answer seems to rest at least in part with their fundamentally different business models .

low - fare carriers and major network carriers generally have different route and cost structures .

in general , low - fare carriers fly “point - to - point” to and from airports in or near major metropolitan areas , such as los angeles , chicago , and baltimore - washington .

in comparison , major network carriers use the “hub and spoke” model , which allows them to serve a large number of destinations , including not just large cities , but small communities and international destinations as well .

american airlines , for example , can carry a passenger from dubuque , iowa , through chicago , to paris , france .

low - fare carriers have also been able to keep costs lower than those of major airline carriers .

for example , 2002 data reported by the carriers to dot indicate that southwest's costs per available seat mile ( a common measure of industry unit costs ) for one type of boeing 737 is 3.79 cents .

for the same aircraft type , united airlines reported a cost of 8.39 cents — more than twice the cost at southwest .

all airlines are now entering an environment in which some of the costs of doing business have increased .

the federal transportation security administration has taken over responsibility for many security functions for which airlines previously had been responsible .

the air transport association ( ata ) estimated that the airline industry spent about $1 billion for security in 2000 .

despite the shift in functional responsibilities , airlines have stated that they continue to bear the costs of other new federal security requirements .

in august 2002 , delta air lines estimated the cost of new federal security requirements that it must bear to be about $205 million for 2002 .

this includes the cost of reinforcing cockpit doors , lost revenues from postal and cargo restrictions , and lost revenues from carrying federal air marshals .

to address mounting financial losses and changing market conditions , carriers have begun taking a multitude of actions to cut costs and boost revenues .

first , many carriers have trimmed costs through staff furloughs .

according to the congressional research service , carriers have reduced their workforces by at least 100,000 employees since last september .

further , some carriers , including united airlines and us airways , have taken steps to renegotiate contracts in order to decrease labor and other costs .

a us airways official stated that its renegotiated labor agreements would save an estimated $840 million annually .

carriers have also grounded unneeded aircraft and accelerated the retirement of older aircraft to streamline fleets and improve the efficiency of maintenance , crew training , and scheduling .

carriers accelerated the retirement of both turboprops and a variety of larger aircraft , including boeing 737s and 727s .

for example , united and us airways retired the boeing 737s used by united's shuttle service and us airways' metrojet system , and the carriers discontinued those divisions' operations .

industry data indicate that the airlines have parked over 1,400 aircraft in storage , with more than 600 having been parked since september 2001 .

although carriers had begun reducing capacity earlier in 2001 , those reductions accelerated after the terrorist attacks .

between august 2001 and august 2002 , major carriers reduced capacity by 10 percent .

carriers can decrease capacity by reducing the number of flights or by using smaller aircraft , such as replacing mainline service with regional jets , which are often operated by the network carrier's regional affiliate and normally have lower operating costs .

for example , american airlines serves the markets between boston , new york ( laguardia ) , and washington , d.c. ( reagan national ) only with regional jet service provided by its affiliate , american eagle .

another way carriers have reduced capacity is to discontinue service to some markets , primarily those less profitable , often smaller communities .

our previous work showed that the number of small communities that were served by only one airline increased from 83 in october 2000 to 95 by october 2001 .

between september 2001 and august 2002 , carriers had notified dot that they intend to discontinue service to 30 additional communities , at least 15 of which were served by only one carrier and are now receiving federally - subsidized service under the essential air service ( eas ) program .

some carriers are modifying their “hub and spoke” systems .

american is spreading flights out more evenly throughout the day instead operating many flights during peak periods .

american began this effort in chicago and has announced that it would expand its “de - peaking” efforts to its largest hub at dallas / fort worth beginning november 2002 .

american officials stated that these changes would increase the productivity of labor and improve the efficiency of gate and aircraft use .

delta officials said they are also taking steps to spread flights more evenly throughout the day .

beyond the steps individual carriers are taking to restructure and cut costs , some carriers are proposing to join forces through marketing and codesharing alliances in order to increase revenues .

under these proposed alliances , carriers would sell seats on each other's flights , and passengers would accrue frequent flyer miles .

company officials stated that the carriers would remain independent competitors with separate schedules , pricing , and sales functions .

on july 24 , 2002 , united and us airways announced a proposed codesharing alliance to broaden the scope of their networks and potentially stimulate demand for travel .

united and us airways estimated that the alliance would provide more than $200 million in annual revenue for each carrier .

one month later , northwest announced that it had signed a similar agreement with continental and delta .

according to northwest , this agreement builds on the alliance between northwest and continental that had been in existence since january 1999 .

these alliances would expand both their domestic and international networks .

the department of transportation is currently reviewing these proposals .

because a financially healthy and competitive aviation industry is in the national interest , and because carriers' and the federal government's efforts to address the current situation may affect consumers both positively and negatively , congress will be confronted with several major public policy issues .

these policy issues underscore the difficulties this industry will encounter as it adapts to a new market environment .

we are highlighting three of these issues: the effect of airlines' current financial situation , including new business costs , on industry health and competition ; the impact of reductions in service on federal programs designed to protect service to small communities , and international developments that may further affect the domestic industry .

how will the carriers' reactions to current financial pressures affect the industry's competitive landscape ? .

there is a new aviation business reality that has increased the airlines' financial pressures and which ultimately will be felt by u.s. consumers .

increased federal security requirements , which are part of this new reality , are adding to the cost of competing in the industry .

the cost of these policies will most likely be borne both by industry , through higher operational costs , and the consumer , through higher fares .

in the current pricing environment , carriers may not be able to pass on these costs to consumers , and thus may be bearing their full impact during the short run .

on the other hand , these same security requirements may be helping the airlines maintain some of its passenger revenue ; some portion of the airlines' current passengers may be flying only as a result of knowing that these heightened security requirements are in place .

thus , the question arises about the net impact of the new market environment and new security requirements on the carriers and their passengers while the industry restructures .

while understandable from the perspective of an individual airline's bottom line , the restructuring activities of individual carriers will significantly change the competitive landscape .

when carriers decrease available capacity in a market by reducing the number of flights , decreasing the size of aircraft used to meet reduced demand , or dropping markets altogether , the net result is that consumers have fewer options .

in doing so , airlines reduce the amount of competition in those markets .

as has been shown repeatedly , less competition generally leads to higher fares in the long run .

a related issue concerns the industry's consolidation , whether through marketing alliances among or mergers between carriers .

because of the potential that consolidation presents for competition , federal oversight has been critical .

as we have noted before , while alliances may offer potential consumer benefits associated with expanded route networks , more frequency options , improved connections , and frequent flyer benefits , consolidation within the industry raises a number of critical public policy issues .

these include increasing potential barriers to market entry , the loss of competition in key markets , and a greater risk of travel disruptions as a result of labor disputes .

since these alliances and mergers have a direct impact on the level of competition within the airline industry and would therefore influence the affordability of air travel to many consumers , these issues are still relevant .

how will the federal government's support of small community air service be affected ? .

the congress has long recognized that many small communities have difficulty attracting and maintaining scheduled air service .

now , as airlines continue to reduce capacity , small communities will potentially see even further reductions in service .

this will increase the pressure on the federal government to preserve and enhance air service to these communities .

there are two main programs that provide federal assistance to small communities: the essential air service ( eas ) program , which provides subsidies to commercial air carriers to serve the nation's smallest communities , and the small community air service development pilot program , which provides grants to small communities to enhance their air service .

as we reported in august , the number of communities that qualify for eas - subsidized service has grown over the last year , and there are clear indications that that number will continue to grow .

federal awards under the program have increased from just over $40 million in 1999 to an estimated $97 million in fiscal year 2002 .

as carriers continue to drop service in some markets , more communities will become eligible for subsidized eas service .

in 2002 , nearly 180 communities requested over $142.5 million in grants under the small community air service development pilot program .

dot awarded the total $20 million available to 40 communities in 38 states to assist them in developing or enhancing their air service .

the grants will be used for a variety of programs , including financial incentives to carriers to encourage either new or expanded air service , marketing campaigns to educate travelers about local air service , and support of alternative transportation .

we are currently studying efforts to enhance air service in small communities , and expect to report on these programs early next year .

how will future international developments affect established agreements between the us and eu member states ? .

there are a number of international issues that will influence the domestic aviation industry's attempts to recover from financial losses .

the european court of justice is expected to reach a decision in the near future on the authority of individual european union nations to negotiate bilateral agreements .

this could raise uncertainties over the status of “open skies” agreements that the united states has signed with individual european union nations .

this is especially critical with regard to negotiating an open skies agreement with the united kingdom , our largest aviation trading partner overseas .

because almost all of the major us carriers partner with european airlines in worldwide alliances , this decision could potentially impact the status of antitrust immunity for these alliances , which could in turn affect alliances established with airlines serving the pacific rim or latin america .

these alliances are key components of several major airlines' networks and as such significantly affect their overall financial status .

various studies have illustrated the benefits to both consumers and carriers that flow from liberalizing aviation trade through “open skies” agreements between the united states and other countries .

this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the committee might have .

for further information on this testimony , please contract jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony included triana bash , carmen donohue , janet frisch , patty hsieh , steve martin , tim schindler , sharon silas , pamela vines , and alwynne wilbur .

net income ( loss ) 2001 net income ( loss ) 2002:2q ( $4,500,000 ) ( $39,500,000 ) ( $366,759,000 ) ( $147,871,000 ) ( $1,070,000,000 ) ( $1,762,000,000 ) ( $305,000,000 ) ( $95,000,000 ) ( $583,000,000 ) ( $1,027,000,000 ) ( $264,000,000 ) ( $423,000,000 ) ( $850,000,000 ) ( $2,145,000,000 ) ( $517,000,000 ) ( $2,117,000,000 ) ( $3,960,259,000 ) ( $7,756,371,000 ) three ( 3 ) months ended 3 / 31 / 02 .

filed chapter 11 on 7 / 30 / 02 .

