i am pleased to be here today to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) management challenges and its progress in addressing them .

as you know , in 2002 , when dhs was created , department leadership faced the daunting task of transforming 22 agencies — several with major management challenges — into one department .

at that time , we recognized that the creation of dhs was an enormous undertaking that could take years to implement , and failure to effectively address management challenges could have serious national security consequences .

in 2003 , shortly after the department was formed , we designated implementing and transforming dhs as a high - risk area to the federal government .

today , the work to strengthen dhs's management continues .

since 2003 , we have narrowed the focus of this high - risk area as dhs has matured and evolved .

in 2013 , we reported that although challenges remained for dhs across its range of missions , the department had made considerable progress in transforming its original component agencies into a single cabinet - level department .

as a result , we narrowed the scope of the high - risk area to focus on strengthening dhs management functions ( human capital , acquisition , financial management , and information technology ) and changed the name of the high - risk area to strengthening dhs management functions to reflect this focus .

in the last decade , dhs has taken many steps to strengthen its management including developing a more strategic approach to human capital planning , improving acquisition process compliance , and improving its information technology ( it ) investment framework .

dhs has implemented more than 75 percent of the approximately 2,800 recommendations we have made since 2003 , which have strengthened program management and performance measurement , among other things .

however , significant challenges remain in the areas of acquisition management and financial reporting .

in may 2018 , we found that many of the acquisition programs we assessed were not on track to meet their schedule and cost goals , as i will explain in greater detail later in this statement .

further , components' financial management systems and business processes need to be modernized to facilitate the department's ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making .

we continue to closely monitor dhs's work in these areas and regularly meet with dhs management to discuss progress .

our five criteria for removing areas from the high - risk list guide our discussions with dhs and our assessments of its progress .

specifically , the agency must have ( 1 ) a demonstrated strong commitment and top leadership support to address the risks ; ( 2 ) the capacity — the people and other resources — to resolve the risks ; ( 3 ) a corrective action plan that identifies the root causes , identifies effective solutions , and provides for substantially completing corrective measures in the near term , including but not limited to steps necessary to implement solutions we recommended ; ( 4 ) a program instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures ; and ( 5 ) the ability to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures .

my statement discusses dhs's progress and remaining actions needed to strengthen and integrate its management functions .

this statement is based on our 2019 high - risk update and other reports we issued from february 2017 through march 2019 .

for these products we analyzed dhs strategies and other documents related to the department's efforts to address its high - risk areas and interviewed dhs officials , among other things .

more detailed information on the scope and methodology of our prior work can be found within each specific report .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

dhs's efforts to strengthen and integrate its acquisition , it , financial , and human capital management functions have resulted in the department meeting 3 out of 5 criteria for removal from the high - risk list — leadership commitment , action planning , and monitoring progress .

dhs has partially met the remaining two criteria — capacity and demonstrated , sustained progress , as shown in figure 1 .

with regard to leadership commitment , dhs's top leadership , including the secretary and deputy secretary of homeland security , has continued to demonstrate commitment and support for addressing the department's management challenges .

they have also taken actions to institutionalize this commitment to help ensure the long - term success of the department's efforts .

one such effort is the under secretary for management's integrated priorities initiative to strengthen the integration of dhs's business operations across the department .

during monthly leadership meetings with the under secretary for management , the department's chief executive officers have been providing status updates on their respective actions to address this high - risk designation .

furthermore , top dhs leaders , such as the under secretary for management and the department's chief executive officers , routinely meet with gao management to discuss progress on high - risk areas .

with regard to having an action plan and monitoring effectiveness , in january 2011 , dhs produced its first integrated strategy for high - risk management and has issued 14 updated versions , most recently in september 2018 .

the september 2018 strategy describes dhs's progress to - date , planned corrective actions to further strengthen its management functions , and includes performance measures to monitor key management initiatives .

dhs's management directorate leads this ongoing effort and dhs's strategy and approach , if effectively implemented and sustained , provides a path for dhs to be removed from our high - risk list .

dhs has partially met the criteria for capacity but needs to make additional progress identifying and allocating resources in certain areas — namely acquisition , it , and financial management — to fully demonstrate its capacity .

dhs has analyzed components' acquisition program staffing assessments but has yet to conduct an in - depth analysis across components or develop a plan to address any gaps .

with regard to it staffing , dhs has not fully identified or reported to congress or the office of personnel management ( opm ) on its department - wide cybersecurity specialty areas of critical needs , such as cybersecurity management or incident response , as required by law .

additionally , dhs's financial statement auditor has identified several capacity - related issues , including resource limitations and inadequate management and staff training , as causes for the material weaknesses reported .

the final criterion is demonstrated progress , which remains partially met .

in 2010 , we identified , and dhs agreed , that achieving 30 specific outcomes in the areas of acquisition management , it management , financial management , human capital management , and management integration would be critical to addressing the department's management challenges .

as such , these 30 outcomes became the key criteria by which we gauge dhs's demonstrated progress .

we reported in march 2019 that dhs has fully addressed 17 of the 30 needed outcomes , mostly addressed four , partially addressed six , and initiated actions to address the remaining three , as shown in table 1 .

in the last 2 years , dhs has made particular progress in the areas of human capital and it management .

specifically , since 2017 dhs has taken steps to fully address 4 outcomes .

the department fully addressed two key human capital outcomes by ( 1 ) demonstrating that components are basing hiring decisions and promotions on human capital competencies and ( 2 ) strengthening employee engagement efforts .

in addition , in the last 2 years dhs has fully addressed two it outcomes by ( 1 ) providing ongoing oversight and support to troubled it investments to help improve their cost , schedule , and performance ; and ( 2 ) demonstrating significant progress in implementing its it strategic workforce planning initiative .

important progress and remaining work in all of the five key areas include: acquisition management .

dhs continues to face challenges in funding its acquisition portfolio .

in may 2018 , we found that recent enhancements to dhs's acquisition management , resource allocation , and requirements policies largely reflect key portfolio management practices .

however , we also found that of the 24 major acquisition programs we assessed with approved schedule and cost goals , 10 were on track to meet those goals during 2017 — a decrease from 2016 .

in addition , we found that dhs's portfolio of major acquisition programs was not affordable from fiscal years 2018 to 2022 because the planned costs exceeded the planned budget .

dhs has taken steps to strengthen acquisition requirements development across the department , such as reestablishing the joint requirements council in june 2014 to review and validate dhs acquisition requirements .

however , opportunities remain to further strengthen dhs's acquisition process by , for example , using the joint requirements council to ( 1 ) identify overlapping or common requirements and ( 2 ) make recommendations to senior leadership to help ensure that dhs uses its finite investment resources wisely and maintains a balanced portfolio of investments that combine near - term operational improvements with long - term strategic planning .

it management .

dhs has updated its approach for managing its portfolios of it investments across all components .

as part of the revised approach , the department is using its capital planning and investment control process and the joint requirements council to assess it investments across the department on an ongoing basis .

for example , as part of its capital planning process for the fiscal year 2020 budget , the office of the chief information officer worked with the components to assess each major it investment to ensure alignment with dhs's functional portfolios , and to identify opportunities to share capabilities across components .

this updated approach should enable dhs to identify potentially duplicative investments and opportunities for consolidating investments , as well as reduce component - specific investments .

additionally , dhs has continued to take steps to enhance its information security program .

in november 2018 , the department's financial statement auditor reported that dhs had made progress in correcting its prior year it security weaknesses .

however , for the 15th consecutive year , the auditor designated deficiencies in it systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes .

work also remains in implementing our six open recommendations concerning dhs's cybersecurity workforce assessment requirements .

dhs also faces challenges in fulfilling its pivotal role in government - wide cybersecurity efforts , as identified in our ensuring the cybersecurity of the nation high - risk area .

dhs has established the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , which functions as the 24 / 7 cyber monitoring , incident response , and management center for the federal civilian government .

however , dhs has continued to be challenged in measuring how the center is performing its functions in accordance with mandated implementing principles .

financial management .

dhs received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 6 consecutive years — fiscal years 2013 to 2018 .

however , in fiscal year 2018 , its auditor reported two material weaknesses in the areas of financial reporting and information technology controls and financial systems , as well as instances of non - compliance with laws and regulations .

these deficiencies hamper dhs's ability to provide reasonable assurance that its financial reporting is reliable and the department is in compliance with applicable laws and regulations .

further , dhs components' financial management systems and business processes need to be modernized ; the current systems affect the department's ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision - making .

as we reported in 2017 , dhs officials have faced various challenges in their efforts to address this — lack of sufficient resources , aggressive schedule , complex requirements , and increased costs .

effectively modernizing financial management systems for the coast guard , federal emergency management agency , and immigration and customs enforcement would help address dhs's risk in this area .

human capital management .

dhs has continued to strengthen its employee engagement efforts by implementing our 2012 recommendation to establish metrics of success within components' action plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems .

further , dhs has conducted audits to better ensure components are basing hiring decisions and promotions on human capital competencies .

opm's 2018 federal employee viewpoint survey data showed that in the past 2 years , dhs's score on the employee engagement index increased by 4 points — from 56 in 2016 to 60 in 2018 — which was 1 point more than the government wide increase over the same period .

while this improvement is notable , dhs's 2018 score ranked 20th among 20 large and very large federal agencies .

increasing employee engagement and morale is critical to strengthening dhs's mission and management functions .

management integration .

since 2015 , dhs has focused its efforts to address crosscutting management challenges through the establishment and monitoring of its integrated priorities initiative .

the department updated these priorities in september 2017 .

each priority includes goals , objectives , and measurable action plans that are discussed at monthly leadership meetings led by senior dhs officials , including the under secretary for management .

dhs needs to continue to demonstrate sustainable progress integrating its management functions within and across the department .

in closing , it is clear that significant effort is required to build and integrate a department as large and complex as dhs , which has grown to more than 240,000 employees and approximately $74 billion in budget authority .

continued progress for this high - risk area depends primarily on addressing the remaining outcomes .

in the coming years , dhs needs to continue implementing its integrated strategy for high - risk management to show measurable , sustainable progress in implementing corrective actions and achieving outcomes .

in doing so , it remains important for dhs to maintain its current level of top leadership support and sustained commitment to ensure continued progress in executing its corrective actions through completion ; continue to identify the people and resources necessary to make progress towards achieving outcomes , work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives as needed , and communicate to senior leadership critical resource gaps ; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high - risk area and periodically provide assessments of its progress to us and congress ; closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective actions , and make midcourse adjustments as needed ; and make continued progress in achieving the 13 outcomes it has not fully addressed and demonstrate that systems , personnel , and policies are in place to ensure that progress can be sustained over time .

we will continue to monitor dhs's efforts in this high - risk area to determine if the outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term .

madam chairwoman torres small , ranking member crenshaw , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 404 ) 679-1875 or curriec@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

other individuals making key contributions to this work include claudia becker , assistant director ; imoni hampton , analyst - in - charge ; michele fejfar , melissa greenaway , james lawson , and tom lombardi .

key contributors for the previous work that this is based on are listed in each product .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

