funding the federal government depends largely upon the internal revenue service's ( irs ) ability to collect taxes — in fiscal year 2015 , irs collected about $3.3 trillion ( before tax refunds of $403 billion ) , or 93 percent of total federal government receipts .

irs's mission is to provide taxpayers top - quality services by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities , and to enforce the law with integrity and fairness .

for fiscal year 2017 , the president requested $12.3 billion in annual appropriations for irs , about $1 billion ( 9 percent ) more than fiscal year 2016 enacted levels .

in march 2016 , we reported that irs's fiscal year 2016 appropriation increased by $290 million to $11.2 billion over fiscal year 2015 levels , with the increases being targeted to improve taxpayer service , combat identity theft , and improve cybersecurity .

in that report , we also reported that irs appropriations remain about 7 percent below fiscal year 2011 levels .

full - time equivalent staff members funded by annual appropriations declined by 12,000 between fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2016 , a 13 percent reduction .

we also reported that these declines have contributed to fluctuations in taxpayer service and longer wait times on the phones than taxpayers have historically experienced .

because of the size of irs's budget and the importance of its service and compliance programs for all taxpayers , you asked us to review the fiscal year 2017 budget request for irs .

in this report , we assess ( 1 ) the extent to which irs's fiscal year 2017 congressional justification ( cj ) presents data on requested funding levels by appropriation accounts and in alignment with agency priorities , ( 2 ) irs's management and allocation of user fees , and ( 3 ) the costs and reporting of irs's information technology investments .

to assess the extent to which the cj provides data on funding levels by appropriation accounts and agency priorities , we reviewed irs documentation on the implementation of the future state vision and on the process used to prioritize requested program increases — the future state is irs's vision for the future of tax administration to help irs more efficiently and effectively implement its mission .

we reviewed the cjs from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 for spending and staffing data , and for changes to the budget presentation .

during a meeting with appropriations staff from both the majority and the minority , we discussed their needs for obtaining information to make appropriations decisions as irs makes changes in its budget presentation .

to describe irs's user fee funding , we reviewed irs's authority to collect and obligate user fees , the president's budget requests from fiscal years 2013 through 2017 , and irs budget and planning documents .

to assess the costs of irs's information technology ( it ) investments , we reviewed congressional justifications , capital investment plans and summaries , and irs data for fiscal years 2011 to 2017 .

we analyzed reported cost and schedule data for major it investments and interviewed department of the treasury ( treasury ) officials to assess the accuracy of these data and the procedures used to report information to congress .

we compared data reported in the fiscal year 2016 cj and the fiscal year 2017 capital investment plan and summary , and assessed the extent to which irs reporting complied with federal internal control standards .

as applicable for each objective , we interviewed irs corporate budget and it officials , and reviewed data collection procedures .

we determined that the data used in this report were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from december 2015 to july 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

funding requests for irs are organized by appropriation account , which aligns broadly with its strategic goals to ( 1 ) deliver high - quality and timely service to reduce taxpayer burden , and encourage voluntary compliance ; and ( 2 ) effectively enforce the law to ensure compliance with tax responsibilities and combat fraud .

irs funds its it investments from its operations support and business systems modernization appropriation accounts .

irs's four appropriation accounts and the fiscal year 2016 appropriations are as follows: enforcement ( $4.86 billion ) : funds activities such as determining and collecting owed taxes , providing legal and litigation support , and conducting criminal investigations .

operations support ( $3.75 billion ) : funds activities including rent and facilities expenses , irs - wide administration activities , and it maintenance and security .

taxpayer services ( $2.33 billion ) : funds taxpayer service activities and programs , including prefiling assistance and education , filing and account services , and taxpayer advocacy services .

business systems modernization ( $290 million ) : funds the planning and capital asset acquisition of it to modernize irs business systems .

in support of the president's budget request , agencies submit cjs to congress to explain the request by outlining agency goals and objectives for the coming fiscal year , and providing detailed descriptions of activities at the program , project , and activity level .

agencies are to prepare the justifications in accordance with the office of management and budget's ( omb ) circular a - 11 which provides guidance on materials required for the agency's request and reflects the needs of the congress for providing effective oversight .

since 2014 , irs has undertaken a multiyear effort to develop a vision for the future state of tax administration to fulfill its mission more efficiently and effectively .

to focus this effort , irs narrowed 19 existing objectives to a core set of objectives that were used to develop six future state themes: 1 .

facilitate voluntary compliance by empowering taxpayers with secure innovative tools and support .

2 .

understand noncompliant taxpayer behavior and develop approaches to deter and change it .

3 .

leverage and collaborate with external stakeholders .

4 .

cultivate a well - equipped , diverse , skilled , and flexible workforce .

5 .

select highest value work , using data analytics and a robust feedback loop .

6 .

drive more agility , efficiency , and effectiveness in irs operations .

these future state themes are in addition to treasury's department - wide focus on strengthening cybersecurity and eliminating identity theft .

irs reported that it adopted a new , more strategic approach to identify and select budget program priorities based on the future state themes .

a user fee is charged to beneficiaries of certain goods or services provided by the federal government .

in general , a user fee is related to a voluntary transaction or request for government goods or services above and beyond what is normally provided to the public .

although irs services and operations are primarily funded through annual appropriations , irs has the authority to supplement its appropriations with other resources , such as user fees .

until 1995 , irs user fee collections were deposited into the treasury's general fund .

in 1995 , congress granted irs authority to retain and obligate up to $119 million in user fee revenue to supplement its annual appropriation .

in 2005 , congress removed the limit of $119 million and irs was permitted to retain and obligate user fees that were implemented after september 30 , 1994 , or the portion of the fee that has been increased since september 30 , 1994 , for those fees that existed prior to that date .

for example , fees for installment agreements — monthly payment plans for taxes owed — were established after september 30 , 1994 , and therefore irs retains the full amount of the fee collected .

however , the fee for enrolling as an actuary is divided between irs and the general fund of the treasury because this user fee existed prior to september 30 , 1994 .

in fiscal year 2016 , irs expects to collect about $422 million in user fee revenue from sources such as installment agreements ( about $155 million ) and income verification express services ( about $51 million ) .

irs deposits user fees that it is authorized to retain into its miscellaneous retained fees fund — an estimated $411 million in fiscal year 2016 — before transferring funds to an appropriation account to be obligated .

for fiscal year 2016 , planned user fee obligations ( $509 million ) account for about 4 percent of irs's total obligations ( $12,374 million ) .

irs's user fee funds are available until expended ( no - year funds ) and funds that are not obligated in the fiscal year in which they are collected are carried over to the next fiscal year .

it comprises a significant portion of irs's budget and plays a critical role in enabling irs to carry out its mission and responsibilities .

irs's fiscal year 2016 appropriations include about $2.5 billion for it investments ; this represents 20 percent of the total irs budget .

irs relies on it systems to process tax returns , account for tax revenues collected , send bills for taxes owed , issue refunds , assist in the selection of tax returns for audit , and provide telecommunications services for all business activities , including providing taxpayers with toll - free access to tax information , among other things .

irs's fiscal year 2016 appropriations increased by $290 million .

irs is required by law to allocate these funds across three areas: customer service representative level of service , cybersecurity , and identity theft prevention .

irs plans to use this funding to invest in ( 1 ) increased telephone level of service , including reduced wait times and improved performance on irs's taxpayer protection program / identity theft toll free line ; ( 2 ) cybersecurity , including network security improvements , protection from unauthorized access , and enhanced insider threat detection ; and ( 3 ) identity theft refund fraud prevention .

as shown in table 1 , cybersecurity was allocated almost one - third of the funding , solely from the operations support appropriation account .

this funding includes $7 million ( 50 additional full - time equivalents ) to maintain the cybersecurity workforce .

cybersecurity efforts are intended to protect taxpayer information and irs's systems , services , and data from internal and external cyber - related threats .

cybersecurity funding increased by 58 percent from fiscal years 2015 to 2016 , primarily from increased appropriations as shown in figure 1 .

the president's fiscal year 2017 budget also requests cybersecurity funds provided through a treasury cybersecurity enhancement account , which is intended to bolster treasury's overall cybersecurity posture .

the request includes $62 million for irs , including $54.7 million to directly support irs cybersecurity efforts by securing data , improving continuous monitoring , and other initiatives .

irs's senior executive team recognized that the 19 strategic objectives listed in the 2014-2017 irs strategic plan were too broad a set of priorities for irs future state vision .

in january 2015 , the senior executive team agreed on six enterprise themes to support the future state vision that aligned with a subset of the strategic objectives and were informed by the needs of the business units .

irs modified its approach to prioritizing programs and initiatives for requested funding increases in fiscal year 2017 .

in january 2015 , the office of planning , programming and audit oversight asked the operating divisions to submit program increase proposals they believed necessary for irs to achieve its priorities .

this office reviewed the proposals to ensure they aligned with irs's strategic plan and submitted them to the senior executive team for consideration .

the senior executive team prioritized the proposed program increases through a voting process to ensure that they aligned with irs's strategy and resource needs .

according to irs officials , funding increases were requested for fewer programs as a result of this new approach .

specifically , in the fiscal year 2017 cj , increases were requested for 14 programs , whereas in the fiscal year 2016 cj , increases in 25 programs were requested .

in its fiscal year 2017 cj , irs explained how requests for increased funding were linked to appropriations accounts , but it did not provide this information for the amount requested to maintain current funding levels .

irs linked each requested program increase to a future state theme and included details on how much of the requested increase would be funded by each of the four appropriation accounts .

figure 2 shows each of the 14 program increase requests organized by theme or focus area , with funding requested broken out by appropriation account .

including data on the appropriation account provides additional transparency and improves the quality of the information available to congress for budget deliberations .

however , irs did not provide data on how much it is currently spending in support of each theme .

as a result , it is unclear what amount of funding would be required to maintain current levels by theme .

according to officials , irs is working to develop such data , but officials cited technical challenges with data availability and comparability as well as challenges identifying spending for specific themes , some of which are worded broadly .

omb circular a - 11 requires that an agency prepare justifications in concise , specific terms and cover all programs and activities of the agency .

additionally , the guidance specifies that an agency should consult with relevant congressional appropriations committees to confirm their support for modifications to the cj's format .

in adopting a new approach by prioritizing a subset of objectives , irs modified how its budget data were organized , but did not clarify how spending by themes relates to appropriation accounts .

congressional appropriations' staff from both the majority and minority with whom we spoke told us they wanted more information on base spending by theme and account .

such information is important to ensure transparency on the current funding levels to assist congress in making informed budget decisions .

irs has permanent , indefinite authority to obligate user fee collections .

this authority allows the agency flexibility in the use of these funds .

while irs does not need congressional approval of its user fee spend plan , it must obtain approval from treasury and omb .

additionally , for fiscal year 2016 , irs was directed to wait 30 days following the submission of the user fee spend plan to congress before obligating these funds .

irs's chief financial officer has oversight responsibilities for the initial assessment , updates , collection , and review of user fees .

while the chief financial officer does not provide the services for which user fees are charged , the office is responsible for ensuring that user fees are appropriately collected , deposited , and reported .

as seen in table 2 , irs plans to allocate $509 million of user fee revenues in fiscal year 2016 across three appropriation accounts .

this represents 4 percent of irs's total obligations in fiscal year 2016 ( $12.37 billion ) .

irs allocates user fee revenues as part of its budget execution process and began planning for fiscal year 2016 allocations in april 2015 .

irs allocates user fee revenue to fund agency priorities for which other funding was unavailable , but does not generally consider the source of funds when making these decisions .

budget officials briefed members of the senior executive team and the irs commissioner multiple times between september 2015 and january 2016 , including on preliminary estimates of user fee spending .

according to irs officials , irs sends a draft of the user fee spend plan to treasury within 30 days of its budget being enacted and finalizes the plan within 60 days .

however , irs began fiscal year 2016 operating under a continuing resolution until december , so the user fee spend plan was submitted to congress in february 2016 .

in may 2016 , irs announced that it is revising a number of existing user fees to more closely match the cost of providing the service and implementing new user fees for some additional services as a result of its 2015 biennial fee review .

agencies are required to review , on a biennial basis , the fees , royalties , rents , and other charges for services and things of value and make recommendations on revising those charges to reflect costs incurred .

irs expects total annual user fee revenue to increase by $128 million when the fees are fully implemented .

officials said they plan to continue their current policy regarding how user fee revenue is allocated .

according to irs officials , the planning process for allocating user fee revenue has been consistent between fiscal years 2011 and 2016 .

however , according to irs officials , changes in appropriation levels and the cost of implementing mandates has resulted in a shift in how user fee revenue has been allocated .

as shown in table 3 and the sidebar , both the amount and allocation of user fee funds shifted between fiscal years 2011 and 2016 .

as we reported in june 2015 , irs management decided to allocate more user fee funds to operations support in fiscal year 2015 , in part because of changes in the amount appropriated to its accounts and the cost of implementing mandates , such as the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , which is largely funded by user fee revenue and operations support funds .

of the $1.6 billion spent on ppaca implementation between fiscal years 2010 and 2015 , $465 million was user fee revenue ( 29 percent ) and $467 million was annually appropriated operations support funds ( 29 percent ) .

the fiscal year 2015 appropriation for operations support was $161 million ( 4.2 percent ) less than fiscal year 2014 , while taxpayer services was not reduced during that time frame .

in fiscal year 2015 , irs obligated $210 million in user fee revenue and $154 million from the operations support account for ppaca implementation .

in addition to changes in the allocation of user fee funds across appropriation accounts , irs has also changed the amount it retains and the amount it carries over to the next fiscal year .

the amount of user fee revenue that irs collected and retained increased from $324 million in fiscal year 2011 to $391 million in fiscal year 2015 .

as previously mentioned , irs is implementing changes to user fees which it expects to generate an additional $128 million annually , all of which irs is authorized to retain and spend .

in fiscal year 2011 , user fee obligations ( $285 million ) accounted for 2.2 percent of irs's total obligations ( $12,777 million ) .

for fiscal year 2016 , planned user fee obligations ( $509 million ) account for about 4 percent of irs's total obligations ( $12,374 million ) .

carryover balances irs can carry over any unexpended fee collections — those funds left over after irs transfers fee collections to supplement its appropriations — for use in subsequent years .

we have suggested that carryovers are one way agencies can establish reserves to sustain operations in the event of a sharp downturn in user fee collections or other events .

see gao - 08-386sp for additional information on user fee design .

these changes in the amount of funds that irs retains and obligates have also affected the amount it carries over from one fiscal year to the next .

as seen in table 4 , irs's carryover balance has declined in recent years from about $327 million at the end of fiscal year 2011 to about $93 million planned for the end of fiscal year 2016 .

this is potentially significant because , as we have previously reported , carryover balances can help agencies to sustain operations in the event of a sharp downturn in user fee collections or other events ( see sidebar ) .

however , this is less of consideration for programs that could also be funded through annual appropriations , as is the case with irs .

in briefings to the senior executive team and to the irs commissioner , officials identified the low carryover balance from fiscal year 2016 to 2017 as a key risk because it decreases the funds available for future fiscal years .

as part of budget deliberations , officials considered the tradeoffs between spending funds on priorities in the current budget year and maintaining a reserve for future years .

it is a significant portion — about 21 percent — of the total irs budget request for fiscal year 2017 .

the president requested $2.8 billion for irs's it investments in fiscal year 2017 , an increase of about 15 percent .

this includes a $391 million ( 65 percent ) increase for non - major it investments and a $33 million ( 2 percent ) decrease for major it investments as shown in figure 3 .

it investments are funded through the operations support and the business systems modernization appropriation accounts and user fees .

these investments generally support ( 1 ) day - to - day operations ( which include operations and maintenance , as well as development , modernization , and enhancements to existing systems ) ; and ( 2 ) modernization efforts in support of irs's goals .

for irs's 23 major it investments , the amount requested for fiscal year 2017 is $1.8 billion , which is funded primarily through the operations support appropriation account as shown in figure 4 .

in previous years , irs reported data on its it investments in the cj in a summary of capital investments and portfolio of major investments .

the summary of capital investments listed major and non - major it investment totals and major it investments by funding source .

the portfolio of major investments included a comprehensive list and description of major it investments .

for fiscal year 2017 , irs moved the summary of capital investments from the cj to a link on treasury's website that was accessible 30 days following the release of the president's budget .

this website also includes a capital investment plan , similar to the portfolio of major investments .

treasury provides capital investment information on its website for each treasury bureau .

treasury is required to submit a capital investment plan to congress no later than 30 days following the submission of the president's budget .

according to irs and treasury officials , treasury asked irs to move the capital investment information from the cj to a separate website to give treasury additional time to review the data to improve reliability .

according to irs officials , this approach also eliminated the possibility of administrative errors in transcribing data from one database to another .

while the move delayed the availability of the irs information , the timing was consistent with capital investment reporting by other treasury bureaus .

in the fiscal year 2017 irs summary of capital investments , treasury reported the non - major it investment total inaccurately for the 3 fiscal years presented ( fiscal years 2015 actual , 2016 enacted , and 2017 requested ) .

treasury underreported the amounts by about $4 million ( less than 1 percent ) in each fiscal year .

consequently , treasury also reported the it total for major and non - major it investments inaccurately .

according to irs and treasury officials , this discrepancy was the result of an error introduced during the 30-day treasury review process .

irs enters it investment information into treasury's sharepoint investment knowledge exchange ( spike ) system .

irs and treasury review and monitor the information before the capital investment plan and the summary of capital investments reports are generated .

according to irs officials , for fiscal year 2017 , treasury took a more active role in reviewing the information submitted by irs on it investments .

during the review process , manual adjustments in spike caused an error that resulted in two rows of non - major it investments being excluded from the non - major it total .

we asked irs about the discrepancy , and irs approached treasury with the issue and treasury subsequently corrected the error in spike and revised the summary of capital investments on treasury's website .

stronger internal controls could help prevent such mistakes , such as effective monitoring of treasury - generated irs information technology investment reports .

according to federal internal control standards , ongoing monitoring should occur in the course of normal operations .

monitoring should be performed continually and be ingrained in the agency's operations .

it includes regular management and supervisory activities , comparisons , reconciliations , and other actions people take in performing their duties .

according to treasury officials , treasury is aware of the need to reduce manual corrections by making improvements to spike , but has yet to take steps to fully ensure that such errors will not occur in future budget cycles .

in june 2015 , we reported on a separate ongoing monitoring internal control issue which resulted in irs providing inaccurate data on actual obligations to date for major it investments in its fiscal year 2016 cj .

as a result of our recommendation that irs implement internal controls to ensure the accuracy of information on major it investments reported in the annual cj , irs took additional steps when preparing the fiscal year 2017 cj .

this included performing an operational review to examine the existing procedures .

in addition , for the fiscal year 2017 it investment reports , irs implemented processes to ensure accurate and reliable data such as comparing its it data maintained on control charts to the data it enters in spike .

irs performed this reconciliation individually for each it investment .

however , irs reported that it did not review the summary of capital investments generated by treasury in its entirety for accuracy after it was generated from spike .

without effectively monitoring it investment information , treasury risks continued errors in the information it reports on its it investments .

such errors could negatively affect congress's ability to obtain accurate information on it investments needed to inform future budget decisions and oversight .

irs intended to improve its budget process by aligning its spending priorities with themes supporting its future state vision , but the effort remains a work in progress .

for fiscal year 2017 , irs did not make clear how spending by themes relates to appropriation accounts and how this advances irs's priorities ; this linkage is important to the clarity and transparency of irs's budget presentation .

appropriations staff told us this information would help them make informed budget and oversight decisions .

while irs faces data challenges that may limit its ability to fully link funding requests to appropriation accounts , providing these linkages to the extent feasible will improve transparency and provide congress with information to assist in making informed decisions .

additionally , accurate and timely budget data are key to effective congressional oversight .

since it is such a significant portion — about 21 percent — of the total budget request for irs , it is particularly important to have robust controls in place to ensure the data's accuracy .

to enhance the budget process and to improve transparency , we recommend that the commissioner of internal revenue , to the extent feasible , ensure that the cj includes data by appropriation account on the amount of funding requested to maintain current services for each future state theme .

as treasury works with irs to improve the quality and accuracy of budget data , we recommend that the secretary of the treasury ensure sufficient controls are in place to make certain that the information technology investment reports generated from spike are accurate .

this includes , for example , taking steps to reduce the need for manual corrections to the data .

we provided a draft of this report to the commissioner of internal revenue and the secretary of the treasury for comment .

in written comments reproduced in appendix iv , irs agreed with the recommendation related to the presentation of data in the congressional justification .

irs plans to provide a robust description of planed activities and outcomes for funding requested to maintain current services .

given irs's emphasis on the future state , budget data on the amount requested to maintain current services for each theme is particularly valuable .

in a separate email response , treasury agreed with the recommendation related to information technology internal controls .

treasury noted that it plans to implement improvements to spike in the next few months that would address our recommendation by avoiding the need for manual corrections moving forward .

irs and treasury also provided technical comments which were incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the chairman and ranking members of other senate and house committees and subcommittees that have appropriation , authorization , and oversight responsibilities for irs .

we are also sending copies to the commissioner of internal revenue , the secretary of the treasury , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or mctiguej@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v .

in the fiscal year 2017 capital investment plan , the internal revenue service ( irs ) did not report life - cycle costs of its major information technology ( it ) investments since most investments were considered ongoing with an undetermined useful life .

instead , irs provided total anticipated outlays for the investments through fiscal year 2021 .

recommendations develop a quantitative measure of scope at a minimum , develop a quantitative measure of scope for its major information technology ( it ) investments , in order to have complete information on the performance of these investments .

benefit a quantitative measure of scope is a good practice as it provides an objective measure of whether an investment delivered the functionality that was paid for .

status the internal revenue service's ( irs ) position on this recommendation has changed over time .

irs agreed with the recommendation we made in june 2012 , but stated it had other methods in place to document delivered functionality of a project throughout the life - cycle .

however , these methods did not provide a quantitative measure of performance .

in responding to a related report we issued in april 2014 , irs maintained its position and therefore did not take action to address the recommendation .

in the december 2015 quarterly report on information technology to congress , however , irs proposed a solution for one investment: specifically , it listed specific “scope elements” for the return review program investment and identified the elements it had implemented to date .

in addition , during our recent review of irs's major it investments , we found that irs had developed a quantitative measure of scope for two investments , although we noted that the measure could be improved by accounting for the work performed by irs staff in accordance with best practices ( gao - 16-545 ) .

the measure used in the quarterly report to congress and the one we noted during our june 2016 review are positive steps .

similar , continued efforts by irs would help fully address our recommendation to develop a quantitative measure of scope for all major it investments .

developing a cost estimate that meets additional best practices , will foster accountability , improve insight , and provide objective information .

capture actual costs and use them as a basis for future updates .

explain why variances occurred between the current estimate and previous estimates .

irs agreed with all of the actions recommended , except using earned value management and validating the ppaca cost estimate by preparing a second , independent cost estimate , in part because of cost and burden .

in february 2015 , irs released version 3 of the ppaca cost estimate , which reflects best practices to a greater extent .

however , four elements of this recommendation remain open .

irs improved the variance from the prior estimate , but irs has not improved its practices related to the use of earned value management , risk and uncertainty analysis , or validating the estimate .

irs released version 4 of the cost estimate in april 2016 and we will continue to monitor irs's progress .

with best practices , and develop and document plans to address risks .

validate the original cost estimate by preparing a second , independent cost estimate .

develop a long - term strategy develop a long - term strategy to address operations amidst an uncertain budget environment .

as part of the strategy , irs should take steps to improve its efficiency , including reexamine programs , related processes , and organizational structures to determine whether they are effectively and efficiently achieving irs's mission .

streamline or consolidate management or operational processes and functions to make them more cost effective .

developing a long - term strategy will enhance budget planning and improve decision making and accountability .

irs agreed with our recommendation and is taking steps to implement it .

irs has adopted a new , more strategic , approach to identify and select budget program priorities based on future state themes for the fiscal year 2017 budget request .

as part of its planning process , irs prioritized a subset of 5 objectives for action as part of the 19 objectives identified in the irs 2014-2017 strategic plan .

operating division officials submitted requests for resources that they thought were necessary to achieve the five priority objectives , and they identified initiatives that were the highest priority to irs .

to guide irs toward the future state concept and assess progress along the way , irs has identified enterprise goals , but as of may 2016 , these goals were still under development .

enhance calculation and use of actual return on investment ( roi ) data calculate actual roi for implemented initiatives , compare the actual roi to projected roi , and provide the comparison to budget decision makers for initiatives where irs allocated resources .

use actual roi calculations as part of resource allocation decisions .

enhanced calculation of roi provides greater insight on the productivity of a program and can inform decision making .

status allocation decisions within the correspondence exam program .

irs plans to use these estimates to inform future examination plans as we recommended in june 2014 , but considerable work remains in this long - term effort .

in july 2015 , irs officials reported there is no timeline for full implementation .

in june 2016 , irs officials confirmed that projected revenue will be considered in investment decision making as part of fiscal year 2018 enterprise planning guidance , but did not report any progress in using actual roi data .

in addition to the individual named above , the following staff made key contributions to this report: thomas gilbert , assistant director ; melissa king , analyst - in - charge ; charles fox ; robert gebhart ; carol henn ; laurie king ; edward nannenhorn ; sabine paul ; bradley roach ; robert robinson ; cynthia m. saunders ; andrew j. stephens ; and elwood white .

