thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's hearing on cybersecurity challenges and cyber risk management at the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

as you know , federal agencies , including va , rely extensively on information technology ( it ) to carry out their operations and deliver services to constituents .

safeguarding federal computer systems has been a longstanding concern .

this year marks the 22nd anniversary of gao's first designation of information security as a government - wide high - risk area in 1997 .

we expanded this high - risk area to include safeguarding the systems supporting our nation's critical infrastructure in 2003 , protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information in 2015 , and establishing a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy and performing effective oversight in 2018 .

most recently , we identified federal information security as a government - wide high - risk area in our march 2019 high - risk update .

as we agreed , my statement provides an overview of the status of cybersecurity across the federal government in general and at va in particular .

this includes a discussion of the it security challenges that the department faces as it modernizes and secures its information systems .

in developing this testimony , we reviewed our prior reports , as well as relevant office of management and budget ( omb ) , inspector general ( ig ) , and agency reports .

a more detailed discussion of the objectives , scope , and methodology for this work is included in each of the reports that are cited throughout this statement .

the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions .

we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

va's mission is to promote the health , welfare , and dignity of all veterans by ensuring that they receive medical care , benefits , social support , and lasting memorials .

in providing health care and other benefits to veterans and their dependents , va relies extensively on it systems and networks to receive , process , and maintain sensitive data , including veterans' medical records and other personally identifiable information .

accordingly , effective information security controls based on federal guidance and requirements are essential to ensure that the department's systems and information are adequately protected from loss , unauthorized disclosure , inadvertent or deliberate misuse , or improper modification , and are available when needed .

implementing an effective information security program and controls is particularly important for va since it uses it systems and electronic information to perform essential activities for veterans , such as providing primary and specialized health care services , medical research , disability compensation , educational opportunities , assistance with home ownership , and burial and memorial benefits .

the corruption , denial , or delay of these services due to compromised it systems and electronic information can create undue hardship for veterans and their dependents .

the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction of the information and information systems used by or on behalf of the agency .

the act also requires federal agencies to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program to provide security for the information and information systems supporting their operations and assets by implementing policies and procedures intended to cost - effectively reduce risks to an acceptable level .

in may 2017 , the president signed executive order 13800 on strengthening the cybersecurity of federal networks and critical infrastructure .

the order sets policy for managing cybersecurity risk and directs each executive branch agency to use the national institute of standards and technology's ( nist ) cybersecurity framework to manage those risks .

the nist cybersecurity framework identifies specific activities and controls for achieving five core security functions: identify: develop an understanding of the organization's ability to manage cybersecurity risk to systems , people , assets , data , and capabilities .

protect: develop and implement appropriate safeguards to ensure delivery of critical services .

detect: develop and implement appropriate activities to identify the occurrence of a cybersecurity event .

respond: develop and implement appropriate activities to take action regarding a detected cybersecurity incident .

recover: develop and implement appropriate activities to maintain plans for resilience and to restore capabilities or services that were impaired due to a cybersecurity incident .

according to nist , these five functions provide a high - level , strategic view of the life cycle of an organization's management of cybersecurity risk .

in fiscal year 2018 , the 23 civilian agencies covered by the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) , including va , reported spending over $6.5 billion on it security - or cybersecurity - related activities .

the 23 civilian agencies individually reported spending between $9 million and almost $1.9 billion on these activities .

collectively , these 23 agencies spent on average about 14 percent of their total it expenditures on cybersecurity - related activities .

va reported spending about $386 million on cybersecurity , which represented about 8 percent of its total it expenditures .

in fiscal year 2018 , federal agencies continued to report large numbers of information security incidents .

as we previously noted , federal agencies reported over 30,000 security incidents during each of the last three fiscal years .

specifically , agencies reported a total of 30,899 , 35,277 , and 31,107 information security incidents in fiscal years 2016 , 2017 , and 2018 , respectively .

during those same periods of time , va reported an average of 2,415 incidents annually , although the number of reported incidents steadily decreased from 2,808 to 1,776 , as shown in figure 1 .

in fiscal year 2018 , va reported 1,776 incidents involving several threat vectors .

these threat vectors included web - based attacks , phishing attacks , and the loss or theft of computer equipment , among others .

figure 2 provides a breakdown of information security incidents , by threat vector , reported by va in fiscal year 2018 .

perhaps most concerning of the incidents reported by va is the relatively large percentage of incidents ( 41 percent ) for which va identified “other” as the threat vector .

government - wide , agencies identified approximately 27 percent of their incidents in the “other” category in fiscal year 2018 .

a large percentage of these incidents may indicate a lack of agency awareness and ability to investigate and catalog incidents .

fisma requires igs to determine the effectiveness of their respective agency's information security programs .

to do so , omb instructed igs to provide a maturity rating for agency information security policies , procedures , and practices related to the five core security functions — identify , protect , detect , respond , and recover — established in the nist cybersecurity framework , as well as for the agency - wide information security program .

the ratings used to evaluate the effectiveness of agency information security programs are based on a five - level maturity model , as described in table 1 .

according to this maturity model , level 4 ( managed and measurable ) represents an effective level of security .

therefore , if an ig rates the agency's information security program at level 4 or level 5 , then that agency is considered to have an effective information security program .

va was one of 18 cfo act agencies where the ig determined that the agency - wide information security program was not effectively implemented during fiscal year 2018 .

the va ig also determined the department's maturity level for each of the five core security functions: level 2 ( defined ) for the detect function ; level 3 ( consistently implemented ) for the identify , protect , and level 4 ( managed and measurable ) for the respond function .

as shown in figure 3 , va's ratings were generally consistent with the maturity level ratings of other cfo act agencies .

agency igs or independent auditors assess the effectiveness of information security controls as part of the annual audits of the agencies' financial statements .

the reports resulting from these audits include a description of information security control deficiencies related to the five major general control categories defined by the federal information system controls audit manual ( fiscam ) : security management controls that provide a framework for ensuring that risks are understood and that effective controls are selected , implemented , and operating as intended ; access controls that limit or detect access to computer resources , thereby protecting them against unauthorized modification , loss , and disclosure ; configuration management controls that prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources and assure that software is current and known vulnerabilities are patched ; segregation of duties controls that prevent an individual from controlling all critical stages of a process by splitting responsibilities between two or more organizational groups ; and contingency planning controls that help avoid significant disruptions in computer - dependent operations .

for fiscal year 2018 , most of the 24 cfo act agencies had deficiencies in most of the control categories , as illustrated in figure 4 .

va's ig reported deficiencies in each of these categories for the department .

as a result of these deficiencies , the igs at 18 of the 24 cfo act agencies designated information security as either a material weakness ( six agencies , including va ) or significant deficiency ( 12 agencies ) in internal control over financial reporting for their agency .

for va , fiscal year 2018 was the 17th year in a row that the department had reported a material weakness in information security .

in addition , igs at 21 of the 24 agencies , including va , cited information security as a major management challenge for their agency for fiscal year 2018 .

the administration has developed key milestones and performance metrics for agency chief information officers ( cio ) to use to assess their agency's progress toward achieving outcomes that strengthen federal cybersecurity .

the milestones and metrics have specific implementation targets , most of which are expected to be met by the end of fiscal year 2020 .

as of fiscal year 2018 , most civilian cfo act agencies , including va , had reported meeting most of the implementation targets for that year .

va reported meeting six of 10 targets .

table 2 shows the number of agencies meeting their targets as of fiscal year 2018 , as well as va's status in doing so .

in several reports issued since fiscal year 2016 , we described deficiencies related to key challenges that va has faced in safeguarding its information and information systems .

the challenges we reported related to effectively implementing information security controls ; mitigating known security deficiencies ; establishing elements of its cybersecurity risk management program ; and identifying critical cybersecurity staffing needs .

our work stresses the need for va to address these challenges as well as manage it supply chain risks as it modernizes and secures its information systems .

effectively implementing information security controls va has been challenged to effectively implement security controls over its information and information systems .

as previously mentioned in this statement , the va ig reported that the department did not have an effective information security program and has had deficient information security controls over its financial systems .

the weaknesses described by the ig are consistent with the control deficiencies we identified during an examination of va's high - impact systems that we reported on in 2016 .

in those reports , we described deficiencies in va's implementation of access controls , patch management , and contingency planning .

these deficiencies existed , in part , because the department had not effectively implemented key elements of its information security program .

until va rectifies reported shortcomings in its agency - wide information security program , it will continue to have limited assurance that its sensitive information and information systems are sufficiently safeguarded .

adequately mitigating known security deficiencies va has not consistently mitigated known security deficiencies in a timely manner .

as mentioned earlier , va has reported a material weakness in information security for financial reporting purposes for 17 consecutive years .

in fiscal year 2016 , we recommended 74 actions for the department to take to improve its cybersecurity program and remedy known control deficiencies with selected high - impact systems .

however , as of october 2019 , over 3 years later , va had implemented only 32 ( or 43 percent ) of the 74 recommendations .

one of the remaining unimplemented recommendations calls for the department to consistently and comprehensively perform security control assessments .

this recommended activity is an important element of a cybersecurity program and helps to provide assurance that controls are operating as intended and to detect controls that are not functioning correctly .

va has also been challenged in assuring that its actions to mitigate vulnerabilities and implement recommended improvements are effective .

the department has asserted that it had implemented 39 of the 42 remaining open recommendations from our fiscal year 2016 reports .

however , the evidence va provided was insufficient to demonstrate that it had fully implemented the recommendations .

the department subsequently provided additional evidence , which was also insufficient , indicating that its remedial action process was not validating the effectiveness of actions taken to resolve known deficiencies .

until va adequately mitigates security control deficiencies , the sensitive data maintained on its systems will remain at increased risk of unauthorized modification and disclosure , and the systems will remain at risk of disruption .

fully establishing elements of a cybersecurity risk management program va has been challenged in managing its cybersecurity risk .

in july 2019 , we reported that the department had fully met only one of the five foundational practices for establishing a cybersecurity risk management program .

although va established the role of a cybersecurity risk executive , the department had not fully: developed a cybersecurity risk management strategy that addressed key elements , such as risk tolerance and risk mitigation strategies ; documented risk - based policies that required the department to perform agency - wide risk assessments ; conducted an agency - wide cybersecurity risk assessment to identify , assess , and manage potential enterprise risks ; or established coordination between cybersecurity and enterprise risk management .

va concurred with our four recommendations to address these deficiencies and asserted that it is acting to do so .

nevertheless , until va fully establishes a cybersecurity risk management program , its ability to convey acceptable limits regarding the selection and implementation of controls within the established organizational risk tolerance will be diminished .

identifying critical cybersecurity staffing needs va has been challenged to accurately identify the work roles of its workforce positions that perform it , cybersecurity , or cyber - related functions — a key step in identifying its critical cybersecurity staffing needs .

in march 2019 , we reported that the department had likely miscategorized the work roles of many of these positions in its personnel system .

specifically , va had reported that 3,008 ( or 45 percent ) of its 6,636 positions in the 2210 it management occupational series — positions that most likely performed it , cybersecurity , and cyber - related functions — were not performing these functions .

va concurred with our recommendation to review the work roles for positions in the 2210 it management occupational series and assign the appropriate work roles , and stated that it had begun to do so .

nevertheless , until va completely and accurately categorizes the work roles of its workforce positions performing it , cybersecurity , and cyber - related functions , the reliability of the information needed to improve workforce planning will be diminished and its ability to effectively identify critical staffing needs will be impaired .

managing it supply chain risks as part of it modernization programs assessing and managing supply chain risks are important considerations for agencies , including va , when operating and modernizing it systems .

in july 2018 , we reported that reliance on a global it supply chain introduces risks to federal information systems .

we noted that supply chain threats are present during various phases of a system's development life cycle and we identified the following threats: installation of malicious or intentionally harmful hardware or software ; installation of counterfeit hardware or software ; failure or disruption in the production or distribution of critical reliance on a malicious or unqualified service provider ; and installation of hardware or software that contains unintentional vulnerabilities , such as defects in code that can be exploited .

these threats can have a range of impacts , including allowing adversaries to take control of systems or decreasing the availability of materials or services needed to develop systems .

accordingly , agencies such as va need to take appropriate measures to assess and manage it supply chain risks as they operate and modernize their information systems .

failure to do so could result in data loss , modification , or exfiltration ; loss of system availability ; and a persistent negative impact on the agency's mission .

in summary , similar to other federal agencies , va continues to be challenged in implementing an effective agency - wide program and controls for securing its information and information systems .

as va pursues efforts to modernize and secure its it systems , it will need to successfully address multiple challenges in order to achieve effective outcomes .

chair lee , ranking member banks , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my written statement .

i would be pleased to answer your questions .

if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov .

contact points for our office of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

other individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include jeffrey knott ( assistant director ) , di'mond spencer ( analyst - in - charge ) , chris businsky , nancy glover , franklin jackson , and daniel swartz .

also contributing were melina asencio , scott pettis , and zsaroq powe .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

