in 2011 , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) — the agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) that administers the medicare program — paid hospitals about $147 billion for inpatient services provided to beneficiaries in fee - for - service medicare , accounting for about one - quarter of all medicare expenditures .

to help control the growth of hospital spending , give hospitals an incentive to provide care efficiently , and ensure beneficiary access to care , congress created the inpatient prospective payment system ( ipps ) in 1983 .

under this system , medicare pays hospitals a flat fee per stay , set in advance , with different amounts for each type of condition .

these payment rates are also influenced by such factors as the relative hourly wage in the area where the hospital is located and whether the hospital qualifies for additional payments .

for hospitals not paid under ipps , other medicare payment methodologies apply .

congress can enhance medicare payments to certain hospitals by changing the qualifying criteria for ipps payment categories , creating and extending exceptions to ipps rules , or exempting certain hospitals from the ipps altogether .

specifically , congress may allow hospitals meeting certain criteria to receive additional medicare payments , and may revise some of the qualification criteria to enable more hospitals to benefit .

for example , legislation has extended statutory provisions set to expire , or allowed certain hospitals to continue receiving additional payments after qualifying criteria have changed , through grandfathering .

often such efforts were intended to ensure beneficiary access to care or to help hospitals recruit and retain physicians and other medical professionals .

however , some medicare payment experts have expressed concerns about exceptions to the ipps , extensions of certain provisions , and other forms of payment adjustments .

they contend that such practices have a cumulative effect on the cost of the program , do not adequately target providers most in need , and undermine the integrity of the ipps .

in light of these issues , you asked us to review medicare payment legislation that has benefited certain hospitals by creating new criteria or changing existing criteria for a hospital's classification , or modifying payments for hospitals that fit a narrow profile .

in this report , we ( 1 ) identify provisions of law that enhanced medicare ipps payments for only a subset of hospitals , and the characteristics of affected hospitals and budgetary estimates , if any ; and ( 2 ) examine the extent to which hospitals qualified for adjustments to , or exemptions from , the ipps in 2012 .

to address these issues , we limited our review to statutory provisions enacted since 1997 and to the class of short - term acute care general we included in our review those hospitals then paid under the ipps.provisions that subsequently adjusted payments to only a subset of ipps hospitals or exempted hospitals from the ipps during this period .

the provisions covered in our review may be ongoing , time - limited , or expired — as indicated .

however , we excluded provisions that simply modified reimbursement to all hospitals in a previously established category of ipps hospitals .

we also excluded provisions that simply granted an extension of time to previously enacted payment rules .

to identify and describe statutory provisions within our scope , we interviewed cms officials and health care policy researchers with expertise in the area of medicare hospital payment systems .

we also reviewed literature on medicare's hospital payment history and congressional committee and conference reports related to the statutory provisions identified .

this resulted in our review of provisions from the following laws: balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) ; medicare , medicaid , and schip balanced budget refinement act of 1999 ( bbra ) ; medicare , medicaid , and schip benefits improvement and protection act of 2000 ( bipa ) ; medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) ; deficit reduction act of 2005 ; tax relief and health care act of 2006 ; medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ; medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ; patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) , as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ) ; medicare and medicaid extenders act of 2010 ; temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 ; middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ; and american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ) .

to determine characteristics of hospitals affected by these provisions , we analyzed data on the number , size , and location of hospitals using two sources: cms's fiscal year 1997 through 2013 impact files , as applicable , and the flex monitoring team — a federally funded consortium of three rural health research centers .

to report estimates of budgetary effects , we used data published by cms and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

we generally reported data on the first year of a provision's implementation , if available .

unless otherwise noted , however , data on affected hospitals and medicare fee - for - service spending were projections issued prior to the implementation of the provisions rather than actual effects .

in order to assess the reliability of the data we analyzed , we reviewed cms's documentation on the impact files , interviewed cms officials familiar with the data , and compared impact file data to data in relevant federal register notices .

we found these data sufficiently reliable for the purpose of this engagement .

to assess the extent to which hospitals qualified for a medicare payment adjustment in 2012 , we analyzed cms and flex monitoring team data on 4,783 short - term acute care general hospitals , as of july 2012 .

these data allowed us to report the number of hospitals that had their payments adjusted , the types of adjustments they received , and the extent to which they qualified for multiple adjustments .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2012 to march 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives .

the ipps provides incentives for hospitals to operate efficiently by paying a predetermined , standardized amount for an entire inpatient episode of a given type rather than the actual costs incurred in providing the care .

cms calculates ipps payments through a series of adjustments applied to separate national base payment rates covering operating and capital expenses .

specifically , the agency adjusts the base payment rates for patients in different diagnosis - related groups , assuming that cases falling into a particular grouping address similar clinical problems that are expected to require similar amounts of hospital services.applies an area wage index to account for geographic differences in labor costs .

finally , cms determines whether supplemental medicare payments or other types of special treatment , such as those provided to certain rural hospitals , are applicable .

cms adjusts hospital payments under ipps using the area wage index , to account for variation in labor costs across the country , as these costs are largely beyond any individual hospital's ability to control .

the wage index reflects how average hospital wages in each geographic area compare to average hospital wages nationally , set as 1.0 .

thus , medicare payment to a hospital in an area with lower wages is generally below the national average payment and the payment to a hospital in a higher wage area is generally above the national average .

cms considers each distinct urban area as a single labor market , but it considers all rural areas within a state as a single labor market and therefore assigns them the same wage index .

if its wage index does not fully account for its relative labor costs , a hospital may qualify to be reclassified to a higher wage index area in order to receive higher medicare payments .

to request a reclassification to another geographic area , hospitals may apply to the medicare geographic classification review board ( the board ) , an entity established by congress .

among various criteria for reclassification , a hospital must demonstrate close proximity to the area for which it is seeking redesignation .

medicare reimburses teaching hospitals and academic medical centers for both the direct and indirect costs of their residency training programs .

direct graduate medical education payments cover the direct costs of resident training , such as salaries and benefits .

the indirect medical education ( ime ) adjustment — a percentage add - on to ipps rates — reflects the higher patient care costs associated with resident education .

the size of the ime adjustment depends on the hospital's teaching intensity , which is generally measured by a hospital's number of residents per bed .

the medicare disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) adjustment generally provides supplemental payments to hospitals that treat a disproportionate number of low - income patients .

to qualify for this payment adjustment , a hospital's disproportionate patient percentage ( dpp ) — the share of low - income patients treated by the hospital — must generally equal or exceed a specific threshold level determined by a statutory formula.amount of medicare dsh payment adjustment varies by hospital location and size .

rural hospitals may qualify for special treatment in determining payment rates under ipps , although some urban hospitals may also qualify , through three programs: sole community hospitals ( sch ) , rural referral in some centers ( rrc ) , and medicare - dependent hospitals ( mdh ) .cases , hospitals may qualify for more than one of these rural provider types , allowing them to receive multiple adjustments to their ipps payment rates .

we identified 16 statutory provisions enacted between 1997 and 2012 that modified medicare payment for inpatient services in a way that benefitted a subset of hospitals .

these provisions allow hospitals to receive adjustments to their wage index , alter classification criteria for supplemental payments or other special treatment , or exclude hospitals from the ipps .

most of the provisions we identified targeted rural hospitals for increased payment .

we identified seven statutory provisions that have enabled hospitals to receive medicare payment under a higher or nearby wage index .

some provisions moved hospitals in specific , named counties into different wage index areas , or set a minimum wage index for hospitals meeting certain criteria .

other provisions allow hospitals to reclassify from an urban to a rural area .

still others enable rural hospitals near urban areas to qualify for the higher wage index of the nearby area .

section 4410 of bba established a rural floor by requiring that the area wage index for a hospital in an urban area of a state could not be less than the area wage indexes for hospitals in that state's rural area .

the provision applied to patient discharges beginning in fiscal year 1998 , and specified that the implementation of the rural floor must be budget neutral — that is , any changes in the wage index for hospitals subject to the floor may not increase or decrease aggregate medicare payments for the operating costs of inpatient services .

initially , this upwards adjustment only applied in states with at least one rural ipps hospital .

the rural floor provision increased the wage index for hospitals in urban areas that had been paid under a lower wage index than the rural areas of that state .

in order to compensate for the increased wage indexes of urban hospitals receiving the rural floor , cms initially applied a nationwide budget - neutrality adjustment to account for the additional payment to these hospitals .

in fiscal year 2009 , cms changed this policy and began phasing in a revised rural floor budget - neutrality adjustment that would be calculated and applied on a state - by - state basis instead of on a nationwide basis .

to do so , the agency blended the nationwide and state - by - state budget neutrality formulas for fiscal year 2009 and fiscal year 2010.within each state , some hospitals' wage index increased , while other hospitals' wage index decreased , in order to ensure that total medicare payments to hospitals in that state remained the same .

as a result , section 3141 of ppaca reversed this policy by requiring that any adjustments to the wage index must be applied on a budget - neutral basis through a uniform national adjustment beginning in fiscal year 2011 .

the application of the national budget - neutrality requirement has resulted in a transfer of medicare payments from hospitals in states where no hospitals qualified for the rural floor to hospitals in states where at least one hospital qualified for this adjustment .

 ( for information on the impact of this provision by state , see app .

i. ) .

in fiscal year 2012 , the effect of this ppaca provision was that hospitals in seven states ( alaska , california , colorado , connecticut , massachusetts , new hampshire , and new jersey ) and puerto rico received increased hospital payments ; hospitals in massachusetts received the largest increase in payments — nearly $275 million — five times greater than new jersey , the next largest recipient ; to pay for the rural floor in these states , hospital payments in other states were adjusted downward by as much as 0.5 percent , with a median state reduction of $7.3 million ; and hospitals in five states saw declines of over $20 million: new york ( $47.5 million ) , texas ( $34 million ) , florida ( $29 million ) , illinois ( $26 million ) , and michigan ( $21 million ) .

specific county and area reclassifications ( expired ) section 152 of bbra reclassified hospitals in seven named counties or areas , deeming them to be located in specifically named large metropolitan areas , thus enabling them to qualify for the wage index of that area .

this provision benefitted hospitals in these counties that competed for labor with nearby hospitals in higher wage areas .

the bbra limited this reclassification to discharges during fiscal year 2000 and fiscal year 2001 .

hospitals in the following specified counties were reclassified: iredell county , north carolina , was deemed to be located in the charlotte - gastonia - rock hill , north carolina - south carolina metropolitan statistical area ( msa ) ; orange county , new york , was deemed to be part of the large urban area of new york , new york ; lake county , indiana , was deemed to be located in the chicago , lee county , illinois , was deemed to be located in the chicago , illinois hamilton - middletown , ohio , was deemed to be located in the cincinnati , ohio - kentucky - indiana msa ; brazoria county , texas , was deemed to be located in the houston , chittenden county , vermont , was deemed to be located in the boston - worcester - lawrence - lowell - brockton , massachusetts - new hampshire msa .

section 401 of bbra allowed certain urban hospitals , beginning january 1 , 2000 , to request to be reclassified as rural hospitals for payment purposes under the ipps .

generally , these hospitals may seek a lower wage index in a rural area in order to receive higher payments as a rural provider type , such as an sch .

according to cms , the provision benefits hospitals that are within an urban area , but are isolated from the metropolitan core by distance or physical features .

under the bbra provision , to qualify for this reclassification , a hospital must submit an application and meet one of the following criteria: be located in a rural portion of an msa or an area defined as rural by be designated as a rural hospital by the state ; would qualify as a rural , regional , or national referral center , or as an sch if the hospital was located in a rural area ; or meet other criteria established by cms .

by fiscal year 2013 , 46 urban hospitals , comprising 1.3 percent of ipps hospitals , had been reclassified by cms as rural under this provision .

seven states — california , florida , missouri , new york , pennsylvania , texas , and virginia — had more than two qualifying hospitals .

section 505 of mma required that hhs establish a process , beginning in fiscal year 2005 , by which the agency may increase the wage index for hospitals located in counties where potential employees commute to higher wage index areas .

the provision benefits hospitals located in counties where a higher than average percentage of hospital employees reside in that county but work in another county that has a higher wage index .

hospitals in qualifying counties receive an average of the differences between the higher and lower wage indexes , weighted by the percentage of hospital workers in the qualifying county who work in the higher - wage areas .

in the first year of implementation , fiscal year 2005 , the wage index increased for 555 eligible hospitals , representing nearly 14 percent of ipps hospitals ; eligible hospitals had an average of 140 beds ; california , texas , and michigan had the most eligible hospitals with 89 , 44 , and 40 hospitals , respectively ; massachusetts , michigan , and connecticut had the most qualifying hospitals as a percentage of all hospitals in the state with 45 , 31 , and 29 percent , respectively ; and utah , minnesota , and georgia benefited from the largest medicare payment adjustment as a result of their qualifying status .

onetime appeal of wage index reclassification by the board ( expired ) section 508 of mma required hhs to establish a process by january 1 , 2004 , so that a hospital denied a request to be reclassified to the wage index of another area in its state could submit a onetime appeal to the board .

the provision required the board to grant appeals of and reclassify qualifying hospitals , defined as those hospitals that did not originally qualify for reclassification on the basis of distance or commuting requirements but met other criteria such as quality factors , as specified by hhs .

the provision limited reclassifications to a three - year period for appeals filed by february 15 , 2004 .

the provision also capped additional medicare expenditures resulting from these reclassifications to $900 million over the initial 3-year period .

we found that , in its first year of implementation , 130 hospitals , or approximately 3 percent of all ipps hospitals , qualified for this adjustment ; and four states — connecticut , michigan , north dakota , and pennsylvania — had at least 10 qualifying hospitals each .

while originally enacted as a onetime and time - limited provision , congress extended reclassifications made under this provision numerous times until they expired on march 31 , 2012 .

section 10324 of ppaca established a hospital wage index floor adjustment , beginning with discharges as of fiscal year 2011 , for hospitals the provision defined a frontier state as one in located in frontier states.which at least 50 percent of counties have a population of fewer than 6 people per square mile and set the wage index in these areas at no lower than 1.0 .

in other words , while the wage index for all other states is a ratio of the average hourly hospital wage in the area to the national average , if the wage index of a frontier state is lower than the national average — or less than 1.0 — this provision adjusts the wage index to 1.0 .

prior to implementation , cms projected that five states would meet the criteria to be designated as a frontier state: montana , nevada , north dakota , south dakota , and wyoming ; 48 out of 82 ipps hospitals in those states would be eligible for a modified wage index that is at least 1.0 ; and ipps payments would increase by approximately $50 million in the first year .

we identified five statutory provisions that have affected the number of hospitals that qualify for ipps supplemental payments or other types of special treatment .

most of these provisions modified the classification criteria for payment adjustments , thereby expanding the number of hospitals that qualify for higher payments .

section 211 of bipa revised the medicare threshold criteria for dsh , resulting in an increased number of hospitals qualifying for a payment adjustment .

effective for discharges as of april 1 , 2001 , this provision allowed hospitals , regardless of location and size , to receive a dsh adjustment with a dpp of 15 percent or greater .

originally , different types of hospitals qualified for a dsh adjustment on the basis of varying dpp thresholds .

for instance , urban hospitals with 100 or more beds qualified for a dsh payment with a minimum dpp of 15 percent , whereas urban hospitals with fewer than 100 beds qualified for a dsh payment adjustment with a minimum dpp of 40 percent .

cms reported that this adjustment of the dpp qualifying threshold added 1,191 primarily rural and small urban hospitals to those already receiving a dsh adjustment ; for example , 351 additional rural hospitals with fewer than 100 beds and 244 additional urban hospitals with fewer than 100 beds started receiving a dsh adjustment after implementation ; would increase medicare spending by $60 million from fiscal year 2001 through fiscal year 2002 ; and would not negatively affect any hospitals .

section 402 of mma modified the formulas used to calculate the dsh payment adjustment for certain hospitals , thereby increasing payments to these hospitals .

specifically , effective with discharges as of april 1 , 2004 , the dsh adjustment formula used for large urban hospitals was applied to other types of hospitals , including schs , rrcs , other rural hospitals with fewer than 500 beds , and urban hospitals with fewer than 100 beds .

in addition , this provision capped this dsh payment adjustment at 12 percent of the hospital's ipps rate , while exempting rrcs from this cap .

for instance , an urban hospital with fewer than 100 beds that qualifies for a dsh payment adjustment of 18.1 percent is capped at the maximum 12 percent payment adjustment .

section 406 of mma established a new payment adjustment for low - volume hospitals beginning in fiscal year 2005 that accounts for the higher costs per discharge at hospitals that admit a relatively small number of patients .

to qualify , hospitals had to be located more than 25 miles from another hospital and have fewer than 800 total discharges annually .

the provision required cms to determine , on the basis of empirical data , applicable percentage increases , not to exceed 25 percent , in payments for qualifying low - volume hospitals .

cms explained in issuing the final rule implementing this mma provision that the agency analyzed data and determined that hospitals with fewer than 200 discharges a year have sufficiently higher costs relative to payments to justify receiving a payment adjustment , but that hospitals with 200 to 800 discharges a year did not .

cms provided the maximum 25 percent payment adjustment only to those qualifying hospitals that were located more than 25 miles from another hospital and had fewer than 200 discharges in a given year .

cms reported that cbo estimated this provision would increase medicare program expenditures by less than $50 million annually , and only three hospitals — one located in florida and two located in south dakota — received a low - volume payment adjustment in fiscal year 2005 .

all were small ( 30 or fewer beds ) rural hospitals classified as schs .

section 3125 , as amended by section 10314 , of ppaca temporarily revised the qualifying criteria for a low - volume hospital designation making it easier for hospitals to receive the payment adjustment .

effective for fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2012 , this provision decreased the required distance from the nearest hospital from 25 miles to 15 miles .

in addition , it changed the maximum number of annual discharges allowed from 800 total patients to 1,600 medicare part a beneficiaries .

the provision also required that payment adjustments for qualifying low - volume hospitals be calculated using a continuous sliding scale , paying up to an additional 25 percent to hospitals with 200 or fewer annual medicare part a discharges .

as a result of these changes , both the number of hospitals receiving the low - volume payment adjustment and the estimated medicare expenditures rose substantially .

cms reported that over the 2-year period , fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2012 , the provision was estimated to cost medicare approximately $880 million ; and the number of hospitals that received a payment adjustment rose to approximately 645 — or about 18 percent of ipps hospitals — in fiscal year 2011 from 3 hospitals the year before .

we found that , in fiscal year 2011 , at least 40 percent of ipps hospitals in each of 6 states received a low - volume adjustment: wyoming ( 67 percent ) , vermont ( 50 percent ) , new mexico ( 43 percent ) , minnesota ( 42 percent ) , alabama ( 41 percent ) , and mississippi ( 41 percent ) ; and recipient hospitals were relatively small,rural areas , and likely to also receive a dsh payment adjustment .

section 212 of bipa modified one aspect of the mdh classification criteria .

effective for cost reporting periods beginning april 1 , 2001 , it changed the data source used to determine whether at least 60 percent of a hospital's discharges were medicare beneficiaries .

this provision allowed a hospital to base this determination on two of the three most recently audited fiscal year cost reporting periods .

prior to this change , discharge data were based on cost reporting periods beginning in 1987 .

this provision did not initially have a significant effect on the number of qualifying hospitals or on medicare payments .

cms estimated that a total of 139 hospitals — all of which had previously been designated as mdhs — would qualify as an mdh using this revised data source .

the agency further estimated that medicare would spend an additional $10 million in the first year of implementation .

it is likely that this provision had a greater effect on the number of hospitals qualifying for an mdh classification in later years because it allowed hospitals to use recent , rather than outdated , cost reports .

in 1997 , congress established the critical access hospital ( cah ) program , under which qualifying small rural hospitals are excluded from the ipps and receive medicare payment based on the reasonable costs of providing services .

in effect , cahs receive higher payments for providing services to medicare beneficiaries than they would under the ipps .

specifically , section 4201 of bba allowed states to apply for approval to create a medicare rural hospital flexibility program ( flex program ) , under which states must designate at least one hospital as a to be designated as a cah , hospitals had to meet the following cah.qualifying criteria: type of organization: nonprofit or public hospital ; services: must provide 24-hour emergency services deemed necessary for ensuring access in each area served by the cah ; location: rural county or other rural area in states with approved flex programs ; size: no more than 15 acute care inpatient beds ; average inpatient stay: no more than 4 days ( subject to certain exceptions ) patient access: ( a ) located either more than 35 miles from the nearest hospital or cah or more than 15 miles in areas with mountainous terrain or only secondary roads , or ( b ) designated by the state as a necessary provider of health care services to residents in the area .

prior to implementation , cms reported that approximately 51 facilities in seven states — those participating in the demonstration program that preceded the cah program — would be eligible to become cahs .

while the cah program was expected to grow , cms was not able to estimate reliably how many additional states would choose to participate or the potential cost of the cah program to medicare .

section 403 of bbra made a number of changes to qualifying criteria for the cah program .

first , the provision changed the inpatient length of stay requirement from a maximum of 4 days to an annual average of 4 days .

second , the provision removed the requirement that eligible hospitals must be nonprofit or public , allowing for - profit hospitals to qualify as cahs , if so approved by their state .

third , the provision permitted a state to designate as a cah not only a currently operating hospital , but closed facilities or facilities that were previously hospitals but currently operate as a state - licensed health clinic or health center , if the facilities data indicate that in the 2 years following the meet all other criteria.enactment of bbra in 1999 , 411 hospitals were newly designated as cahs .

see mma , pub .

l. no .

108-173 , § 405 ( e ) , ( g ) , ( h ) , 117 stat .

at 2266 ( codified , as amended , at 42 u.s.c .

§ 1395i - 4 ( c ) ( 2 ) , ( h ) ) .

reasonable cost basis ) .eliminated the ability of a state to designate a hospital as a necessary provider , so that states could no longer waive the 35-mile distance requirement to designate a hospital as a cah .

however , the provision grandfathered all cahs that had already received their cah status by being designated as a necessary provider .

third , effective january 1 , 2006 , the provision cbo estimated that these changes to the cah program under this provision would increase medicare program expenditures by approximately $100 million annually , according to cms .

data show that in 2004 and 2005 , the 2 years following enactment of mma , 422 new cahs joined the program .

however , the number of new cah designations dropped sharply in 2006 with the elimination of the necessary provider designation .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

the cah program has grown to a total of 1,328 hospitals as of 2012 .

the majority of cahs have the maximum 25 inpatient beds .

in addition , cahs are largely concentrated in the central states , although all but five states have at least one cah .

we found that the states with the largest percentage of hospitals designated as cahs are north dakota and montana , with about 84 percent and 79 percent , respectively .

 ( see fig .

5. ) .

furthermore , according to medpac , 17 percent of cahs are 35 or more miles from the nearest hospital , 67 percent are between 15 miles and 35 miles from the nearest hospital , and 16 percent of cahs are fewer than 15 miles from the nearest hospital .

these data indicate that not all cahs meet current qualifying criteria .

section 1109 of hcera authorized $400 million in medicare payments to qualifying hospitals in low - spending counties over 2 years , fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2012 .

this provision defined qualifying hospitals as acute care hospitals located in a county that ranked within the lowest quartile of age , sex , and race adjusted spending per beneficiary enrolled in fee - for - service medicare parts a and b. cms allocated the additional payments to each qualifying hospital in proportion to its share of medicare inpatient payments for all qualifying hospitals , based on fiscal year 2009 ipps payments for operating expenses .

in implementing this provision , cms made payments to about 400 hospitals , which accounted for 11 percent of all ipps hospitals and approximately 8 percent of ipps beds ; medicare expenditures increased $150 million in fiscal year 2011 and $250 million in fiscal year 2012 ; on average , qualifying hospitals had 135 to 137 beds ; half of qualifying hospitals were in urban areas and half were in rural states with the most hospitals receiving this payment were new york ( 50 hospitals ) , wisconsin ( 40 hospitals ) , virginia ( 31 hospitals ) , oregon ( 21 hospitals ) , and iowa ( 20 hospitals ) .

we found that , in 2012 , payment adjustments to , or exclusions from , the ipps affected nearly all of the 4,783 hospitals in our review .

of these hospitals — ipps hospitals and cahs — 91 percent were subject to a payment adjustment under the ipps or were excluded from the ipps entirely .

specifically , 3,039 hospitals , or over 63 percent , qualified for at least one of the following four types of payment adjustments under the ipps: a dsh adjustment , an ime adjustment , a wage index adjustment , or a rural provider type adjustment for an rrc , sch , or mdh designation ; 1,328 hospitals , or about 28 percent , qualified as cahs , excluding them from the ipps ; and 416 hospitals , or about 9 percent , received ipps payments that were unadjusted for the modifications included in our review .

among the 3,455 ipps hospitals , the vast majority qualified for one of the four categories of upward payment adjustment in 2012 .

the dsh adjustment had the broadest reach , affecting payments to about 4 in 5 of ipps hospitals .

nearly 1 in 3 hospitals qualified for an ime adjustment , 1 in 3 qualified for a wage index adjustment , and almost 1 in 5 received a rural provider type adjustment .

each of these categories of increased payment benefited hospitals in both urban and rural areas .

the dsh and ime adjustments applied mostly to urban hospitals' payments , whereas the wage index adjustment was applied to more rural hospitals' payments .

although rural provider type adjustments generally supported payment to rural hospitals , about 20 percent of recipients were urban hospitals .

 ( see table 1. ) .

among the 3,039 ipps hospitals receiving additional payment , the majority qualified for more than one category of payment adjustment .

in 2012 , roughly half of ipps hospitals received two forms of adjustments and 13 percent qualified for three forms of adjustments .

two percent of ipps hospitals qualified for four forms of adjustments , but no state had more than 10 hospitals qualifying for four forms of increased payment .

the remaining ipps hospitals , almost a third of the total , qualified for a dsh adjustment alone .

by location , we found that most hospitals in urban areas qualified for one or two forms of increased payment , whereas most hospitals in rural areas qualified for two or more forms of additional pay .

 ( see fig .

6. ) .

of the 416 hospitals that did not qualify for ipps payment adjustments , nearly all were in urban areas and were distributed across most states .

generally , they were substantially smaller than the average urban hospital , typically having 98 beds compared to 224 beds .

the multiple types of adjustments to medicare payments vary in their financial effect , and can substantially affect a hospital's revenue .

take , for example , a beneficiary who undergoes coronary bypass surgery with angioplasty and has a major complication or comorbidity .

when this surgery is performed at a teaching hospital in a large urban area that treats a high percentage of low - income patients , the total operating payment from medicare comes to about $63,600 .

specifically , in fiscal year 2013 , the ipps operating base rate for that case , adjusted for the local wage index , is approximately $41,500 .

added to that amount is about $14,100 for ime and roughly $8,000 for medicare dsh .

thus , the two payment adjustments increase the amount this hospital would receive for this discharge by more than 50 percent .

the ipps streamlines how medicare pays hospitals and gives hospitals an incentive to economize by paying a fixed amount , set in advance .

over time , however , numerous statutory provisions have been enacted that provide , grandfather , or extend additional payments to ipps hospitals or exclude a substantial number of hospitals from the ipps altogether .

this piecemeal approach to modifying the original ipps — a patchwork of individual “fixes” — has had the cumulative effect of most hospitals receiving modifications and add - ons to the basic payment formula that increase medicare spending .

in fact , over 90 percent of hospitals were subject to either ipps payment adjustments or exemptions in 2012 .

these changes address characteristics of the hospital market such as competition for labor , challenges to rural hospitals , and the need to support medicare - participating hospitals in certain markets .

in addition , organizations such as iom and medpac have recently made recommendations to strengthen the data used in geographic adjustments , and to hone the targeting of rural special payment adjustments .

taken together , these findings and recommendations suggest that , 30 years after the ipps was implemented , the way medicare currently pays hospitals may no longer ensure that the goals of the payment system — cost control , efficiency , and access — are being met .

hhs reviewed a draft of this report and did not have any general comments .

the agency provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate .

as we agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from its date .

we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services .

the report will also be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

in addition to the contact named above , rosamond katz , assistant director ; alexander galuten ; katherine perry ; kathryn richter ; and hemi tewarson made key contributions to this report .

