i am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on reforms made to the small business administration's ( sba ) disaster loan program and the impact those reforms had following recent disasters .

as you know , sba plays a critical role in assisting the victims of natural and other declared disasters .

sba provides financial assistance through its disaster loan program to help homeowners , renters , businesses of all sizes , and nonprofits recover from disasters such as earthquakes , hurricanes , and terrorist attacks .

since the agency's inception in 1953 , sba has approved more than $46 billion in disaster loans for homeowners , businesses , and nonprofit organizations .

after the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes ( katrina , rita , and wilma ) , sba faced an unprecedented demand for disaster loans , while also being confronted with a significant backlog of applications ; therefore , hundreds of thousands of loans were not disbursed in a timely way .

many criticized sba for what was perceived to be a slow and confusing response to the disasters and one that exposed many deficiencies in the agency's disaster loan program and demonstrated the need for reform .

for example , as we stated in our february 2007 report , sba did not engage in or complete comprehensive disaster plans before the gulf coast hurricanes , and this limited logistical disaster planning likely contributed to the initial challenges the agency faced in responding to the 2005 hurricanes .

as a result , congress and sba agreed that the program needed significant improvements .

since then , sba has taken several steps to reform its disaster loan program which include creating an online loan application , increasing the capacity of its disaster credit management system ( dcms ) , and developing a disaster recovery plan ( drp ) .

in june 2008 , congress enacted the small business disaster response and loan improvements act ( act ) to expand steps taken by sba and require new measures to ensure that sba is prepared for future catastrophic disasters .

my statement today summarizes our report released at this hearing .

this report focuses on ( 1 ) the extent to which sba addressed the requirements of the act , and ( 2 ) how sba's response , following the major disasters of 2008 , aligned with key components of its june 2007 drp .

to do this work , we identified and analyzed the requirements of the act and related statutory deadlines ; obtained information about sba's completed , current , and planned reform efforts ; reviewed documents and progress reports to determine if requirements had been addressed and deadlines were met ; interviewed officials and obtained information on what , if any , challenges exist that may affect sba's ability to implement certain requirements ; and interviewed officials to obtain information about next steps and resources that the agency identified as needed to address any remaining requirements .

we also conducted site visits in iowa and texas , and obtained information on sba's performance in the aftermath of the 2008 midwest floods and hurricane ike .

we interviewed sba and small business development center ( sbdc ) officials , state and local officials , and representatives of local chambers of commerce , economic development organizations , and affected small business owners about what worked well and suggested improvements to sba's disaster loan processes .

finally , we reviewed results from a survey of sba loan applicants on their satisfaction with sba's disaster loan program in 2008 .

our work was performed between october 2008 and july 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as of june 2009 , sba fully addressed requirements for 13 of 26 provisions of the act ; partially addressed 8 ; and took no action on 5 that are not applicable at this time ( see table 1 ) .

for the 13 provisions sba fully addressed , the agency's actions included putting in place a secondary facility in sacramento , california to process loans during times when the main facility in fort worth , texas is unavailable , making improvements to dcms to track and follow up with applicants , and expanding its disaster reserve staff from about 300 to more than 2,000 individuals .

furthermore , according to sba and our review , 5 provisions require no action by sba at this time because they are discretionary or additional appropriations are needed before sba can satisfy the act's requirements .

sba permitted to mke economic injry disaster lo to nonprofit .

sba must ensure it disaster assnce progr re coordinted to the mximm extent prcticable with fema progr .

better public reness of disaster decltion , ppliction period , nd cretion of rketing nd otrech pln .

sba must condct dy looking t the contency etween ndrd operting procedre nd regtion of the disaster lon progrm .

sba increased lomont from $10,000 to $14,000 withot requiring collterl .

sba authorize privte contrctor to process disaster lo nd coordinte effort with irs to expedite lon processing .

sba must develop , implement , or mintin centrlized informtion tem to trck nd follow p with disaster lopplicnt .

sba i authorized to increase the deferment period of lo , but the deferment my not exceed 4 ye .

sba must pt in plce econdry fcility for processing disaster lo in case the primry fcility i ilable .

sba cn not require the orrower to pny non - mortized mont for the firt 5 ye fter repyment egin .

sba i authorized to mke economic injry disaster lo in cas of ice torm nd lizzrd .

sba must develop nd implement jor disaster repone plnd condct disaster imtion exercit least once every 2 ye .

sba musassign n individual the disaster plnning reponilitie nd report to congress .

sba hold ensure tht the ner of fll - time equivlent oda employee not fewer thn 800 nd in the disaster cdre not fewer thn 1,000 .

sba must develop , implement , or mintin comprehenive written disaster repone plnd pdte the plnnually .

sba must develop long - term pl to ecre sufficient office ce to ccommodte n increased workforce in time of disaster .

sba my not rely olely on the lopplicnt' us as jor rce of employment prior to the disaster to qualify for disaster lo eyond the crrent tory limit .

mximm disaster lomont increased from $1.5 to $2 million .

sba may uarantee any urety aaint loss on a bid , payment , performance , or ancillary bond on any work order or contract that at the time of the bond execution doe not exceed $5 million .

if the preident declre jor disaster , sba my declre eligiility for dditionl disaster assnce .

sba permitted to mke economic injry disaster lo to eligile ll business concern locted nywhere in the us ( inclding oide the disaster re ) when the sba declre eligiility for dditionl disaster assnce .

sba must eablind implement privte disaster assnce progrm .

sba my guantee timely pyment of principnd interet on privte disaster lossued to eligile ll business nd homeowner within n eligile disaster re .

sba must eablin immedite disaster assnce progrm to provide immedite ll dollr lo throgh privte lender .

sba must eablin expedited disaster assnce business lon progrm .

sba i llowed to intitte progrm to refinnce glf coast disaster lo resulting form hrricne ktrin , rit , or wilm p to mont no greter thn the originl lon .

sba mussubmit report to congress on disaster assnce .

addressed ( initil or ongoing ) or dedline met prtilly ddressed or ome dedline met not ddressed or missed dedline not pplicable ecause no ction i needed to e tken sba t thi time , de to proviion' dicretionry nre .

the act requires sba to issue regulations for these provisions .

sba has not yet issued an updated drp .

while sba has taken some steps toward implementing the act , the agency still needs to take additional steps to completely address 8 provisions .

according to sba officials , the agency has not yet completely addressed some provisions that require new regulations because to do so , the agency must make extensive changes to current programs or implement new programs – – such as the immediate and expedited disaster assistance programs – – to satisfy requirements of the act .

these programs , which require participation of private lenders , would be designed to provide businesses with access to short - term loans while they are waiting for long - term assistance .

moreover , as required by the act , sba has not issued an update of its comprehensive drp that reflects recent changes resulting from the act's requirements , as well as sba's own reform efforts .

delays in updates to the drp limit the agency's ability to adequately prepare for and respond to disasters .

also , sba has not fully addressed the requirement for providing region - specific marketing and outreach and ensuring the information is made available to sbdcs and other local resources .

we consistently heard from regional entities , such as sbdcs and emergency management groups , about the need for more up - front information on sba's disaster loan program and their expected roles and responsibilities in disaster response efforts .

by taking such actions , sba could leverage the efforts and capacity of sbdcs , as well as state and local emergency management agencies , and ensure that it and they will be better prepared for future events , especially in disaster - prone areas .

furthermore , the act established multiple new reporting requirements and while sba has addressed some of these , the agency has failed to comply with the act and issue a first annual report on disaster assistance – – which was due in november 2008 .

specifically , the act requires that sba report annually on the total number of sba disaster staff , major changes to the disaster loan program ( such as changes to technology or staff responsibilities ) , a description of the number and dollar amount of disaster loans made during the year , and sba's plans for preparing and responding to possible future disasters .

failure to produce annual reports on schedule can lead to a lack of transparency on the agency's progress in reforming the program .

additionally , 9 provisions set forth in the act are subject to deadlines , which the agency has had limited success in meeting .

the agency also has not developed a plan with expected time frames for addressing the remaining requirements .

sba's not providing reports to congress and not having an implementation plan in place for addressing the remaining requirements can lead to a lack of transparency about the agency's disaster loan program , program improvement , and capacity to reform the program , as well as its ability to adequately prepare for and respond to disasters .

sba's initial response following the 2008 midwest floods and hurricane ike aligned with major components of its drp , such as infrastructure , human capital , information technology , and communications .

additionally , individuals to whom we spoke affected by both disasters considered the agency's overall performance somewhat positive , but believed the disaster loan process could be improved .

in may 2008 , floods devastated 85 counties in iowa ( one of several states affected ) and in september 2008 , hurricane ike devastated 50 counties in texas .

sba and sbdc officials , state and local representatives , private - entity officials , and business owners in iowa and texas told us that in the days immediately following the disasters , sba's office of disaster assistance staff reported to the affected areas and began providing needed disaster assistance .

these individuals also said that sba staff provided outreach and public information about its disaster loan program ; distributed application information ; assigned knowledgeable customer service representatives to various disaster and business recovery centers ; and assisted in the initial application process by answering questions , providing guidance , and offering one - on - one help – – as outlined in sba's drp .

in addition , our review of sba's 2008 disaster loan program customer satisfaction survey also showed that respondents were somewhat satisfied with the assistance sba provided during other recent disasters .

however , both the individuals we interviewed and survey results indicated areas for improvement and opportunities to increase satisfaction with sba's disaster loan process .

for example , individuals we interviewed and survey responses pointed to concerns about the amount of paperwork required to complete sba's disaster loan application and the timeliness of loan disbursements .

also , some business owners said they had to provide copies of 3 years of federal income tax returns , although they had signed an internal revenue service ( irs ) form 8821 — tax information authorization — which allows sba to get tax return information directly from irs .

to address these concerns , the individuals we interviewed suggested several changes to the program , such as eliminating the requirement that business loan applicants provide copies of irs tax records ; providing partial disbursements earlier in the process ; using bridge loans to help ensure disaster victims receive timely assistance ; and involving sba , sbdcs , and state and local officials in joint pre - planning and disaster preparedness efforts .

though sba officials told us they have been taking steps to improve the application process , these steps and improvement efforts were not documented .

in addition , we found that while sba conducts an annual customer satisfaction survey , the agency does not appear to incorporate this feedback mechanism into its formal efforts to continually improve the application process .

furthermore , sba does not appear to have a formal process for addressing identified problem areas and using this experience to improve the application process for future applicants .

by establishing such a process to address identified problem areas , sba could better demonstrate its commitment to improving the disaster loan program .

as discussed in our report , while sba has made progress , the agency has missed opportunities to further improve its disaster loan program , and in particular improve the application process for future applicants .

in our report , we made five recommendations to facilitate sba's progress in meeting and complying with requirements of the act and improve the disaster loan program .

specifically , we recommended that the administrator of sba: ( 1 ) develop procedures for regional entities that would enable sba to meet all region - specific requirements of the act and ensure regional entities , such as sbdcs , have this information and other disaster loan program information readily available prior to the likely occurrence of a disaster ; ( 2 ) complete the first annual report to congress on disaster assistance and adhere to the time frame for subsequent reports ; ( 3 ) expeditiously issue an updated drp that reflects recent changes resulting from the act's requirements , as well as sba's own reform efforts ; ( 4 ) develop an implementation plan and report to congress on the agency's progress in addressing the requirements of the act , including milestone dates for completing implementation ; and ( 5 ) develop and implement a process to address identified problems in the disaster loan application process for future applicants .

sba generally agreed with our recommendations and stated the agency's plan to incorporate them into its ongoing efforts to implement the act and improve the application process .

specifically , sba plans to expand its outreach efforts to ensure the public in all regions of the country are more aware of sba disaster assistance programs before a disaster strikes .

sba is also planning to submit both the required annual report , and the 2009 revision to its drp to congress by november 15 , 2009 .

additionally , sba officials said the agency has plans to develop an implementation plan for completion of the remaining provisions .

finally , in response to our recommendation on the application process , sba cited ongoing efforts since 2005 to improve its application process , such as the electronic loan application , and said the agency has plans to continue its improvement efforts and make them an ongoing priority .

however , sba did not say how it would implement a formal process to address identified problem areas in the disaster loan application process .

madam chairwoman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have .

for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include kay kuhlman , assistant director ; michelle bowsky , beth faraguna , and alexandra martin - arseneau .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

