i am pleased to be here today as you discuss seniors' health and the preventive care benefits in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) .

overall preventive care depends heavily on identifying health risks associated with the onset or progression of disease and on taking steps to reduce or mitigate these risks .

the medicare program , in contrast , was established largely to help pay beneficiaries' health care costs when they became ill or injured .

over time , however , congress has broadened medicare coverage to include specific preventive services , such as immunizations for influenza and pneumonia and screening tests for certain cancers , that aim to keep an illness or condition from developing or becoming more serious .

most recently , in passing the mma , congress added coverage , to start in 2005 , for a one - time preventive care examination for new enrollees and for selected other preventive services .

as these new benefits are implemented under mma , you have inquired about lessons learned from previous research on delivery options for preventive services .

since 2002 , we have done a series of reports for congress that examines the delivery of preventive care services to medicare beneficiaries .

my statement today summarizes some relevant findings from our work done before mma , specifically: the extent to which medicare beneficiaries receive preventive services through physician visits , and some of the expected benefits and limitations of delivering services through a one - time preventive care examination , including discussion of another delivery option being explored by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) .

my testimony today is based on reports and testimony we have issued since 2002 .

our work for these products included a synthesis of information on preventive care received by people age 65 or older from four nationally representative health surveys ; a review of the results of past related research demonstrations and congressionally mandated studies ; and interviews with department of health and human services ( hhs ) and cms officials and other experts .

this work allows us to discuss the benefits and limitations of the delivery of preventive services through a one - time examination .

this body of work was conducted from august 2001 through august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in july 2004 , we updated information on recommended preventive services and on the status of a cms effort to explore another delivery option .

in summary , although they typically visit a physician several times during a year , most medicare beneficiaries receive some but not all recommended preventive services .

our analysis of year 2000 data shows that nearly 9 in 10 medicare beneficiaries visited a physician at least once that year , and beneficiaries made an average of six visits or more within the year .

despite these opportunities , many beneficiaries did not receive recommended preventive services .

in 2000 , for example , about 30 percent of medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination , and 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination as recommended under current guidelines for people age 65 or older .

moreover , many medicare beneficiaries are apparently unaware that they may have conditions that preventive services are meant to detect .

for example , in one 1999 – 2000 nationally representative survey during which people received physical examinations , nearly one - third of people age 65 or older whom the survey found to have high cholesterol measurements said they had not previously been told by a physician or other health professional that they had high cholesterol .

projected nationally , this percentage translates into 2.1 million people age 65 or older who may have had high cholesterol without knowing it .

a one - time preventive care examination may provide an opportunity for beneficiaries to receive some preventive services while orienting new beneficiaries to medicare .

but covering an initial examination does not ensure that beneficiaries receive the recommended preventive services they need .

the results of a cms demonstration conducted in the late 1980s and early 1990s indicated that offering medicare beneficiaries packages of broad - based preventive services slightly improved the use of some services , such as immunizations and cancer screenings , but did not consistently improve health or lower costs .

cms is exploring an alternative for medicare preventive care that , by means other than a physician's examination , would provide systematic health risk assessments to medicare beneficiaries .

a key component of this demonstration , which is still in development , is to address concerns that to be effective , risk assessments must be coupled with follow - up interventions , such as referrals for follow - up care .

preventive health care can extend lives and promote well - being among our nation's seniors .

medicare now covers a number of preventive services , including immunizations , such as hepatitis b and influenza , and cancer screenings , such as pap smears and colonoscopies .

not all beneficiaries , however , avail themselves of covered preventive services .

some beneficiaries may simply choose not to use these services , but others may be unaware that the services are available or covered by medicare .

further , for some beneficiaries , certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value .

appropriate preventive care depends on an individual's age and particular health risks , not simply on the results of a standard battery of tests .

to evaluate preventive care for different age and risk groups , hhs in 1984 established the u.s. preventive services task force , a panel of private - sector experts .

the task force recommends certain screening , immunization , and counseling services for people age 65 or older .

medicare covers some , but not all , of these services ( see table 1 ) .

medicare's fee - for - service program does not cover regular periodic examinations , where clinicians might assess an individual's health risk and provide needed preventive services .

beneficiaries could and still can , however , receive some of these services during office visits for other health issues .

in late 2003 , mma added coverage under medicare for a one - time “initial preventive physician evaluation” if performed within 6 months after an individual's enrollment under part b of the program .

covered services under the examination include measurement of height , weight , and blood pressure ; an electrocardiogram ; and education , counseling , and referral services for screenings and other preventive services covered by medicare .

mma also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease ( and related abnormalities ) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries and diabetes in “at risk” beneficiaries .

the new coverage applies to services provided on or after january 1 , 2005 .

nationally representative survey data show that medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups.” these data do not show , however , which specific services were delivered during those “checkups.” despite the frequency of visits , many medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of recommended preventive services .

data also show that many beneficiaries may not know about their risk for health conditions that preventive care is meant to detect .

from 2000 survey data and u. s. bureau of the census estimates of people age 65 or older , we estimated that beneficiaries visited a physician at least six times that year , on average , mainly for illnesses or medical conditions .

only about 1 in 10 visits occurred when beneficiaries were well ( see fig .

1 ) .

even though the majority of visits to physicians were to treat illness or health conditions , most medicare beneficiaries reported receiving what they considered to be “routine checkups.” in cdc's 2000 behavioral risk factor surveillance system survey , for example , 93 percent of respondents age 65 or older reported that they had received a “routine checkup” within the previous 2 years .

this survey did not , however , provide information on which specific services were delivered during those checkups .

data from another survey , enumerating services provided during office visits , indicated that medicare beneficiaries do receive some preventive services during visits when they are ill or being treated for a health condition .

despite how often medicare beneficiaries visit physicians , relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of recommended preventive services covered by medicare .

as we reported in 2002 , for example , although 91 percent of female medicare beneficiaries in our analysis received at least one preventive service , only 10 percent were screened for cervical , breast , and colon cancer and were also immunized against influenza and pneumonia .

our analysis of additional data for our 2003 report showed that many medicare beneficiaries still did not receive certain recommended preventive services .

the task force recommends , for example , that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination and at least one pneumonia vaccination .

according to data from cms's medicare current beneficiary survey of 2000 , however , about 30 percent of medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination , and 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination .

many medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect — strong evidence that they may not be receiving the full range of recommended preventive services .

for example , data from cdc's nhanes for 1999 – 2000 show that , of beneficiaries participating in this nationally representative survey who , as part of the survey , had a physical examination and were found to have elevated blood pressure readings at that time , 32 percent reported that no physician or other health professional had told them about the condition before .

on the basis of this survey , we estimate that , during the period when the survey was conducted , 21 million medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk for high blood pressure , and an estimated 6.6 million of them may have been unaware of this risk .

similarly , 32 percent of those found by the survey to have a high cholesterol level reported that no one had told them that they had high cholesterol .

projected nationally , this percentage translates into 2.1 million medicare beneficiaries who may have had high cholesterol without knowing it ( see fig .

2 ) .

a one - time initial preventive care examination covered by medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries .

information from a cms demonstration and from other related studies shows that ensuring receipt of follow - up care will be important to improving beneficiaries' health .

a proposed cms demonstration , currently in design , will explore another preventive care delivery option and examine the value of linking beneficiaries to needed follow - up services .

as proponents of a one - time “welcome to medicare” examination told us , such an examination could be a means to better ensure that health care providers have enough time to identify individual medicare beneficiaries' health risks and provide preventive services appropriate for their risks .

it could be used to orient new beneficiaries to medicare and encourage them to make informed choices about providers and plans .

nevertheless , a one - time examination does not ensure delivery of the full range of preventive services .

primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer , because these services usually require specialists .

it also is uncertain whether a one - time or periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries' health .

for example , one previous cms initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results .

in the late 1980s and early 1990s , the agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services , such as free preventive visits , health risk assessment , and behavior counseling , to see if they would increase use of preventive services , improve health , or lower health care expenditures for medicare beneficiaries .

the agency's final report , published in 1998 , concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of some simple disease - prevention measures , such as immunizations and cancer screenings , but did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce the use of hospital or skilled nursing services .

the report tempered these results by pointing out that the relatively brief period during which the services were provided ( roughly 2 years ) and the limited number of follow - ups and beneficiary contacts with providers ( one to two ) may have been inadequate to achieve measurable outcomes .

determining how to better ensure adequate follow - up once health risks are identified is a concern that a new cms project aims to evaluate .

cms is exploring an alternative for medicare preventive care that would provide systematic health risk assessments to fee - for - service beneficiaries through a means other than examination by a physician .

in the late 1990s , the agency commissioned the rand corporation to evaluate the potential effectiveness of health risk assessment programs .

such programs collect information from individuals ; identify their risk factors ; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health , sustain function , or prevent disease .

the study concluded that health risk assessment programs have increased beneficial behavior ( particularly exercise ) and improved physiological variables ( particularly diastolic blood pressure and weight ) and general health .

in addition , the study stated that to be effective , risk assessment questionnaires must be coupled with follow - up interventions , such as referrals to appropriate services .

the study recommended that cms conduct a demonstration to test cost - effectiveness and other aspects of the health risk assessment approach for medicare beneficiaries .

following through on the study's findings , cms has begun designing a demonstration project focused on medicare fee - for - service beneficiaries , called the medicare senior risk reduction program , to identify health risks and follow up with preventive services provided by means other than examinations by physicians .

the program will use a beneficiary - focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks , such as lifestyle behaviors , and use of clinical preventive and screening services .

the program will test different approaches to administering health risk assessments , creating feedback reports , and providing follow - up services , such as referring beneficiaries to health - promoting community services including physical activity and social support groups .

according to project researchers , the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks ; track patient risks and health over time ; and provide beneficiaries with self - management tools and information , health behavior advice , and end - of - life counseling where appropriate .

the design phase had not been finalized as of last week and , according to a cms official , still required approval from hhs and the office of management and budget .

current data indicate that many opportunities exist for medicare beneficiaries to receive preventive care , but many beneficiaries nonetheless fail to receive the full range of recommended services .

although some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services , others may not be aware that these services are available and covered by medicare .

our work shows that more needs to be done to deliver preventive services to those beneficiaries who need them , because many people may have a health condition that preventive services can easily diagnose , and yet they may not know that they have this condition .

a one - time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that medicare beneficiaries receive .

at the same time , it is not a panacea .

ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services and follow - up care is likely to remain a challenge .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of this committee may have .

for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call janet heinrich at ( 202 ) 512-7119 .

katherine iritani , matt byer , ellen w. chu , lisa lusk , and behn miller kelly also made key contributions to this testimony .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

