about 400,000 american undergraduate college and university students participate in intercollegiate athletics each year .

during the last 2 decades , the number of college athletes and the sports in which they participate have changed markedly .

colleges and universities across the country have added many sports teams and discontinued others .

in response to these changes , the congress included provisions in the higher education amendments of 1998 that require gao to study participation in athletics , including schools' decisions to add or discontinue sports teams .

while the mandate also required information on high school and 2-year college athletics , because of limited readily available information and the difficulty of collecting comparable information from these schools , as agreed with your offices , we focused only on 4-year intercollegiate athletics .

this report answers the following questions: how did the number of men's and women's intercollegiate sports participants and teams at 4-year colleges and universities change in the 2 decades since the1981 – 82 school year ? .

how many colleges and universities added and discontinued teams since the 1992 – 93 school year , and what influenced their most recent decisions to add and discontinue teams ? .

how did colleges and universities make and implement decisions to discontinue intercollegiate sports teams ? .

when colleges and universities added teams , what types of strategies did they use to avoid discontinuing sports teams or severely reducing their funding ? .

to determine changes in the numbers of participants and teams at 4-year colleges and universities , we obtained statistics from the two largest national intercollegiate sports associations for 4-year colleges and universities — the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) and the national association of intercollegiate athletics ( naia ) .

information for these schools covered 18 years — school years 1981 – 82 through 1998 – 99 .

although these data are unverified , they are widely used by researchers to study this topic .

to gather information to respond to the other questions , we sent a questionnaire covering the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 school years to athletic directors at all 1,310 4-year schools that belong to one of these two associations .

we received responses from 91 percent of these schools .

for detailed information on schools' experiences in attempting to add sports teams without substantially reducing opportunities for other athletes , we also visited four colleges and universities .

for details about our scope and methodology , see appendix i .

our work was done between february and december 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

although intercollegiate sports may bring to mind nationally televised football and basketball games , 4-year schools' intercollegiate sports programs vary widely , from small programs involving fewer than 10 teams with expenditures of less than $1 million to large programs with more than 900 student - athletes and expenditures in excess of $50 million .

at many schools , intercollegiate athletic competition serves primarily to meet the needs of student - athletes — to give them opportunities to develop their athletic ability as they pursue their courses of study .

schools also view intercollegiate athletics as a means of recruiting prospective students .

at schools with large athletic programs , sports serve as an important focal point for students , faculty and staff , alumni , surrounding communities , and the national television audience .

typically , schools with the largest number of athletic programs and facilities belong to division i - a of the ncaa , and those with smaller programs are members of ncaa divisions ii or iii or the second major national collegiate association , naia .

most 4-year postsecondary institutions with intercollegiate athletic programs participate in one of these two associations .

ncaa , the larger , administers intercollegiate athletics for over 1,000 4-year ( baccalaureate degree - granting ) schools .

division i member schools are further divided into three categories — i - a , i - aa , and i - aaa — with those that have larger football programs generally placed in i - a and those without football programs in i - aaa .

division i - aa schools sponsor football but are not subject to the spectator attendance requirements that apply to division i - a schools .

in april 2000 , naia consisted of 330 member institutions .

the naia does not have divisions except for basketball and football , which each have divisions i and ii .

although no federal monies fund intercollegiate sports programs , federal involvement has arisen in part as a result of civil rights legislation .

for example , at schools receiving federal financial assistance , all education programs and activities — including intercollegiate athletic programs — are subject to title ix of the education amendments of 1972 , which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex .

federal regulations implementing title ix require that men and women be provided equitable opportunities to participate in intercollegiate athletics , and equitable scholarships , facilities , equipment , supplies , and other benefits .

the department of education's office for civil rights assesses schools' compliance with these requirements .

to comply with requirements concerning equitable opportunities to participate in intercollegiate sports , schools must meet any one of the three following criteria , which education refers to as parts of a three - part test: ( 1 ) intercollegiate - level participation opportunities for male and female students are provided in numbers substantially proportionate to their respective enrollments , or ( 2 ) the institution can show a history and continuing practice of program expansion that is demonstrably responsive to the developing interests and abilities of the members of the underrepresented gender , or ( 3 ) it can be demonstrated that the interests and abilities of the members of the underrepresented gender have been fully and effectively accommodated by the present program .

since the early 1980s , the number of women participating in intercollegiate sports has increased substantially .

although male athletes still outnumber their female counterparts , the growth in their programs has been much smaller and the number of women's teams now exceeds the number of men's teams .

the percentage of male undergraduates who participate in intercollegiate athletics is essentially the same as it was in 1981 – 82 , while the percentage of women has increased considerably .

the rapid growth in women's participation in intercollegiate sports since 1981 – 82 has narrowed the gap between genders ( see fig .

1 ) .

the number of women in intercollegiate sports increased by 81 percent ( from 90,000 to 163,000 participants ) and the number of men increased by 5 percent ( from 220,000 to 232,000 participants ) between 1981 – 82 and 1998 – 99 .

the growth in women's participation was fastest during the early 1980s and in the 1990s .

men's participation also grew in the early 1980s , but peaked in 1985 – 86 .

since then , it decreased modestly , then fluctuated within a narrow range .

the growth in the number of women athletes may reflect , in part , the rapid increase in women's undergraduate enrollment .

from 1981 – 82 to 1998 – 99 women's undergraduate enrollment grew by 30 percent , compared to 6 percent for men .

however , women's participation also grew as an overall percentage of women undergraduates .

women athletes made up 3.9 percent of women undergraduates in 1981 – 82 and 5.5 percent in 1998 – 99 .

in contrast , the portion of undergraduate men participating in athletics remained relatively steady , starting and ending the period at 9.3 percent .

the trends in the number of women participants varied by sport .

for example , table 1 shows that the biggest increase in the number of women participants — about 18,000 — was in soccer .

though participation increased in most sports , five sports reported decreases in participation .

the biggest decline occurred in gymnastics , with nearly 700 fewer women gymnasts in 1998 – 99 than in 1981 – 82 .

in men's sports , increases and decreases were more evenly balanced , with increases in the number of participants in 14 sports and decreases in 12 .

as shown in table 2 , the greatest increase in numbers of participants occurred in football , with about 7,200 more players .

football also had the greatest number of participants — approximately 60,000 , or about twice as many as the next largest sport .

wrestling experienced the largest decrease in participation — a drop of more than 2,600 participants .

though the number of male participants was greater than the number of female participants in 1998 – 99 , there were 330 more women's teams than men's teams .

the average women's team had fewer athletes than the average men's team .

from 1981 – 82 to 1998 – 99 , the number of women's intercollegiate sports teams increased by 66 percent ( from 5,695 to 9,479 teams ) .

most sports saw an increase in the number of teams , with the largest increase occurring in women's soccer , where the number of teams rose from 80 to 926 .

the greatest decrease occurred in gymnastics , where the number of teams fell from 190 to 90 ( see table 3 ) .

half of men's sports saw a decline in the number of teams .

two sports had no change and the remaining sports ( nearly half ) had an increase in the number of teams .

as with women's sports , the largest increase came in soccer ( 135 new teams ) .

football , the sport that saw the largest increase in the number of participants , saw a decrease of 37 teams , mainly from naia schools .

gymnastics , fencing , and rifle saw the largest percentage decline in the number of teams .

the largest decrease in the number of teams was in wrestling ( 171 teams ) ( see table 4 ) .

about 80 percent of schools added one or more women's sports teams during the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 period , and more than two - thirds did so without discontinuing any teams .

student interest in a particular sport was often cited as an influence behind many of these decisions .

gender equity considerations also often influenced decisions to add women's teams and discontinue men's teams , particularly at schools with large athletic programs .

the financial impact of adding or discontinuing teams varied widely by size of program and by sport .

overall , among the 1,191 college and universities responding to the questionnaire , 963 added at least one team and 307 discontinued at least one ( see fig .

2 ) .

however , of the 948 schools that added one or more women's teams , 72 percent did so without discontinuing any teams .

only about 16 percent of all respondents neither added nor discontinued a team from 1992 – 93 through 1999 – 2000 .

in total , schools added nearly three times as many women's teams as men's teams during this period — 1,919 teams for women , compared with 702 for men .

they discontinued more than twice as many men's teams — 386 teams for men , 150 for women .

schools with smaller programs were more likely to add men's teams .

only about 3 percent of the schools with the largest intercollegiate athletic programs ( ncaa division i - a ) added one or more men's teams , compared with 39 percent for ncaa division iii schools and 54 percent of naia schools ( see table 5 ) .

the level of student interest was the factor schools cited most often as greatly or very greatly influencing their most recent decision to add both men's and women's teams ( see fig .

3 ) .

overall , 52 percent of the respondents that had added a women's sports team indicated that student interest was a great or very great influence in the decision , and nearly as many schools ( 47 percent ) cited the need to meet gender equity goals or requirements .

other factors cited less frequently when adding a women's team included the availability of adequate facilities and sufficient equipment , the growth in the number of teams to compete against , community interest , and enough improvement in a club team's skill to compete at the varsity intercollegiate level .

the factors that most influenced recent decisions to add women's teams varied by the size of a school's intercollegiate athletic programs .

for example , respondents from ncaa division i - a schools compared to division iii schools more often cited gender equity considerations ( 82 percent versus 35 percent ) and community interest ( 35 percent versus 12 percent ) as a great or very great influence .

division iii schools cited the availability of adequate facilities and sufficient equipment ( 30 percent , compared with 24 percent in division i - a. ) .

both types of schools cited student interest about as often ( 60 percent versus 55 percent ) .

for men's sports , the pattern of which factors most influenced schools' decisions to add a team was somewhat different , particularly with regard to gender equity goals or requirements .

as was the case for the addition of women's teams , student interest was the factor cited most often ( 49 percent ) as influencing the addition of men's teams .

after student interest , the factor cited most often was the availability of sufficient facilities and adequate equipment ( 32 percent ) , followed by community interest ( 23 percent ) .

gender equity considerations , an influential factor for adding a women's team , was cited by only 4 percent of schools that had added a men's team .

the level of student interest was the most often cited factor in schools' most recent decisions to discontinue men's and women's teams ( see fig .

4 ) .

among the 272 responding schools that discontinued a men's team , 91 ( 33 percent ) cited lack of student interest as a great or very great influence , 83 ( 31 percent ) cited the need to meet gender equity goals or requirements , and 82 ( 30 percent ) cited the need to reallocate budget resources to other sports .

factors affecting decisions to discontinue men's teams varied with the size of a school's program .

among schools with large intercollegiate athletic programs , gender equity considerations more often figured as a great or very great influence .

at ncaa division i - a schools , for example , a majority ( 54 percent ) of the respondents discontinuing a men's team cited gender equity considerations as a great or very great influence .

insufficient student interest in the sport was not often cited ; only 6 percent of respondents cited it as a great or very great influence .

in contrast , among ncaa division iii respondents , the absence of sufficient student interest in the sport was the most often - cited factor ( 44 percent cited it as a great or very great influence ) .

the need to reallocate resources to other sports was the next most often - cited factor ( cited by 26 percent ) , followed by decreases in the budget and gender equity considerations ( each cited by 21 percent ) .

decisions to discontinue a women's team were generally most often driven by the level of student interest .

of the 123 schools that discontinued one or more women's teams , 58 percent cited the lack of student interest as a great or very great influence .

the next most often - cited influences were the team's inability to compete at the desired level and the absence of adequate facilities and sufficient equipment .

the most recent addition of an intercollegiate team increased the average school's total intercollegiate expenditures by an estimated 6 percent , and the most recent discontinuation of a team reduced expenditures by 4 percent .

in general , schools with larger intercollegiate programs experienced smaller percentage changes in their expenditures , as shown in table 6 .

for example , adding a women's team at the ncaa division i - a level increased costs an average of 3 percent , compared to 5 percent for ncaa division iii and 9 percent for naia .

the comparable averages for recent additions of men's teams were 2 , 8 , and 13 percent .

the effect of adding or discontinuing a team also varied by sport ( see table 7 ) .

for example , schools estimated that adding women's soccer typically increased expenditures by 6 percent , while adding football teams increased expenditures by an average of 31 percent .

discontinuing men's tennis decreased expenditures by an average of 2 percent , while discontinuing football decreased expenditures an average of 24 percent .

the 307 responding schools that discontinued a team during the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 period typically spent 3 months or less between making the proposal to discontinue a team and making a final decision .

most schools informed the campus community of the proposed discontinuation before the decision was final .

once the decision was made to discontinue a team , however , most did not provide a written explanation for their decision .

most schools held meetings to discuss the proposal with groups in the campus community .

schools with larger athletic programs more often included other interested parties , such as alumni or members of booster clubs .

affected athletes usually continued to receive athletic financial aid after the sport was discontinued .

most decisions to discontinue a team were considered and implemented within a few months following the initial proposal , according to the responses from the colleges and universities concerning the team they most recently discontinued during the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 period .

the median of the reported amount of time between making such a proposal to reaching a final decision was 2 months .

in 38 percent of cases , both the proposal and the final decision came in the same month .

in about 5 percent of cases , the schools took more than a year to reach a final decision .

the amount of time before the team stopped participating was also brief .

for about one - third of the schools , the team had already stopped participating before the final decision to discontinue the sport was made .

for another 26 percent , participation stopped during the month the final decision was made .

for another 17 percent of the respondents , participation ended by the third month following the final decision .

only about 5 percent allowed sports teams to continue to play for a year or more past the time when a final decision was made .

in most cases the proposal to discontinue the team came from within the athletic department , although college administrations were a common source at schools with smaller athletic programs .

about 60 percent said the proposal originated with the athletic department .

at ncaa division i - a schools , the figure was 83 percent .

for naia and ncaa division i - aaa schools , about one - third of the proposals originated from the school administration .

for example , at naia schools that discontinued a sport , the athletic department initiated 46 percent of the proposals and school administration initiated 38 percent .

similarly , at ncaa division i - aaa schools that discontinued a sport , athletic departments initiated 50 percent of the proposals and the school administration initiated another 36 percent .

most colleges and universities ( 186 of the 307 schools discontinuing a team ) informed the campus community of the possibility of discontinuing the team before the decision was final .

large schools , such as those in ncaa division i - a , were most likely to use a press release to inform the campus community of the possibility of discontinuing the sport .

ncaa division iii schools more often provided the information by mail to individuals or used other means such as meetings with athletes and staff .

most of the schools discontinuing a team ( 64 percent ) informed affected athletes of the decision in the month it was finalized .

about 20 percent of these schools indicated that they informed the affected athletes of the decision during the 3 months preceding the final decision .

about 10 percent of these schools indicated that they informed the affected student athletes of a decision in the months following a final decision .

typically these schools informed the athletes within a month or two .

overall , less than half ( 41 percent ) of schools that discontinued a sports team provided a written explanation .

this varied somewhat by the size of schools' athletic programs .

ncaa division i - a and i - aa schools were least likely to provide a written explanation to affected athletes ; about one - quarter of them did so .

members of ncaa divisions ii and iii and naia were more likely to provide a written explanation ; about half did so .

more than two - thirds of the schools that discontinued intercollegiate athletic teams did so without allowing an appeal of the decision .

the proportion of schools allowing an appeal varied little by size of schools' athletic programs — from a low of 25 percent among division i - aa schools to a high of 36 percent among division i - aaa schools .

several schools described their appeals process as a meeting with the athletic director .

most schools , however , described appeals as meetings with school administrators or organizational units outside the athletics department .

for example , schools allowed student - athletes to appeal to the dean of students , athletic council , the school's president , or the board of trustees .

one respondent described an appeal involving an open forum at which all interested parties could speak ; others provided opportunities for a written appeal .

about 80 percent of the schools ( 170 of the 212 responding schools that discontinued a team ) — aside from division iii schools which are prohibited from providing athletic financial aid — indicated that they allowed their student - athletes to continue receiving aid even though the team was being discontinued .

this was most often the case at ncaa division i schools ; continued aid was available at 90 percent of these schools .

this was less often the case at division ii schools , where 72 percent of schools indicated that student athletes could continue to receive aid .

for about 86 percent of the schools that continued to provide assistance , the aid was available until the athlete graduated .

at most of the rest , the aid was made available for up to 1 year .

among all ncaa and naia schools discontinuing a team , 86 percent assisted affected athletes in transferring to another institution's intercollegiate athletics program .

however , affected athletes who remained enrolled at the school did not necessarily have the opportunity to compete in that sport at the club level .

only 41 percent gave the affected athletes that opportunity .

a majority of the 1,191 school officials reported that they have been able to add one or more teams without discontinuing others .

they used a variety of strategies to do so , including obtaining funding from nonschool sources and finding ways to contain costs .

the four schools we reviewed in depth used strategies that ranged from fundraising to awarding fewer scholarships .

the 693 schools that added one or more intercollegiate athletic teams over the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 period without discontinuing a team did so more often by obtaining additional revenue than by containing costs and reallocating revenue .

sources of funds tended to vary with the size of the intercollegiate athletic program .

as shown in table 8 , ncaa division i - a schools tended to rely on revenue from other sports and from outside sources .

schools with smaller programs , particularly those in ncaa division iii and naia , most often used additional funds from the institution's general fund .

in some cases , they reallocated existing resources by , for example , trimming travel expenses for all teams and using the savings to help fund the new team .

for more detailed information concerning how schools added teams without discontinuing opportunities for athletes on other teams , we visited four colleges and universities to learn how they enhanced their athletic programs .

we selected these four because they represented various sizes of schools and athletic programs , and different regions of the country ( see table 9 ) .

they used combinations of innovative strategies that , as the survey reported , placed greater emphasis on increasing athletic revenue than on cutting costs in other programs .

fundraising strategies included renting out athletic facilities , and cost - containment approaches included trimming administrative expenditures .

though all four schools have unique characteristics , directors from each athletic program articulated factors that were key to facilitating successful program expansion without discontinuing teams .

table 10 lists these factors .

all four schools cited the first three factors and two of the four schools cited the last factor .

one of the athletic directors acknowledged , however , that a “one size fits all” approach may not be feasible and that these approaches may not apply to other schools .

athletic directors also identified several specific revenue - generating approaches for adding teams without discontinuing others .

donations .

the smaller division i - a school revitalized a business relationship with the chief executive officer of a local private firm .

this individual's prominence , in turn , encouraged financial support from the rest of the business community .

substantial donations from fans and locally based corporations also enabled the school to add new teams and build facilities such as a new football stadium , a sports complex with a softball field , a track , a soccer field , and a planned olympic - sized pool .

similarly , at the larger division i - a school , large donations helped the school to add teams and increase the capacity of its football stadium , build a new basketball and ice hockey arena , and upgrade locker facilities .

rental fees .

another revenue - generating strategy was to rent out athletic facilities for other purposes and use the fees to expand the athletic program .

for example , the football stadiums or basketball arenas at the division i - a schools were used to host cultural and entertainment events such as concerts , or to serve as venues for prominent athletic events such as a world cup soccer match .

in addition , the smaller division i - a school took advantage of its proximity to a prominent venue by letting the public use the football stadium parking lot to accommodate overflow event parking ; the annual proceeds of $200,000 were all allocated to the women's program .

at the division iii school , local high school teams rented the football field for practice and special athletic events .

in addition to focusing on raising revenue , one athletic director told us that it was important to maintain flexibility in the use of funds available to the athletic department .

for example , the larger division i - a school's athletic department requires that any earnings in excess of a specified rate of return on endowment funds designated for specific teams be available for general intercollegiate athletic department uses .

this gives the athletic director greater flexibility in allocating resources .

all four schools we visited also took various steps to reduce current or avoid incurring additional expenditures .

these included the following strategies: recruiting most prospective student - athletes via telephone rather than denying requests for some teams to be elevated from club to varsity replacing a retiring full - time faculty member with a coach who also assumed other administrative duties , limiting the size of the football team roster , trimming administrative costs , not awarding the maximum number of scholarships allowed , and limiting team travel outside the region to one trip every 2 to 3 years to minimize travel expenses .

another cost - containment strategy involved establishing partnerships between the school and the local community .

such partnerships reflected the schools' ability to capitalize on the unique characteristics of their geographic location .

for example , the larger division i - a school planned to undertake a cost - sharing project with the city and local school district to build a boathouse on a local river that would accommodate rowing teams from the university , high school , and general public .

the smaller division i - a school teamed with a local hospital offering a nationally recognized sports medicine program .

through the arrangement , the hospital provides free services , including a portable medical facility at sports events and physical screenings for each athlete .

the division iii school formed a partnership with a locally based professional men's basketball team .

under the agreement , the team was able to practice at the school's basketball courts in exchange for funding a new hardwood floor for the courts and renovations to the men's and women's locker rooms .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of education for comment , and it did not provide comments .

we are sending copies of this report to the honorable roderick r. paige , secretary of education ; appropriate congressional committees ; representatives of ncaa and naia ; and other interested parties .

please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 if you or your staff have any questions about this report .

key contacts and staff acknowledgments for this report are listed in appendix ii .

as agreed with your offices , we focused our review of intercollegiate athletics on addressing the following questions: how did the number of men's and women's intercollegiate sports participants and teams at 4-year colleges and universities change in the 2 decades since the1981 – 82 school year ? .

how many colleges and universities added and discontinued teams since the 1992 – 93 school year , and what influenced their most recent decisions to add and discontinue teams ? .

how did colleges and universities make and implement decisions to discontinue intercollegiate sports ? .

when colleges and universities added teams , what types of strategies did they use to avoid discontinuing sports teams or severely reducing their funding ? .

to determine the number of men's and women's intercollegiate sports participants and teams , we gathered participation statistics from the two largest 4-year intercollegiate athletic associations — the national association of intercollegiate athletics ( naia ) and the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) .

some schools were members of both associations .

for example , of the 787 ncaa members and 515 naia members in 1981 – 82 , 117 were dual - membership schools .

by 1998 – 99 , ncaa had 1,041 members and naia had 339 members , 61 of which were dual members as of april 1999 , according to the ncaa .

based on the number of teams and average team sizes , we estimated that these schools accounted for about 3 percent of male and 2 percent of female participants in 1997 – 98 .

because dual - membership schools report their participation statistics to both associations , we counted their statistics only once to avoid double - counting the numbers of teams and participants .

the adjusted participation statistics were used to calculate net change in number of teams , number of participants , and participation rates between 1981 – 82 and 1998 – 99 .

to estimate rates of participation , we divided the total estimated number of participants for both associations by the estimated total number of full - time undergraduates enrolled at all 4-year institutions .

to the extent that an individual student participated in more than one sport , our calculation of the number of participants may be overstated because these individuals are counted more than once in the statistics .

in addition , some 4-year institutions are not members of either naia or ncaa , and they were excluded from our analyses .

although we did not verify the accuracy of the statistics provided by the ncaa and naia , they are the best available data and are widely used by researchers to study intercollegiate athletic participation .

to respond to the other three questions , we developed and administered a questionnaire to gather information from athletic directors at all 4-year colleges and universities that were members of either the naia or ncaa .

we pretested a draft questionnaire at six schools and subsequently revised it based on their comments .

in may 2000 , we mailed the final questionnaire to 1,310 institutions including 326 naia members and 1,040 ncaa members ( both active and provisional members. ) .

this included 56 4-year colleges and universities that were members of both ncaa and naia .

by october 2000 , we had received 1,191 usable questionnaire responses for an overall response rate of 91 percent .

in some cases , however , respondents did not respond to all applicable questions .

the questionnaire asked athletic directors for the total number of women's and men's intercollegiate sports teams added and discontinued during the 1992 – 93 to 1999 – 2000 school - year period .

when calculating the number of new teams added , we excluded teams that had not yet begun participating in intercollegiate competition by the end of the 1999 – 2000 school year .

similarly , when calculating the number of teams discontinued , we excluded teams whose last day of intercollegiate competition was after the end of the 1999 – 2000 school year .

we asked each school that added or discontinued a team to respond to additional questions concerning only the most recently added and most recently discontinued men's and women's sports teams .

we reviewed athletic directors' questionnaire responses for consistency and in many cases contacted them or their staff to resolve inconsistencies , but we did not otherwise verify the information provided in the questionnaire responses .

to identify types of strategies that colleges and universities used to avoid discontinuing sports teams or severely reducing their funding , we used the questionnaire to collect information on how schools paid for new teams .

we analyzed these responses for schools that had added some teams without discontinuing others .

to get some specific examples of how schools augmented their athletic program without eliminating teams or severely reducing their funding , we visited four selected colleges and universities that were ncaa member schools .

we chose these schools in order to achieve variation in a number of characteristics , including geographic diversity , whether the school was public or private , size of the athletic department budget , whether the school awarded athletic scholarships , whether sports were profitable , and whether the school sponsored football .

at each school , we interviewed the athletic director and other staff involved in administering the athletic program and toured the athletic facilities .

in addition to the individuals named above , joel i. grossman , elsie m. picyk , meeta sharma , sharon m. silas , stanley g. stenersen , jason m. suzaka , and james p. wright made key contributions to this report .

gender equity: men's and women's participation in higher education ( gao - 01-128 , dec. 15 , 2000 ) .

interscholastic athletics: school district provide some assistance to uninsured student athletes ( gao / hehs - 00-148 , sep. 12 , 2000 ) .

intercollegiate athletics: comparison of selected characteristics of men's and women's programs ( gao / hehs - 99-3r , june 18 , 1999 ) .

intercollegiate athletics: status of efforts to promote gender equity ( gao / hehs - 97-10 , oct. 25 , 1996 ) .

intercollegiate athletics: compensation varies for selected personnel in athletic departments ( gao / hrd - 92-121 , aug. 19 , 1992 ) .

