the u.s. government has invested hundreds of billions of dollars in developing the most sophisticated weapon systems and technologies in the world .

yet , u.s. weapons and technologies can be exposed to the risk of compromise when they are exported , stolen , lost during combat , or damaged during routine missions .

when u.s. technologies are compromised , it can weaken u.s. military advantage , shorten the expected combat life of a system , and erode the u.s. industrial base's technological competitiveness in the international marketplace .

in an effort to protect u.s. technologies from exploitation , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics in 1999 directed each military service to implement anti - tamper techniques .

program managers are responsible for applying the techniques on individual weapon systems .

the senate report accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 required us to review the department of defense's ( dod ) implementation of the anti - tamper policy .

we conducted our work between february 2003 and august 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

dod increasingly relies on advanced technology in its weapons for effectiveness on the battlefield and actively seeks to include foreign partners in weapon system development and acquisition .

dod's policy also encourages the sale of certain weapons to foreign governments through the foreign military sales program and direct commercial sales made by companies .

while these efforts have the potential to enhance coalition operations and reduce weapons' unit costs , dod has acknowledged that the efforts also risk making u.s. technologies potentially vulnerable to exploitation .

dod reported that an increasing number of countries have reverse engineering capability and actively seek to obtain u.s. technology through various means .

as a method to protect critical technologies , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics directed the military services in 1999 to implement anti - tamper techniques .

while the techniques will not prevent exploitation , they are intended to delay or discourage attempts to reverse engineer critical technologies in a weapon system or develop countermeasures to a system or subsystem .

in 2001 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics designated the air force as the executive agent responsible for implementing dod's anti - tamper policy .

the executive agent oversees an annual budget of about $8 million per year to implement policy and manage anti - tamper technology projects through the air force research laboratory .

dod , in conjunction with the air force research laboratory and the department of energy's sandia national laboratories , also holds periodic information sessions to educate the acquisition community about anti - tamper policy , guidance , and technology developments .

in addition , military services and defense agencies , such as the missile defense agency , have an anti - tamper focal point to coordinate activities .

program managers are responsible for considering anti - tamper measures on any weapon system with critical technologies .

since it is not feasible to protect every technology , program managers are to conduct an assessment to determine if anti - tamper protection is needed .

the first step of the decision process is to determine if the system has critical technologies .

if program managers determine the system has no critical technologies , they are to document that decision according to draft guidance .

program managers of systems that contain critical technologies complete the remaining steps of the process .

based on draft guidance , program managers are to conceptually address how they will implement anti - tamper measures at system development , otherwise known as milestone b. dod's anti - tamper decision process is illustrated in figure 1 .

program managers can obtain assistance on their assessments from government laboratories , contractors , and the intelligence community .

they are required to document the decision to use or not to use anti - tamper techniques in a classified annex of the program protection plan , which is subject to approval from the program's milestone decision authority .

anti - tamper techniques vary depending on the type of protection the system requires .

an example of an anti - tamper technique is software encryption , which scrambles software instructions to make them unintelligible without first being reprocessed through a deciphering technique .

another example is a thin opaque coating placed on microelectronic components , which makes it difficult to extract or dissect the components without great damage .

programs can apply multiple anti - tamper techniques to a critical technology .

for example , a program could encrypt critical data on a microelectronic chip that is also covered with a protective coating .

each layer of protection could act as an obstacle to reverse engineering .

implementation of the anti - tamper policy has been hampered by several factors .

first , identification of critical technology is subject to interpretation and program managers and dod officials can and have arrived at different conclusions about what needs to be protected .

second , applying anti - tamper protection can take time and money , which may compete with a program manager's cost and schedule objectives .

finally , some programs found it difficult to apply anti - tamper techniques when the techniques were not fully developed , and others were unsure which techniques were available to them .

in general , the later anti - tamper techniques are applied , the more difficult and costly it can be to implement .

thus far , support to help program managers address some of these factors has been limited .

dod officials acknowledged that the identification of critical technologies — a basis for determining if anti - tamper protection is needed — is subjective , which can result in different conclusions regarding what needs protection .

dod's program managers anti - tamper handbook defines technology as critical if compromise results in degrading combat effectiveness , shortening the expected combat life of the system , or significantly altering program direction .

while a broad definition allows for flexibility to determine what is critical on individual systems , it may increase the risk that the same technology is protected on some systems but not on others or that different conclusions can be reached on whether programs have critical technologies .

for example: an official from an intelligence agency described a case where two services used the same critical technology , but only one identified the technology as critical and provided protection .

the intelligence agency official speculated that if exploited , knowledge gained from the unprotected system could have exposed the technology on both systems to compromise .

while both systems were ultimately protected , the intelligence agency official stated that the situation could occur again .

officials from the executive committee told us that two program managers stated that their systems had no critical technologies and therefore were not subject to the anti - tamper policy .

both managers were directed by the executive committee to reconsider their determination and apply anti - tamper protection .

as a result , one program is in the process of determining which technologies are critical , and the other program is applying anti - tamper protection as a condition to export the system .

while different conclusions can be reached regarding what is critical , various organizations can serve as a check on a program manager's assessment .

however , no organization has complete information or visibility of all programs across the services and agencies .

for example , the anti - tamper executive agent and the military service focal points do not have full knowledge about which program offices have or have not identified critical technologies or applied anti - tamper protection .

in 2001 , dod attempted to collect such information , but not all programs provided data and dod did not corroborate what was provided to ensure that program officials were consistently assessing critical technologies .

the executive agent stated that there are no plans to update this data .

conducting oversight over program managers' assessments may be difficult because of limited resources .

specifically , the executive agent has two full - time staff and the military service focal points perform duties other than anti - tamper management .

furthermore , according to a military official , program offices that determine they have no critical technologies are not required to obtain the focal points' concurrence .

while other organizations can review a program manager's critical technology assessment as part of various acquisition and export processes , they may not have a full perspective of the assessments made by all programs across the services and the agencies .

for example , different milestone decision authorities only review an individual program manager's critical technology decisions for programs coming under their responsibility .

also , the executive committee may weigh in on the determinations , but it only reviews exports involving stealth technology .

while it was apparent that the systems had critical technologies , some program managers needed assistance to determine which specific technologies were critical .

for example , a program office tasked the contractor to identify critical technologies , and it has worked for months with the contractor to agree upon and finalize a list of critical technologies on the system .

also , an intelligence official , who is available to assist program managers in assessing their systems' criticality , found that some program managers identified too many technologies as critical and that others did not identify all of the systems' critical elements .

in one instance , a program manager indicated that a system had 400 critical technologies , but an intelligence agency narrowed down the list to about 50 that it considered critical .

in another case , a program manager concluded that an entire system was one critical technology , but the intelligence agency recommended that the system's technologies be broken down and identified approximately 15 as critical .

although there are various resources to help program managers identify critical technologies , they may have limited utility , or may not be known , and therefore not requested .

for example , the militarily critical technologies list — cited in guidance as a primary reference for program managers — may not be up to date and may not include all technologies , according to some dod officials .

another resource — the program managers anti - tamper handbook — contains information regarding critical technology determinations , but program managers are not always aware that the handbook exists , in part because it is not widely distributed .

in addition , the defense intelligence agency can conduct an independent assessment of a system's critical elements and technologies , if requested by the program manager .

however , many officials we interviewed were unaware that the agency provides this assistance .

according to a military official , the focal points are available to review a program manager's assessment if requested .

in some instances , program managers may have differing perceptions of what constitutes a critical technology .

according to dod's guidance , critical technologies can be either classified or unclassified .

however , an anti - tamper focal point stated that there is a perception that the anti - tamper policy only applies to classified programs .

we found in one instance that the manager for a weapon program stated that the program did not require anti - tamper protection because it had no critical technologies that were classified .

applying anti - tamper protection takes money and time , which can affect a program manager's cost and schedule objectives .

generally , anti - tamper implementation is treated as an added requirement that is not separately funded for most programs .

program officials acknowledged that anti - tamper costs can be difficult to estimate and isolate because they are intertwined with other costs , such as research and development or production costs .

as we have found in prior work , the later a requirement is identified , the more costly it is to achieve .

most programs we visited experienced or estimated cost increases , and some encountered schedule delays as they attempted to apply anti - tamper techniques .

for example: a program official told us the anti - tamper protection for a program upgrade increased both design and production costs for the receiver unit .

the program official stated that the anti - tamper protection increased total unit cost by an estimated $31 million , or 10 percent .

program officials expressed concern that unit cost increases may affect procurement decisions , particularly for one service , which is the largest acquirer of units and may be unable to purchase the proposed number .

a program office estimated that it needs a budget increase of $56 million , or 10 percent , to fund the desired anti - tamper protections .

officials from that program told us that the existing program budget was inadequate to fund the added anti - tamper requirements .

as a result , the program manager requested , and is waiting for , separate funding before attempting to apply anti - tamper protection to the system .

one program office awarded a contract modification for the design , implementation , and testing of anti - tamper techniques valued at $12.5 million .

initially , the contractor had estimated the anti - tamper costs to be $35 million , but the program office did not approve all techniques suggested by the contractor .

in addition , the contractor estimated that the recurring unit price for anti - tamper protection on future production lots may be $3,372 per unit .

the u.s. government and the contractor have not completed unit price negotiations .

program officials told us that anti - tamper implementation contributed to a 6-month schedule delay .

another program office estimated that $87 million is needed to protect two critical technologies with multiple anti - tamper techniques .

the program office expects that half of the anti - tamper budget will be used to test the techniques .

the anti - tamper protection will only be applied if the system is approved for export .

at that time , program officials will reexamine the anti - tamper cost estimates .

in addition , it may take 5 years to adequately apply the techniques .

officials from an international program stated that , thus far , they have experienced a 60-day schedule delay while they wait for the contractor to estimate the system's anti - tamper cost .

program officials stated that the potential for increased costs and additional schedule delays is high .

program officials and representatives from the executive committee stated that the cost of anti - tamper protection can be significantly higher for an international program for various reasons , including that the u.s. version and the international version of the system may require different anti - tamper techniques .

cost and schedule impacts may also be more significant if the programs are further along in the acquisition process when program offices first attempt to apply anti - tamper protection .

several programs that have experienced significant cost increases or delays were in or beyond the program development phase when they attempted to apply anti - tamper techniques .

for example , when the anti - tamper policy was issued , one program had just obtained approval to begin system development and program officials believed it was too late to implement anti - tamper protection .

as a result , the program received an interim waiver of the anti - tamper policy , and it only plans to apply anti - tamper techniques if the system is approved for export .

while dod has not systematically collected cost data for anti - tamper application across programs , dod officials have stated that it is more cost - effective for programs to consider anti - tamper requirements at program inception , rather than later in the acquisition process .

an official from a program that applied anti - tamper techniques in the production phase stated that ideally a program should identify its anti - tamper needs , including cost and technology , as early as possible .

recent army anti - tamper guidance indicates that programs should receive approval for their preliminary anti - tamper plans at the concept stage .

anti - tamper techniques can be technically difficult to incorporate on a weapon system , such as when the technology is immature .

dod is working to oversee the development of generic anti - tamper techniques and tools to help program managers identify potential techniques , but many of these efforts are still in progress and it is uncertain how they will help program managers .

while program managers want knowledge about generic techniques , they ultimately have to design and incorporate techniques needed for their unique systems to ensure protection of critical technologies and to meet performance objectives .

problems in applying anti - tamper techniques typically arose when the programs were already in design or production or when the techniques were not fully developed or specifically designed for the system .

for example: officials from a program told us that they experienced problems when applying an anti - tamper protective coating .

because the team applying the coating did not coordinate with teams working on other aspects of the system , the problems with the coating were not discovered until just before production .

prior to an initial development test , the program office received a temporary waiver to test the system without the anti - tamper technique because the coating caused malfunctioning .

the program office and its contractor are working to resolve issues with the anti - tamper technique .

a program office was not able to copy anti - tamper techniques used by a similar program and , therefore , attempted to apply a generically developed anti - tamper coating , which resulted in problems .

specifically , the coating caused the system to malfunction , so the program office requested assistance from a national laboratory , but the laboratory's solution melted key components of the system .

therefore , the program office requested that the contractor develop a new coating and other methods of protection for the system .

the contractor's anti - tamper techniques were successfully applied to the system .

one program required advanced anti - tamper techniques to protect miniaturized internal components , but the technology was still in development and not available for immediate application .

according to program officials , research and development of the anti - tamper technique was originally expected to be completed in 2002 and is now estimated to be available in 2006 .

currently , officials are uncertain that the technique will meet their needs because the technique is being generically developed .

in the absence of being able to apply the anti - tamper technique , the program received approval from dod to use procedural protections , whereby u.s. military personnel provide physical security of the system when it is used in foreign countries , which includes locking the unit in a protected room to restrict access by foreign nationals .

dod officials stated that physical security can be less reliable than actual anti - tamper protection .

some program managers told us that they need more help in deciding what anti - tamper techniques they should apply to their individual systems .

to provide information , dod has a classified database that describes current anti - tamper techniques .

an air force research laboratory official stated that they are in the process of updating this database , developing a rating system on the value of various techniques to be included in the database , and creating a classified technology road map that will prioritize the needs for various anti - tamper techniques .

these tools are currently unavailable .

dod and sandia national laboratories also have provided information on anti - tamper techniques and tools to program managers at periodic workshops where attendance is voluntary .

to further assist program managers , dod is in the process of overseeing the development of generic anti - tamper techniques , but it is uncertain to what extent such techniques address a program's specific needs .

in 2001 , dod issued several contracts to encourage anti - tamper technology development .

to date , several defense contractors have provided anti - tamper technology concepts , but according to the executive agent , programs need to further develop the technology before it can be applied to and function on a particular system .

according to air force research laboratory and sandia national laboratories officials , generic anti - tamper techniques can be considered , but program managers have to design and incorporate the techniques needed for their unique systems .

program managers ultimately have to ensure that the techniques protect critical technologies and do not adversely affect performance objectives for the system .

anti - tamper protection is one of the key ways dod can preserve u.s. investment in critical technologies , while operating in an environment of coalition warfare and a globalized defense industry .

however , implementation of the anti - tamper policy , thus far , has been difficult — in part because dod has not developed an implementation strategy to ensure success .

for program managers expected to implement anti - tamper protection , the policy can compete with their goals of meeting cost and schedule objectives , particularly when the anti - tamper requirement is identified late in the system development process .

without providing more oversight and guidance about what needs to be protected and how to do so , dod is at risk of program managers making decisions on individual programs that can result in unprotected technologies and have negative consequences for maintaining the military's overall technological advantage .

we are recommending that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of acquisition , technology , and logistics and the anti - tamper executive agent to take the following five actions to improve oversight and assist program offices in implementing anti - tamper protection on weapon systems .

to better oversee identification of critical technologies for all programs subject to the anti - tamper policy , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics , in coordination with the executive agent and the focal points , to ( 1 ) collect from program managers information they are to develop on critical technology identification and ( 2 ) appoint appropriate technical experts to centrally review the technologies identified for consistency across programs and services .

to better support program managers in the identification of critical technologies , the secretary of defense should direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics , in coordination with the executive agent and the focal points , to ( 1 ) continue to identify available anti - tamper technical resources , ( 2 ) issue updated policy identifying roles and responsibilities of the technical support organizations , and ( 3 ) work with training organizations to ensure training includes practical information on how to identify critical technologies .

to help minimize the impact to program cost and schedule objectives , the secretary of defense should direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics to work with program managers to ensure that the cost and techniques needed to implement anti - tamper protection are identified early in a system's life cycle and to reflect that practice in guidance and decisions .

to maximize the return on investment of dod's anti - tamper technology efforts , the secretary of defense should direct the executive agent to monitor the value of developing generic anti - tamper techniques and evaluate the effectiveness of the tools , once deployed , in assisting program managers to identify and apply techniques on individual programs .

to ensure successful implementation of the anti - tamper policy , the secretary of defense should direct the under secretary for acquisition , technology , and logistics to develop a business case that determines whether the current organizational structure and resources are adequate to implement anti - tamper protection and if not , what other actions are needed to mitigate the risk of compromise of critical technologies .

in written comments on a draft of this report , dod partially concurred with one recommendation and offered an alternative solution , which we did not incorporate .

dod concurred with our remaining four recommendations and provided alternative language for two , which we incorporated as appropriate .

dod's letter is reprinted in the appendix .

dod partially concurred with our recommendation to collect and centrally review the program's critical technology identifications and proposed , instead , that it develop a standardized process to minimize subjectivity , incorporate that process into anti - tamper policy , and monitor subsequent implementation .

as part of its rationale , dod stated that technical representatives in the services currently work with program managers to implement the anti - tamper policy and that quarterly conferences and seminars are ways to disseminate important information to program managers .

we believe dod's proposal is an improvement over the current process given that program managers need more technical support and guidance to identify critical technologies .

however , we do not believe dod's proposal is sufficient because a central review mechanism is needed to ensure consistent critical technology identification across the services and the agencies .

without central visibility over program managers' critical technology identifications , the risk exists that the same technology is protected on some systems but not on others .

knowledge gained from unprotected systems can expose critical technology to compromise , which minimizes the impact of anti - tamper protection .

in addition , dod's dissemination of information at conferences may be limited because conference attendance is voluntary and all program managers may not attend and receive the information .

given the need for consistency and a central review , we did not revise our recommendation .

dod concurred with our remaining recommendations , but offered alternative language for two , which we incorporated .

specifically , for our recommendation aimed at better supporting program managers in identifying critical technologies , dod proposed adding language that underscored the need for identifying technical resources and maintaining up - to - date policies on technical support organizations' roles and responsibilities .

while dod has identified some resources and listed them in several documents , it has not developed a comprehensive list of resources to assist program managers .

therefore , we added to our recommendation that dod continue to identify available anti - tamper technical resources .

for our recommendation that dod evaluate generic anti - tamper techniques , dod proposed language that offered greater flexibility , which seemed reasonable and we incorporated .

to determine how dod implemented the anti - tamper policy , we collected data and interviewed officials from 17 programs , which were identified by dod as having experience with implementing the policy or by us through our review .

twelve of the 17 programs reported that their systems had critical technologies , and most were in various stages of implementing the anti - tamper policy .

from those programs we selected six for an in - depth review .

we conducted structured interviews with the six programs that had identified critical technologies on their systems to understand their experiences with applying anti - tamper techniques .

we selected systems that represented a cross - section of acquisition programs and various types of systems in different phases of development .

to the extent possible , when selecting the programs for an in - depth review , we considered factors that may increase a system's vulnerability and exposure to exploitation .

we also considered whether the system was approved for export by examining the defense security cooperation agency's data on foreign military sales .

in addition , we analyzed available program information from the anti - tamper executive agent and the military focal points to determine programs reporting critical technologies and anti - tamper plans .

dod acknowledged that the information was incomplete , and we did not independently verify the reliability of the data .

we supplemented the program information by interviewing the executive agent , the military focal points , representatives from the intelligence community , dod's executive committee , the department of energy's sandia national laboratories , the air force research laboratory , defense contractors , and an electronic security specialist .

we also discussed dod's anti - tamper policy with current and former officials from the office of the secretary of defense .

to observe dod's training of program managers , we attended a dod anti - tamper information workshop and a quarterly review .

we analyzed pertinent dod policies , directives , instructions , and guidance governing anti - tamper protection on systems .

we also conducted a literature search to obtain information on program protection and industry practices related to anti - tamper measures .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , office of management and budget .

we will make copies available to others upon request .

in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 .

others making key contributions to this report were anne - marie lasowski , yelena t. harden , gregory k. harmon , and holly ciampi .

