i am pleased to be here to discuss the report we are releasing today on the need for improved oversight of coal mine operator black lung insurance .

the federal government's black lung disability trust fund ( trust fund ) finances medical and cash assistance to certain coal miners who have been totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis ( also known as black lung disease ) .

black lung benefits are generally to be paid by responsible coal mine operators .

however , the trust fund pays benefits in certain circumstances , including in cases where no responsible mine operator can be identified or when the liable mine operator does not pay .

as we reported in may 2018 , the trust fund faces financial challenges .

its expenditures have consistently exceeded revenue and the trust fund has essentially borrowed with interest from the department of the treasury's ( treasury ) general fund almost every year since 1979 , which was its first complete fiscal year .

in fiscal year 2019 , the trust fund borrowed about $1.9 billion to cover its expenditures , according to department of labor ( dol ) officials .

in june 2019 , we reported preliminary observations to this committee that coal operator bankruptcies were further straining trust fund finances because , in some cases , responsibility for benefit payments was transferred from the bankrupt operator to the trust fund .

this may occur , for instance , when the amount of collateral the department of labor ( dol ) requires from a self - insured coal operator does not fully cover the operator's benefit responsibility should the operator become insolvent .

trust fund revenue is primarily obtained through a tax on coal produced and sold domestically , which we refer to in this report as the coal tax .

the coal tax rate has varied over the years .

from 1986 through 2018 , the coal tax rate was $1.10 per ton of underground - mined coal and $0.55 per ton of surface - mined coal , up to 4.4 percent of the sales price .

in 2019 , the rate of the coal tax decreased to $0.50 cents and $0.25 cents per ton of underground - mined and surface - mined coal , respectively , up to 2 percent of the sales price .

in 2020 , the rate of the coal tax increased to pre - 2019 levels .

however , it is scheduled to decrease again beginning in 2021 .

with less revenue from the coal tax , the trust fund will likely need to borrow more from treasury's general fund .

my statement summarizes the findings from the report we are releasing today , which addresses: ( 1 ) how coal mine operator bankruptcies have affected the trust fund , and ( 2 ) how dol managed coal mine operator insurance to limit financial risk to the trust fund .

in summary , we found: three self - insured coal mine operator bankruptcies from 2014 through 2016 transferred about $865 million in benefit responsibility to the trust fund , according to dol estimates .

several other self - insured operator bankruptcies have occurred since 2016 that may also affect the trust fund .

commercial black lung insurance helps limit trust fund exposure to coal operator bankruptcies .

dol's limited oversight of coal mine operator insurance has exposed the trust fund to considerable financial risk .

dol began implementing a new self - insurance process in july 2019 , but it lacks key enforcement procedures that could help to prevent the reoccurrence of past oversight deficiencies .

dol does not monitor the commercial - insurance policies purchased by coal mine operators to secure their benefit liabilities .

we made three recommendations , and dol agreed with them: to establish procedures for self - insurance renewals ; to establish procedures for coal operator appeals ; and to develop a process to monitor whether commercially - insured operators maintain adequate and continuous coverage .

for our report , we analyzed bloomberg data and consulted dol to identify coal operators that filed for bankruptcy from 2014 through 2016 ; analyzed national council on compensation insurance ( ncci ) data and dol documentation on commercially - insured and self - insured coal mine operators ; and examined workers' compensation insurance practices in four states — kentucky , pennsylvania , west virginia , and wyoming — to identify relevant practices that could inform dol's administration of coal operator insurance at the federal level .

we also interviewed dol officials , coal mine operators , insurance company representatives , and officials from the national mining association , ncci , national council of self - insurers , and the american academy of actuaries , among others .

a more detailed explanation of our methodology is available in our report .

the work upon which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

of the eight coal mine operator bankruptcies we identified , three resulted in a transfer of estimated benefit liability from the coal operator to the trust fund and five did not , according to dol .

figure 1 shows how many operators were self - insured or commercially insured at the time of bankruptcy , and if responsibility for benefits was shifted from the bankrupt operator to the trust fund .

federal law generally requires coal mine operators to secure their black lung benefit liability .

a self - insured coal mine operator assumes the financial responsibility for providing black lung benefits to its eligible employees by paying claims as they are incurred .

operators are allowed to self - insure if they meet certain dol conditions .

for instance , operators applying to self - insure must obtain collateral in the form of an indemnity bond , deposit or trust , or letter of credit in an amount deemed necessary and sufficient by dol to secure their liability .

operators that do not self - insure are generally required to obtain coverage from commercial insurance companies , state workers' compensation insurance funds , or other entities authorized under state law to insure workers' compensation .

from 2014 through 2016 , three self - insured coal mine operator bankruptcies resulted in a transfer of $865 million of benefit liabilities from the coal operators to the trust fund , according to dol estimates ( see table 1 ) .

dol estimates for how these bankruptcies will affect the trust fund have considerably increased from what dol had previously reported .

in june 2019 , we reported that dol estimated that between $313 million to $325 million in benefit liabilities would transfer to the trust fund as a result of these bankruptcies .

in january 2020 , however , dol provided updated estimates stating that $865 million in benefit liabilities would transfer to the trust fund as a result of these bankruptcies .

according to dol , their estimates increased , among other reasons , to account for higher black lung benefit award rates that occurred from fiscal years 2016 through 2019 , and higher medical treatment cost inflation in recent years .

additionally , dol's prior estimate for the patriot coal ( patriot ) bankruptcy did not account for future claims and their effect on the trust fund .

the amount of collateral dol required from these operators to self - insure did not fully cover their estimated benefit liabilities .

when this occurs , benefit liabilities in excess of the collateral can be transferred to the trust fund .

for example , the collateral dol required from alpha natural resources ( alpha ) was about $12 million and approximately $494 million of estimated benefit liability transferred to the trust fund , according to dol .

the three other self - insured coal mine operator bankruptcies we identified did not affect the trust fund .

specifically , arch coal , peabody energy , and walter energy were also self - insured operators , but dol officials said that their federal black lung benefit liabilities were assumed by a reorganized company or by a purchaser , and therefore did not transfer to the trust fund .

insurance contracts or policies to secure operators' benefit liabilities are required by law to include a provision that insolvency or bankruptcy of an operator does not release the insurer from the obligation to make benefit payments .

additionally , state insurance regulation , insurer underwriting , risk management practices , and state guaranty funds help to protect the trust fund from having to assume responsibility for paying black lung benefits on behalf of bankrupt coal operators .

thus , by being commercially insured , the two operators we identified that filed for bankruptcy between 2014 and 2016 — energy future holdings and xinergy ltd — did not affect the trust fund , according to dol ( see fig .

1 ) .

since 2016 , several other self - insured operators have also filed for bankruptcy , according to dol officials , including cambrian coal , cloud peak energy , murray energy , and westmoreland coal .

dol officials said that about $17.4 million in estimated black lung benefit liability will transfer to the trust fund as a result of westmoreland coal's bankruptcy .

given the uncertainty of the bankruptcy process in terms of whether liabilities will or will not transfer to the trust fund , however , dol officials said that they could not speculate on how these other bankruptcies may affect the trust fund .

in overseeing coal mine operator self - insurance in the past , dol did not estimate future benefit liability when setting collateral or regularly review operators to monitor their changing financial conditions .

dol regulations require that collateral be obtained from operators in an amount deemed necessary and sufficient to secure the payment of the operators' liability .

to determine collateral amounts under the former process , agency procedures stated that an operator's net worth be assessed by reviewing , among other factors , the operator's audited financial statements and black lung claims information .

the amount of collateral was to be equal to 3 , 5 , or 10 years of the operator's annual black lung benefit payments made at the time of a coal operator's self - insurance application depending on its net worth .

specifically , if net worth was $1 billion or greater , agency procedures set collateral equal to 3 years of benefit payments .

if net worth ranged from $500 million to $1 billion , collateral was equal to 5 years of benefit payments .

if net worth ranged from $10 million to $500 million , dol set collateral equal to 10 years of benefit payments .

agency procedures did not permit operators with net worth less than $10 million to self - insure .

dol's former process for determining collateral did not routinely consider potential future claims for which an operator could be responsible .

the agency periodically reauthorized coal operators to self - insure by reviewing an operator's most recent audited financial statement and claims information , among other things .

dol prepared memos documenting these reviews , and communicated with coal operators about whether their financial circumstances warranted increasing or decreasing their collateral .

regulations state that dol may adjust the amount of collateral required from self - insured operators when experience or changed conditions so warrant , but regular monitoring of self - insured operators was not conducted .

in reviewing the most recent reauthorization memos for each of the self - insured operators , we found that while some of these operators had been reauthorized more recently , others had not been in decades .

one operator in particular had not been reauthorized since 1988 .

there were no written procedures that specified how often reauthorizations should occur after an operator's initial 18-month reauthorization .

dol has other tools available to mitigate financial losses to the trust fund .

these include revoking an operator's ability to self - insure ; fining mine operators for operating without insurance ; and placing liens on operator assets .

based on our review of agency documentation , however , we found instances when officials did not use these tools to protect the trust fund , or were hindered from doing so because of an operator's ongoing appeal or bankruptcy .

james river .

in september 2001 , dol required $5 million in additional collateral from james river coal ( james river ) , which would have increased its collateral from $0.4 million to $5.4 million .

although dol did not receive the additional collateral , it did not revoke the operator's authority to self - insure , which is a potential option under agency regulations .

further , dol had not reauthorized james river at any point from august 2001 until it filed for bankruptcy in april 2014 .

if james river's ability to self - insure had been revoked , dol could have potentially prevented the trust fund from being responsible for claims based on a miner's employment from 2001 through 2016 , when james river liquidated .

additionally , if the operator had been unable to obtain commercial insurance , the agency could have potentially fined the operator for each day it operated without insurance .

instead , no action was taken during these years and estimated benefit liability of $141 million was shifted to the trust fund , according to dol .

dol officials stated that they do not have records explaining why james river did not provide the additional collateral or why they did not revoke its authority to self - insure .

patriot .

in august 2014 , dol required an additional $65 million in collateral from patriot , increasing its collateral from $15 million to $80 million .

patriot appealed this decision and , in the 8 months that followed before patriot filed for bankruptcy in may 2015 , dol did not obtain additional collateral , or revoke patriot's ability to self - insure because the appeal was still pending .

dol officials said they would not typically revoke an operator's authority to self - insure during an ongoing appeal .

as a result , dol was hindered from using this enforcement tool .

liens on operator assets can be an effective tool to protect the trust fund if an operator defaults on its benefit liability , but dol officials said they are hindered from using this tool if an operator files for bankruptcy .

dol can place a lien on a coal operator's assets under federal law if they refuse the demand to pay the black lung benefit payments for which they are liable .

in the event of bankruptcy or insolvency , federal law states that the lien imposed shall be treated in the same manner as a lien for taxes due and owing to the united states under certain laws .

however , dol officials said that operators rarely stop paying benefits until after they file for bankruptcy .

once a bankruptcy occurs , dol officials said that they are generally prevented by the court from placing a lien and taking an operator's assets in lieu of payment of current and future benefit liability .

under bankruptcy law , dol officials said that they have no special status over other creditors with outstanding financial claims .

dol officials said that obtaining sufficient collateral is a better way to protect the trust fund .

in july 2019 , dol began implementing a new process for coal mine operator self - insurance that may help to address some past deficiencies , if implemented effectively .

among other things , dol will require operators to periodically submit financial and claims information , including an actuarial estimate of the operator's current and future benefit liability .

dol plans to use this information to assess the insolvency risk of each operator .

depending on the results of their analysis , dol plans to categorize the risk - level of each applicant as low , medium , or high .

dol will then set the amount of collateral required to self - insure by linking the operator's risk category to a corresponding percentage of the operator's actuarial estimated benefit liability .

dol policies state that they would require a high - risk operator to secure with collateral 90 percent of estimated benefit liability , a medium - risk operator to secure 45 percent , and a low - risk operator to secure 15 percent .

however , in february 2020 , dol officials said they plan to revise these percentages to 100 percent , 85 percent , and 70 percent for high - risk , medium - risk , and low - risk operators , respectively .

coal mine operators that are already authorized to self - insure will be required to submit , among other things , an annual renewal application .

dol plans to use this information to update their insolvency risk analysis .

if an operator's risk category changes ( eg , from low - to medium - risk ) , dol plans to send a form to the operator requiring an additional amount or type of collateral .

upon receiving the completed form , and proof that the collateral has been obtained , dol stated that they will notify the operator that its authority to self - insure has been reauthorized .

dol's new self - insurance process made important changes , but overlooked other key internal control improvements that are needed to protect the financial interests of the trust fund .

dol's new requirements for setting collateral and for the more frequent review of self - insured operators are key components of internal controls , which call for agency management to implement control activities through policy .

however , dol's new self - insurance procedures do not specify ( 1 ) the duration of an operator's self - insurance authority , ( 2 ) the time frames for submitting renewal applications and supporting documentation , and ( 3 ) the conditions under which an operator's self - insurance authority would not be renewed .

our report recommends that dol implement procedures for coal mine operator self - insurance renewal that clarifies how long an operator is authorized to self - insure ; when an operator must submit its renewal application and supporting documentation ; and the conditions under which an operator's self - insurance authority would not be renewed .

dol agreed with this recommendation and stated that it will ensure letters granting or renewing self - insurance authority will inform operators that their authorization expires in one year and that they must submit renewal information three months in advance of the expiration date .

dol staff are hindered from taking enforcement action during an operator's ongoing appeal , as previously mentioned .

dol policies state that an operator may request reconsideration if its self - insurance application has been denied or if it believes the collateral required by dol is too high to secure its benefit liability .

however , dol lacks procedures that specify , among other things , the length of time that operators have to submit supporting information .

further , dol does not specify a goal for how much time dol appeals decisions should take .

for example , in october 2015 , dol recommended revoking murray energy's ( murray ) authority to self - insure due to deteriorating financial conditions .

murray appealed this decision , and dol officials said they postponed responding to the appeal until their new self - insurance process was implemented .

however , murray filed for bankruptcy in october 2019 and dol had not revoked its authority to self - insure or requested additional collateral because murray's appeal was still pending and dol was still evaluating how much collateral it would require from the operator under its new self - insurance process .

our report recommends that dol develop and implement procedures for self - insured coal mine operator appeals that identify time lines for self - insured operators to submit documentation supporting their appeals and that identify a goal for how much time dol should take to make appeals decisions .

dol agreed with this recommendation and stated that they will ensure letters denying self - insurance will inform operators that they have a 30-day appeal period ( limited to one extension ) , and that dol has set a goal of resolving all appeals within 90 days of the denial letter .

we found that dol does not monitor coal mine operators that do not self - insure and , thus , must commercially insure their federal black lung liabilities to make certain they maintain adequate and continuous coverage as required by law .

in the absence of effective dol monitoring , we evaluated the potential risk that uninsured operators could pose to the trust fund .

specifically , in examining the 13 largest coal mine operators that do not self - insure , we found that some insurers erred in reporting black lung policies and in one instance an operator did not have adequate coverage .

we found six operators ( parent or subsidiary ) that were not insured for the entire 3-year period from 2016 through 2018 , according to our review of dol data .

when we discussed our findings with dol , agency officials had to research each operator individually and in some cases contact the operator or their insurer to find out whether or not they had been covered .

dol concluded that these entities were insured .

however , the insurers had not properly reported the federal black lung endorsement on new policies or subsequent renewals , in addition to other reporting issues .

one of these six operators also had , inadvertently , not maintained adequate commercial coverage for its mining operations in texas , and had not self - insured those operations .

in this instance , the operator obtained an excess loss policy that only pays claims once they exceed a high threshold and , therefore , is not sufficient by itself to secure the payment of the operator's benefit liability .

designing processes to achieve agency objectives and respond to risks is a principle of effective internal controls .

without a process to monitor operator compliance with program insurance requirements , dol risks not identifying a lapse or cancellation of operator coverage .

this could result in the trust fund having to assume responsibility for paying benefits that would otherwise have been paid by an insurer .

our report recommends that dol should develop and implement a process to monitor operator compliance with commercial insurance requirements and periodically evaluate the effectiveness of this process .

dol agreed with this recommendation and stated that it will modify existing computer systems to identify lapses or cancellations of commercial insurance coverage , and require operators identified as having lapsed or cancelled coverage to obtain or provide proof of coverage within 30 days .

chairwoman adams , ranking member byrne , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact cindy brown barnes at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are alicia puente cackley , ( director ) , blake ainsworth ( assistant director ) , patrick ward ( assistant director ) , justin dunleavy ( analyst - in - charge ) , alex galuten , rosemary torres lerma , olivia lopez , scott mcnulty , and almeta spencer .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

