federal agencies spend billions of tax dollars each year to buy services ranging from clerical support and consulting services , to information technology services such as network support , to the management and operation of government facilities such as national laboratories .

the department of defense ( dod ) is , by far , the government's largest purchaser of services , acquiring about $93 billion in services in fiscal year 2002 .

however , our work , and the work of dod's inspector general , has found that this spending could be managed more efficiently .

congressional concern over dod services acquisition has been spurred by the contrasting experience of the private sector , depicted by our recent work .

a number of leading companies have achieved significant savings — without any reduction in services — by adopting a strategic approach involving the implementation of a variety of best practices .

using a strategic approach enabled the companies to transform their processes and thus get the best value in procuring services .

recognizing that these experiences could help reform dod , the congress included provisions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 to achieve significant savings through improved management and oversight of services procurement .

specifically , section 801 of this law requires dod to establish ( 1 ) a management structure designed to provide visibility and establish accountability for services contracts , ( 2 ) a program review structure for major services acquisitions , and ( 3 ) an automated system to collect and analyze data to support management decisions in contracting for services .

one of the aims of these requirements is to promote the use of best commercial practices , such as centralizing key functions , promoting strategic orientation , improving personnel skills and capabilities , conducting spending analyses , rationalizing supplier bases , and expanding the use of cross - functional , commodity - based teams .

in this report , we evaluate dod's implementation of the requirements of section 801 .

to conduct this work , we interviewed acquisition officials in the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the military departments .

we also reviewed policy memoranda and other documents pertaining to dod's implementation of section 801 requirements .

more information is contained in our scope and methodology section .

dod is historically the federal government's largest purchaser of services .

between 2001 and 2002 , dod's reported spending for services contracting increased almost 18 percent , to about $93 billion .

in addition to the sizeable sum of dollars involved , dod contracts for a wide and complex range of services , such as professional , administrative , and management support ; construction , repair , and maintenance ; information technology ; research and development ; medical care ; operation of government - owned facilities ; and transportation , travel , and relocation .

in each of the past 5 years , dod has spent more on services than on supply and equipment goods ( which includes weapon systems and other military items ) ( see fig .

1 ) .

despite this huge investment in buying services , our work — and the work of the dod inspector general — has found that dod's spending on services could be more efficient and more effectively managed .

in fact , we have identified dod's overall contract management as a high - risk area , most recently in our performance and accountability and high - risk series issued this past january .

responsibility for acquiring services is spread among individual military commands , weapon system program offices , or functional units in various defense organizations , with limited visibility or control at the dod - or military - department level .

our reports on dod's contract management have recommended that dod use a strategic approach to improve acquisition of services .

our work since 2000 at leading companies found that taking a more strategic approach to acquiring services enabled each company to stay competitive , reduce costs , and in many cases improve service levels .

pursuing such a strategic approach clearly pays off .

studies have reported some companies achieving savings of 10 to 20 percent of their total procurement costs , which include savings in the procurement of services .

these leading companies reported achieving or expecting to achieve billions of dollars in savings as a result of taking a strategic approach to procurement .

for example , table 1 summarizes the savings reported by the companies we studied most recently .

the companies we studied did not follow exactly the same approach in the manner and degree to which they employed specific best practices , but the bottom line results were the same — substantial savings and , in many cases , service improvements .

figure 2 elaborates on the four broad principles and practices of leading companies that are critical to successfully carrying out the strategic approach .

these principles and practices largely reflect a common sense approach , yet they also represent significant changes in the management approach companies use to acquire services .

companies that have been successful in transforming procurement generally begin with a corporate decision to pursue a more strategic approach to acquiring services , with senior management providing the direction , vision , and clout necessary to obtain initial buy - in and acceptance of procurement reengineering .

when adopting a strategic , best - practices approach for changing procurement business processes , companies begin with a spend analysis to examine purchasing patterns to see who is buying what from whom .

by arming themselves with this knowledge , they identify opportunities to leverage their buying power , reduce costs , and better manage their suppliers .

companies also institute a series of structural , process , and role changes aimed at moving away from a fragmented acquisition process to a more efficient and effective corporate process .

these changes include adjustments to procurement management structure and processes such as instituting companywide purchasing of specific services ; reshaping a decentralized process to follow a more coordinated , strategic approach ; and increasing the involvement of the corporate procurement organization , including working across units to help identify service needs , select providers , and better manage contractor performance .

dod has made limited progress in its overall implementation of section 801 , particularly with respect to establishing a management structure to oversee a more strategic approach to the acquisition of services , as envisioned by the legislative history of this provision .

while dod's leaders express support for a strategic approach in this area , they have not translated that support into broad - based reforms .

the experience of leading companies offers particularly relevant insights into the nature of long - term changes in management structure and business processes .

long - term changes will be needed if the military departments and the defense agencies are to be successful in adopting a more strategic approach to acquiring services and achieving substantial savings and other benefits .

private sector experience demonstrates the need to change how services are acquired — by modernizing management structure and business processes — and setting performance goals , including savings , and establishing accountability for achieving them .

such changes are needed to move dod and the military departments from a fragmented approach to doing business to one that is more coordinated and strategically oriented .

the end goal is to institute a departmentwide perspective — one that will ensure that the organization is getting the best overall value .

industry has found that several ingredients are critical to the successful adoption of a strategic approach .

for example , senior management must provide continued support for common services acquisitions processes beyond the initial impetus .

another example is to cut across traditional organizational boundaries that contributed to the fragmented approach by restructuring procurement management and assigning a central or corporate procurement organization greater responsibility and authority for strategic planning and oversight of the companies' service spending .

companies also involve business units in this coordinated approach by designating commodity managers to oversee key services and making extensive use of cross - functional commodity teams to make sure they have the right mix of knowledge , technical expertise , and credibility .

finally , companies extensively use metrics to measure total savings and other financial and nonfinancial benefits , to set realistic goals for improvement , and to document results over time .

to date , dod has not significantly transformed its management structure in response to the 2002 national defense authorization requirements , and its crosscutting effort to improve oversight will focus on only a portion of military department spending for services .

specifically , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and each of the military departments now have policies in place for a management structure and a process for reviewing major ( i.e. , large - dollar or program - critical ) services acquisitions for adherence to performance - based , competition and other contracting requirements .

 ( see app .

i for a descriptive comparison of dod and military department policies. ) .

dod modeled its review process for acquiring services after the review process for acquiring major weapons systems ; the policy is intended to elevate high - dollar value services to the same level of importance and oversight .

dod intends that the new program review structure provide oversight before it commits the government to a major acquisition to ensure that military departments and defense agencies' buying strategies are adequately planned , performance - based , and competed .

the new policy similarly establishes a high - dollar threshold of $500 million or more for selecting which service acquisitions must move forward from lower - level field activities , commands , and program offices to the military department headquarters ( and possibly to dod ) for advance review and approval .

we expect that this new policy will lead to very few service acquisition strategies and a small portion of overall service spending being subjected to central oversight at the military department headquarters level or at dod headquarters .

dod officials acknowledge that most service acquisitions cost less than the $500 million threshold required for headquarters - level reviews , and the total value of the few contract actions likely to be forwarded under that threshold will amount to a small portion of dod's total spending on services , which is approaching $100 billion each year .

dod's review criteria indicate that the central reviews that do take place will be focused on approving individual acquisitions rather than coordinating smaller , more fragmented requirements for service contracts to leverage buying power and assessing how spending could be more effective .

our discussions with procurement policy officials in the various military departments confirmed that they expect no more than a few acquisitions to be reviewed at the dod or military department headquarters level each year .

while the new process complies with the act's requirements to improve oversight of major service acquisitions , it has not led to centralized responsibility , visibility , or accountability over the majority of contracting for services .

in response to the legislative requirement to develop an automated system to collect and analyze data , dod has started a spend analysis pilot that views spending from a dod - wide perspective and identifies large - scale savings opportunities .

however , the scope of the pilot is limited to a test of a few service categories .

thirteen months after congress directed that dod create an automated system to support management decisions for the acquisition of services , the deputy secretary of defense tasked a new team to carry out the pilot .

in may 2003 , dod hired a vendor to support the team by performing an initial spend analysis and developing strategic sourcing business cases for only 5 to 10 service categories .

efforts to extract data for the pilot spend analysis will be restricted to information taken from centrally available databases on services contract actions ( excluding research and development ) in excess of $25,000 , a limitation due to the 90-day time frame established for completing the spend analysis .

pilot projects and associated efforts will be completed by september 2004 , so it is too early to tell how dod will make the best use of the results .

even though dod's senior leadership called for dramatic changes to current practices for acquiring services about 2 years ago , and proposed various initiatives and plans to transform business processes , dod's early initiatives have not moved forward quickly , expanded or broadened in scope , or been well coordinated .

the experience of leading companies we studied in our prior work indicates that successfully addressing service acquisition challenges requires concerted action and sustained top - level attention , efforts that must be reinforced by a sound strategic plan .

moreover , section 801 required dod to issue guidance on how the military departments should carry out their management responsibilities for services contracting .

to date , the only guidance that dod has issued involves review of individual major service acquisitions for adherence to performance - based , competition , and other acquisition strategy requirements .

dod has not established a strategic plan that provides a road map for transforming its services contracting process and recognizes the integrated nature of services contracting management problems and their related solutions .

air force , army , and navy headquarters procurement organizations have initiatives underway to better manage the acquisition of services , but they are in the early stages of development and unconnected to each other .

limited progress has taken place on key efforts to coordinate responsibility and leverage purchasing power , even in the pursuit of key goals such as reducing unnecessary spending and redirecting funds to higher priorities such as modernization and readiness .

information we obtained on the military departments' early efforts suggests that military department leaders understand the value of a strategic approach in this area , but they have not yet translated that understanding into broad - based reforms to meet comprehensive performance goals , including savings .

although the air force , army , and navy initiatives that follow seek to include the basic principles of the framework used by leading companies when they acquire services , the initiatives are still under study , or in the early stages of implementation .

at a january 2003 symposium , air force participants from headquarters and major commands discussed a vision for transforming contracting for services and taking a strategic , departmentwide approach based on commercial best practices .

at this event , the deputy assistant secretary for contracting called for rethinking business processes , noting that the air force spends over half of its discretionary dollars on services , yet most of the attention goes to managing goods .

to move forward on this initiative , staff from acquisition headquarters and major commands are to work together on an 18-month project to capture , analyze , and use spend analysis data and develop an air force strategic sourcing plan for services acquisitions .

another key initiative participants considered was the establishment by the air force of a management council for services contracting .

no time frame has been set for when the air force would activate such a council .

however , the deputy assistant secretary's vision for adopting a best practices approach to contracting for services calls for radically transforming business processes within 5 years and establishing cross - functional , air force - wide councils to consolidate market knowledge and carry out strategic sourcing projects .

in july 2003 , in the first such effort to take advantage of its overall buying power , the air force formed a commodity council responsible for developing departmentwide strategies for buying and managing information technology products .

according to an air force official involved with this council , the lessons learned and best practices of this council will be carried forward to other commodity councils that will be established by the air force .

another category that the air force is considering for a future commodity council is construction services .

in 2001 , top army leadership approved a consolidation of army contracting activities that focuses on the areas of installation management and general - purpose information technology .

this initiative covers only a portion of the army's service spending , and it involved the establishment of the army contracting agency in october 2002 to centralize much installation - support contracting under a corporate management structure and called for consolidating similar and common use requirements to reduce costs .

this central agency will be fully responsible for army - wide purchases of general information technology and electronic commerce purchases and for large installation management contracting actions over $500,000 that were previously decentralized .

the agency's key anticipated benefit will be its ability to centralize large buys that are common army - wide , while continuing to provide opportunities for small businesses to win contracts .

to have an early demonstration of the value of this approach , the agency plans an october 2003 spend analysis of several services that could offer easy savings , including security guards , furniture refinishing , telecommunications , building demolition , and photocopying .

the agency has yet to set a time frame for carrying out the consolidated purchases , which could be national or regional in scope .

the agency's organizational structure assigns regional executive responsibility for managing services contracting , and includes a high - level council in headquarters for overseeing more strategic approaches to buying army installation support services .

the navy is considering pilot tests of a more strategic approach for services spending in a few categories .

senior navy leadership began a study in september 2002 to recommend business process changes in the navy's acquisition program .

a navy official conducting the preliminary spend analysis of navy purchasing data estimated opportunities to save $115 million through taking a more strategic , coordinated approach to buying $1.5 billion in support services ( engineering ; logistics ; program , general , and facilities management ; and training ) .

the navy official said that , sometime this year , senior navy leadership is expected to approve the study's recommendations to pilot - test consolidated acquisition for support services .

to lead these innovative management approaches , the secretary of the navy earlier this year approved a new position for a director of program analysis and business transformation within the office of the deputy assistant secretary for acquisition management .

a navy procurement policy official involved with the ongoing effort told us that the navy's pilot tests are likely to be affected by dod's spend analysis pilot that is testing dod - wide strategic sourcing strategies for 5 to 10 services .

since navy procurement policy officials are also involved in dod's pilot , he anticipates having to coordinate the navy's pilot as both initiatives move forward .

a strategic plan could help dod ensure that these early initiatives successfully lead to lower costs and improved acquisition of services .

such a plan would identify , coordinate , and prioritize these initiatives ; integrate the military departments' services contracting management structures ; ensure comprehensive coverage of services spending ; promote and support collaboration ; and establish accountability , transparency , and visibility for tracking performance and achieving results .

however , some of the procurement policy officials we interviewed have expressed skepticism that broad - based reforms to foster a more strategic approach are necessary or beneficial , or that dod could fully adopt private sector strategies in view of its current decentralized acquisition environment and other constraints .

given the federal government's critical budget challenges , dod's transformation of its business processes is more important than ever if the department is to get the most from every dollar spent .

senior leadership has for 2 years expressed a commitment to improving the department's acquisition of services .

nonetheless , dod and the military departments remain in the early stages of developing new business processes for the strategic acquisition of services .

dod's leaders have made a commitment to adopt best practices and make dramatic changes .

translating that commitment into specific management improvements will allow dod to take on the more difficult tasks of developing a reliable and accurate picture of spending on services across dod ; determining what structures , mechanisms , and metrics can be employed to foster a strategic approach ; and tailoring those structures to meet dod's unique requirements .

given that dod's spending on services contracts is approaching $100 billion annually , the potential benefits for enhancing visibility and control of services spending are significant .

to achieve significant improvements across the range of services dod purchases , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics to work with the military departments and the defense agencies to further strengthen the management structure .

this structure , established in response to section 801 , should promote the use of best commercial practices such as centralizing key functions , conducting spend analyses , expanding the use of cross - functional commodity teams , achieving strategic orientation , achieving savings by reducing purchasing costs and other efficiencies , and improving service contracts' performance and outcomes .

we also recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary to develop a strategic plan with guidance for the military departments and the defense agencies on how to carry out their responsibilities for managing acquisition of services .

key elements of this guidance should address improving knowledge of services spending by collecting and analyzing data about services procurements across dod and within military departments and defense agencies , promoting collaboration across dod and within military departments and defense agencies by establishing cross - functional teams to carry out coordinated purchasing of services , and establishing strategic savings and performance goals , measuring results , and ensuring accountability by assigning high - level responsibility for monitoring those results .

in commenting on a draft of this report , dod concurred in principle with the recommendation to further strengthen the management structure established in response to section 801 and partially concurred with the recommendation to develop a plan with guidance to the military departments on carrying out their strategic and centralized responsibilities for the acquisition of services .

dod expects that various initiatives being pursued to enhance services acquisition management structures and processes — such as the management structure for reviewing individual service acquisitions valued at more than $500 million and the spend analysis pilot assessed in this report — will ultimately provide the information with which to decide what overarching joint management and business process changes are necessary .

dod cites these initiatives as demonstrating a full commitment to improving acquisition of services .

dod further states that these efforts — such as collecting and enhancing data , performing spend analyses , and establishing commodity teams — are similar to industry best practices — and have already had significant impacts on the manner in which services are acquired .

we agree that the initiatives are positive steps in the right direction to improve acquisition of services .

however , it is too early to tell if these early efforts will lead dod and the military departments to make the type of long - term changes that are necessary to achieve significant results in terms of savings and service improvements .

moreover , according to dod , factors such as unusual size , organizational complexity , and restrictive acquisition environment mean that dod cannot adhere strictly to the commercial best practices described in the report .

yet , none of the companies we studied followed exactly the same approach in employing specific best practices .

likewise , dod and the military departments need to work together and determine how these practices can be adapted to fit their unique needs , challenges , and complexities .

significant bottom line results in terms of savings and service improvements are likely with adequate follow - through on the various initiatives .

dod's strategic plan should be explicit about how and when appropriate follow - through actions will take place so that significant , long - lasting performance improvements and cost savings are achieved .

dod's comments can be found in appendix ii .

section 801 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2002 requires dod to establish a management structure and a program review structure and to collect and analyze data on purchases in order to improve management of the acquisition of services .

as described in the legislative history , these requirements provide tools with which the department can promote the use of best commercial practices to reform dod's services procurement management and oversight and to achieve significant savings .

section 801 also directed us to assess dod's compliance with the requirements and to report to congressional armed services committees on the assessment .

to conduct this work , we interviewed officials — including those responsible for defense procurement and acquisition policy , and acquisition resources and analysis — in the office of the secretary of defense and the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics .

we also interviewed officials responsible for service acquisition policy and management in the air force , the army , and the navy .

we interviewed both dod's and the various services' officials about policy memoranda and related actions taken to implement section 801 requirements , including the evolving nature of implementation actions over several months .

we also discussed comparisons between dod's and the military departments' services acquisition management reforms and leading companies' best practices for taking a strategic approach , which were identified in our previous work and promoted by the legislation .

to assess compliance with the policy and guidance requirements for the management and program review structures , we reviewed internal memoranda and policy documents issued by the under secretary of defense and the military departments .

for background on dod's contract spending on services , we analyzed computer - generated data extracted from the defense contract action data system .

we did not independently verify the information contained in the database .

there are known data reliability problems with this data source , but we determined that the data are sufficient to provide general trend information for background reporting purposes .

we conducted our review from november 2002 to july 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the deputy secretary of defense ; the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force ; and the under secretaries of defense ( acquisition , technology , and logistics ) and ( comptroller ) .

we will also provide copies to others on request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

should you have any questions on matters discussed in this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 .

other contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii .

in response to 2002 national defense authorization requirements , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the military departments developed and implemented policies for a program review structure to oversee large - dollar and program - critical services acquisitions .

the review process , modeled after dod's review process for major weapons systems , seeks to ensure major service acquisition strategies are adequately planned , performance - based , competed , and address socioeconomic goals .

in most cases , an acquisition must be valued at $500 million or more to prompt review at the headquarters level for dod and the military departments .

table 2 compares selected aspects of the legislation's requirements with , and the implementation status of , dod and military department policies .

in addition to those named above , cordell smith , bob swierczek , and ralph white made key contributions to this report .

