over the last 4 years , the united states has provided thousands of troops and obligated nearly $370 billion to help achieve the strategic goal of creating a democratic iraq that can govern and defend itself and be an ally in the war on terror .

these troops have performed courageously under dangerous and difficult circumstances .

the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act of 2007 ( the act ) requires gao to submit to congress by september 1 , 2007 , an independent assessment of whether or not the government of iraq has met 18 benchmarks contained in the act , and the status of the achievement of the benchmarks .

the benchmarks cover iraqi government actions needed to advance reconciliation within iraqi society , improve the security of the iraqi population , provide essential services to the population , and promote economic well - being .

the benchmarks contained in the act were derived from benchmarks and commitments articulated by the iraqi government beginning in june 2006 .

 ( see appendix xix for information on the origin of these benchmarks. ) .

the january 2007 u.s. strategy , the new way forward in iraq , is designed to support the iraqi efforts to quell sectarian violence and foster conditions for national reconciliation .

the u.s. strategy recognizes that the levels of violence seen in 2006 undermined efforts to achieve political reconciliation by fueling sectarian tensions , emboldening extremists , and discrediting the coalition and iraqi government .

amid such violence , it became increasingly difficult for iraqi leaders to make the compromises necessary to foster reconciliation through the passage of legislation aimed at reintegrating former ba'athists and sharing hydrocarbon revenues more equitably , among other steps .

thus , the new strategy was aimed at providing the iraqi government with the time and space needed to help address reconciliation among the various segments of iraqi society .

as required by the act , this report provides 1 ) an assessment of whether or not the iraqi government has met 18 key legislative , security , and economic benchmarks , and , 2 ) provides information on the status of the achievement of each benchmark .

among these 18 benchmarks , eight address legislative actions , nine address security actions , and one is economic - related .

in comparison , the act requires the administration to report in july and september 2007 on the status of each benchmark , and to provide an assessment on whether satisfactory progress is being made toward meeting the benchmarks , not whether the benchmarks have been met .

in order to meet our statutory responsibilities in a manner consistent with gao's core values , we decided to use “partially met” criteria for selected benchmarks .

see appendices i - xviii for information on our assessment and the status of the achievement of each benchmark , and appendix xx for a comparison of gao's assessment with the administration's july 2007 initial benchmark assessment report .

we are also issuing a separate , classified report on selected benchmarks .

to complete this work , we reviewed u.s. agency documents and interviewed officials from the departments of defense , state , and the treasury ; the multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) and its subordinate commands ; the defense intelligence agency ; the central intelligence agency ; the national intelligence council ; and the united nations .

these officials included ryan crocker , the u.s .

ambassador to iraq , and general david h. petraeus , commander of multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) .

we also reviewed translated copies of iraqi documents and met with officials from the government of iraq and its legislature .

as part of this work , we made multiple visits to iraq during 2006 and 2007 , most recently from july 22 to august 1 , 2007 .

our analyses were enhanced by approximately 100 iraq - related reports and testimonies that we have completed since may 2003 .

we provided drafts of the report to the relevant u.s. agencies for review and comment .

we received formal written comments from state and defense and technical comments from the central intelligence agency and national intelligence council which we incorporated as appropriate .

this letter and each appendix describe the detailed criteria we used in making our assessments of the 18 benchmarks .

as required by the mandate , we made a determination of whether all 18 benchmarks had been met .

for 14 of the 18 benchmarks , we developed criteria for assessing whether the benchmark was “partially met.” for the remaining 4 benchmarks , we determined that they should be judged as “met” or “not met” because the nature of the individual benchmarks did not lend themselves to a “partially met” assessment .

although we analyzed classified data , including the august 2007 national intelligence estimate for iraq , this report only contains unclassified information , as of august 30 , 2007 .

we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

appendix xxi contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology .

our analysis shows that the iraqi government has met one of the eight legislative benchmarks and partially met another .

specifically , the rights of minority political parties in the iraqi legislature are protected through existing provisions in the iraqi constitution and council of representatives' by - laws ; however , minorities among the iraqi population are vulnerable and their rights are often violated .

in addition , the iraqi government partially met the benchmark to enact and implement legislation on the formation of regions ; this law was enacted in october 2006 but will not be implemented until april 2008 .

six other legislative benchmarks have not been met .

the benchmark requiring a review of the iraqi constitution has not been met .

fundamental issues remain unresolved as part of the constitutional review process , such as expanded powers for the presidency , the resolution of disputed areas ( such as kirkuk ) , and power sharing between federal and regional governments over issues such as distribution of oil revenue .

in addition , five other legislative benchmarks have not been met .

figure 1 highlights the status of the legislative benchmarks requiring legislative enactment and implementation .

as figure 1 shows , legislation on de - ba'athification reform has been drafted but has yet to be enacted .

hydrocarbon legislation is in the early stages of legislative action ; although three key components have been drafted , none are under active consideration by the council of representatives .

although the government of iraq has established an independent electoral commission and appointed commissioners , the government has not implemented legislation to establish provincial council authorities , provincial elections law , or a date for provincial elections .

no legislation on amnesty or militia disarmament is being considered because the conditions for a successful program , particularly the need for a secure environment , are not present , according to u.s. and iraqi officials .

prospects for additional progress in enacting legislative benchmarks have been complicated by the withdrawal of 15 of 37 members of the iraqi cabinet .

according to an august 2007 u.s. interagency report , this boycott ends any claim by the shi'ite - dominated coalition to be a government of national unity and further undermines iraq's already faltering program of national reconciliation .

in late august , iraq's senior shi'a , and sunni arab and kurdish political leaders signed a unity accord signaling efforts to foster greater national reconciliation .

the accord covered draft legislation on de - ba'athification reform and provincial powers laws , as well as setting up a mechanism to release some sunni detainees being held without charges .

however , these laws need to be passed by the council of representatives .

 ( see appendices i - vii , and xvi for further information on these legislative benchmarks ) .

the administration's july 2007 report cited progress in achieving some of these legislative benchmarks but provided little information on what step in the legislative process each benchmark had reached .

future reporting should provide this important detail , as we display in figure 1 .

our analysis shows that the iraqi government has met two of the nine security benchmarks .

specifically , it has established political , communications , economic , and services committees in support of the baghdad security plan and , with substantial coalition assistance , 32 of the planned 34 joint security stations across baghdad .

of the remaining 7 benchmarks , the iraqi government partially met 2 and did not meet five .

 ( see fig .

2 ) the iraqi government partially met the benchmark of providing three trained and ready brigades to support baghdad operations .

since february 2007 , the iraqi government deployed nine iraqi army battalions equaling three brigades for 90-day rotations to support the baghdad security plan .

the administration's july 2007 report to congress noted problems in manning the iraqi brigades , but stated that the three brigades were operating in support of baghdad operations .

our classified report provides additional information on the readiness levels and performance of these units , which supports our assessment of this benchmark .

the iraqi government also partially met the benchmark of ensuring that the baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for any outlaws regardless of their sectarian or political affiliation .

even though the baghad security plan is aimed at eliminating safe havens , and u.s. commanders report satisfaction with the coalition's ability to target extremist groups , opportunities for creating temporary safe havens exist due to the political intervention of iraqi government officials ( see discussion in appendix x ) and the strong sectarian loyalties and militia infiltration of security forces .

the iraqi government has not met the benchmark to reduce sectarian violence and eliminate militia control of local security.as discussed in appendix xiii , militia control of local security forces remains a problem .

several u.s. and un reports have found that militias still retain significant control or influence over local security in parts of baghdad and other areas of iraq .

on trends in sectarian violence , we could not determine if sectarian violence had declined since the start of the baghdad security plan .

the administration's july 2007 report stated that mnf - i trend data demonstrated a decrease in sectarian violence since the start of the baghdad security plan in mid - february 2007 .

the report acknowledged that precise measurements vary , and that it was too early to determine if the decrease would be sustainable .

measuring sectarian violence is difficult since the perpetrator's intent is not always clearly known .

given this difficulty , broader measures of population security should be used in judging these trends .

the number of attacks targeting civilians and population displacement resulting from sectarian violence may serve as additional indicators .

for example , as displayed in figure 3 , the average number of daily attacks against civilians remained about the same over the last six months .

the decrease in total average daily attacks in july is largely due to a decrease in attacks on coalition forces rather than civilians .

while overall attacks declined in july compared to june , levels of violence remain high .

enemy initiated attacks have increased around major religious and political events , including ramadan and elections .

for 2007 , ramadan is scheduled to begin in mid - september .

our classified report provides further information on measurement issues and trends in violence in iraq obtained from other u.s. agencies .

the unclassified august 2007 national intelligence estimate ( nie ) on iraq reported that coalition forces , working with iraqi forces , tribal elements , and some sunni insurgents , have reduced al qaeda in iraq's ( aqi ) capabilities and restricted its freedom of movement .

however , the nie further noted that the level of overall violence , including attacks on and casualties among civilians remains high and aqi retains the ability to conduct high - profile attacks .

for the remaining four unmet security benchmarks , we found that: the iraqi government has not always allowed iraqi commanders to make tactical and operational decisions without political intervention , resulting in some operational decisions being based on sectarian interests .

the government had not always ensured that iraqi security forces were providing even - handed enforcement of the law , since u.s. reports have cited continuing sectarian - based abuses on the part of iraqi security forces .

instead of increasing , the number of iraqi army units capable of independent operations had decreased from march 2007 to july 2007 .

iraqi political authorities continue to undermine and make false accusations against iraqi security force personnel .

according to u.s. government officials , little has changed since the administration's july 2007 report .

 ( see appendices viii - xv , and xviii for further information on these security benchmarks ) .

the iraqi government partially met the benchmark to allocate and spend $10 billion because it allocated $10 billion in reconstruction funds when it passed its 2007 budget in february , 2007 .

the new way forward in iraq cited iraq's inability to spend its own resources to rebuild critical infrastructure and deliver essential services as an economic challenge to iraq's self - reliance .

iraqi government funds represent an important source of financing for rebuilding iraq since the united states has obligated most of the $40 billion provided to iraq for reconstruction and stabilization activities since 2003 .

however , it is unclear whether the $10 billion allocated by the iraqi government will be spent by the end of iraq's fiscal year , december 31 , 2007 .

preliminary ministry of finance data reports that iraq's central ministries spent about $1.5 billion , or 24 percent , of the approximately $6.5 billion in capital project funds allocated to them through july 15 , 2007 .

the remaining funds from the $10 billion were allocated to the provinces and the kurdish region .

 ( see appendix xvii for further information on the economic benchmark ) .

as of august 30 , 2007 , the iraqi government met 3 , partially met 4 , and did not meet 11 of its 18 benchmarks .

the iraqi government has not fulfilled commitments it first made in june 2006 to advance legislative , security , and economic measures that would promote national reconciliation among iraq's warring factions .

of particular concern is the lack of progress on the constitutional review that could promote greater sunni participation in the national government and comprehensive hydrocarbon legislation that would distribute iraq's vast oil wealth .

despite iraqi leaders recently signing a unity accord , the polarization of iraq's major sects and ethnic groups and fighting among shi'a factions diminishes the stability of iraq's governing coalition and its potential to enact legislation needed for sectarian reconciliation .

reconciliation was also premised on a reduction in violence .

while the baghdad security plan was intended to reduce sectarian violence , measuring such violence may be difficult since the perpetrator's intent is not clearly known .

other measures of violence , such as the number of enemy - initiated attacks , show that violence has remained high through july 2007 .

as the congress considers the way forward in iraq , it must balance the achievement of the 18 iraqi benchmarks with the military progress , homeland security , foreign policy and other goals of the united states .

future administration reports on the benchmarks would be more useful to the congress if they clearly depicted the status of each legislative benchmark , provided additional quantitative and qualitative information on violence from all relevant u.s. agencies , and specified the performance and loyalties of iraqi security forces supporting coalition operations .

in preparing future reports to congress and to help increase transparency on progress made toward achieving the benchmarks , we recommend that: 1 .

the secretary of state provide information to the president that clearly specifies the status in drafting , enacting , and implementing iraqi legislation ; 2 .

the secretary of defense , and the heads of other appropriate agencies , provide information to the president on trends in sectarian violence with appropriate caveats , as well as broader quantitative and qualitative measures of population security , and 3 .

the secretary of defense , and the heads of other appropriate agencies , provides additional information on the operational readiness of iraqi security forces supporting the baghdad security plan , particularly information on their loyalty and willingness to help secure baghdad .

as discussed below , state and dod concurred with these recommendations .

we provided a draft of this report to the departments of state and defense , the national intelligence council , and the central intelligence agency .

the national intelligence council and the central intelligence agency provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

the department of state provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix xxii .

state also provided us with technical comments and suggested wording changes that we incorporated as appropriate .

state agreed with our recommendation to provide the president with additional information on the specific status of key iraqi legislation in preparing future reports to congress .

state suggested that we note the standards we used in assessing the 18 benchmarks differ from the administration's standards .

the highlights page and introduction of our report discuss these differing standards .

state also suggested that we take into consideration recent political developments in iraq , such as the communiqué released by iraqi political leaders on august 26 , 2007 .

we added additional information to the report about this communiqué and related developments .

the department of defense also provided written comments , which are reprinted in appendix xxiii .

dod also provided us with technical comments and suggested wording changes that we incorporated as appropriate .

defense agreed with our recommendations to provide , in concert with other relevant agencies , information to the president on trends in sectarian violence with appropriate caveats , as well as broader quantitative and qualitative measures of security .

defense also agreed to provide the president with additional information on the operational readiness of iraqi security forces supporting the baghdad security plan .

dod also provided additional oral comments .

dod disagreed with our conclusion in the draft report that trends in sectarian violence are unclear .

further information on dod's views , and our response , are contained in our classified report .

however , the additional information that dod provided did not warrant a change in our assessment of “not met.” we note that the unclassified august 2007 nie stated that the overall violence in iraq , including attacks on and casualties among civilians , remains high , iraq's major sectarian groups remain unreconciled , and levels of insurgent and sectarian violence will remain high over the next six to twelve months .

dod disagreed with our initial assessment of “not met” for the training and readiness of the iraqi brigades supporting operations in baghdad and provided additional information on this issue .

while acknowledging that some of these iraqi units lacked personnel , fighting equipment , and vehicles , the u.s. commander embedded with the units attested to their fighting capabilities .

based on this additional information , and our classified and unclassified information , we changed our rating from “not met” to “partially met.” dod did not agree with our initial assessment that the benchmark related to safe havens was not met .

dod provided additional information describing mnf - i efforts to conduct targeted operations in sadr city .

for example , from january to august 2007 , coalition forces and iraqi security forces conducted over eighty operations that span each sector of sadr city .

however , due to sectarian influence and infiltration of iraqi security forces , and support from the local population , anti - coalition forces retain the freedom to organize and conduct operations against coalition forces .

based on this additional information , we changed this assessment to “partially met.” we are sending copies of this report to appropriate members of congress .

this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512- 5500 or mr. joseph a. christoff , director , international affairs and trade , at ( 202 ) 512-8979 .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are included in appendix xxiv .

forming a constitutional review committee and completing the constitutional review .

iraq's constitution was approved in a national referendum in october 2005 , but did not resolve several contentious issues , such as claims over disputed areas including oil - rich kirkuk .

amending the constitution is critical to reaching national agreement on power sharing among iraq's political blocs and furthering national reconciliation , according to iraqi leaders , u.s. officials , and the iraq study group report .

although the iraqi legislature formed a constitutional review committee ( crc ) in november 2006 , the review process is not yet complete .

first , the review committee's work is not finished .

in a may 23 , 2007 report , the crc recommended a package of constitutional amendments to the iraq council of representatives .

however , the package did not resolve the powers of the presidency ; disputed territories , including kirkuk ; and the relative powers of the regions versus the federal government .

the crc received an extension until the end of august 2007 to help resolve the outstanding issues , but , according to the chairman of the crc , iraq's major political groups need to reach agreement on these issues .

second , once resolved , the iraqi legislature must approve the package of amendments by an absolute majority vote .

finally , if a package of amendments is approved , the iraqi people will need to vote on the amendments in a referendum within 2 months after the legislature approves them .

to complete a package of necessary amendments to the constitution , iraq's major political groups need to reach agreement on the following three contentious issues .

power of the presidency .

the deputy chairman of the crc , a member of the sunni bloc , believes that the presidency should have greater power .

the constitution gives the presidency such powers as accrediting ambassadors .

it also gives the presidency council the power to approve or disapprove legislation in the current electoral term .

however , the legislature can adopt any disapproved legislation by a three - fifths majority vote .

in contrast , the prime minister , selected from the legislature's largest political bloc , is commander - in - chief of the armed forces , names the ministers for each ministry , and directs the council of ministers .

the council directs the work of all government ministries and departments , develops their plans , and prepares the government budget .

the high - ranking sunni official said that giving the presidency more power could allow for better power sharing among iraq's political groups .

disputed areas , particularly kirkuk .

article 140 of the constitution addresses the issue of disputed areas .

it requires a census and a referendum in kirkuk and other disputed areas by december 31 , 2007 to determine the will of its citizens .

according to the kurdistan regional government's ( krg ) prime minister , kirkuk represents the kurdish region and must be returned to kurdistan .

under the former regime's policy of arabization — removing kurdish families from kirkuk and replacing them with arab families — areas of kirkuk were given to other governorates , according to a kurdish committee .

krg officials want the referendum held by the date specified in the constitution .

other iraqi legislators believe that the kirkuk referendum should be deferred because of the disputes over the borders of kirkuk and continuing displacement of people in the area .

power of the federal government versus regions .

the crc proposed several amendments to the constitution to clarify the powers of the federal government and the shared powers with the regions , but has not achieved compromise among major political factions on these amendments .

in particular , the crc proposed amending article 111 of the constitution to clearly state that the federal government shall collect oil revenues and distribute them equally to all iraqis in accordance with the national budget law .

according to the united nations , this amendment would provide the federal government exclusive authority for oil revenues .

in contrast , the existing constitutional framework is widely interpreted as allowing regions to define how and whether they share locally generated oil revenues .

for this reason , the kurdish bloc opposes the crc - proposed amendment .

if agreement is reached on a package of constitutional amendments , the iraqi legislature must vote on the package .

the amendments will be considered approved if an absolute majority of the legislature votes for the package .

one challenge is simply holding a vote .

despite iraqi leaders signing a unity accord , as of august 29 , 2007 , several iraqi parties were boycotting the government , including iraq's largest sunni bloc .

although the other parties in the legislature could form an absolute majority to pass a package of amendments , it would defeat the purpose of trying to reach a broad political accommodation .

if the legislature approves the constitutional amendments , the government must hold a national referendum within 2 months of approval .

according to the united nations , before a referendum can occur , the iraq electoral commission must develop a valid voting roster , educate the public about the proposed amendments , print referendum ballots , and locate and staff polling places .

in a july 2007 report , the iraq high electoral commission stated that it faced challenges to developing a valid voting roster because of the large movement of displaced persons — an estimated 800,000 since february 2006 .

enacting and implementing legislation on de - ba'athification reform .

coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) order 1 dissolved the ba'athist party , removed ba'athist leaders and senior party members from government , and banned them from future employment in the public sector .

the cpa further provided for investigation and removal of even junior members of the party from upper - level management in government ministries , universities , and hospitals .

most of iraqi's technocratic class was pushed out of government due to de - ba'athification and many sunni arabs remain angry about policies to de - ba'athify iraqi society , according to the iraq study group report .

although iraqi leaders have drafted several pieces of legislation to reform de - ba'athification , none has sufficient support among iraq's political factions to have a first reading in the iraqi legislature , according to u.s. officials .

no consensus exists on reforming the current de - ba'athification policy and many iraqis are concerned by the prospects of former ba'athist tormenters returning to power .

however , according to an august 2007 u.s. interagency report , iraq's senior shi'a and sunni arab and kurdish political leaders signed a unity accord , including consensus on draft legislation on de - ba'thification reform .

such a law would need to be drafted , passed by the council of representatives , and implemented .

according to u.s. officials , reforms to the law would more likely promote reconciliation if the reforms target ba'athists who had command responsibility within the party or committed human rights violations or other crimes .

removing individuals based purely on party membership increases the chances that segments of the iraqi public will see the system as unfair , according to these officials .

draft legislation on de - ba'athification reform , dated july 2007 before the unity accord , provides for a special commission , a panel of judges to make decisions , and the right to appeal the panel's decisions .

the draft legislation also specifies that the commission will be dissolved 6 months after the law is passed .

enacting and implementing legislation to ensure the equitable distribution of hydrocarbon resources of the people of iraq without regard to the sect or ethnicity of recipients , and enacting and implementing legislation to ensure that the energy resources of iraq benefit sunni arabs , shi'a arabs , kurds , and other iraqi citizens in an equitable manner .

the importance of oil revenues for the iraqi economy is widely recognized , as is the need to create a new legal framework for the development and management of the country's oil sector .

the oil sector accounts for over half of iraq's gross domestic product and over 90 percent of its revenues .

the timely and equitable distribution of these revenues is essential to iraq's ability to provide for its needs , including the reconstruction of a unified iraq .

the government of iraq has not enacted and implemented any of the four separate yet interrelated pieces of legislation needed to ensure the equitable distribution of hydrocarbon resources .

as of august 2007 , the iraqi government had drafted three pieces of legislation: ( 1 ) hydrocarbon framework legislation that establishes the structure , management , and oversight for the oil sector ; ( 2 ) revenue - sharing legislation ; and ( 3 ) legislation restructuring the ministry of oil .

however , none of the legislation is currently under consideration by iraq's parliament ( council of representatives ) .

a fourth piece of legislation establishing the iraq national oil company ( inoc ) has not been drafted , according to state officials .

hydrocarbon framework legislation was approved by the iraqi cabinet ( council of ministers ) in february 2007 , and sent to the oil and gas committee of iraq's parliament for review in july 2007 .

however , before the legislation was submitted to the parliament , the iraqi government amended the draft to address substantive changes made by the shura council .

according to state , the shura council reviews draft legislation to ensure constitutionality and to avoid contradictions with iraq's legal system , including islamic law .

the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) did not agree to the council's revisions .

accordingly , the oil and gas committee chairman is taking no legislative action until the iraqi cabinet and the krg agree on a new draft , according to state .

it is not clear if this legislation will include annexes intended to allocate the control of particular oil fields and exploration areas to either the central or regional governments .

according to the iraqi government , the annexes remain under consideration .

revenue - sharing legislation is intended to ensure the equitable distribution of iraq's financial resources , including oil and gas revenues .

the central government and the krg agreed on draft revenue - sharing legislation in june 2007 .

however , the iraqi cabinet has not yet approved the legislation and submitted it to iraq's parliament for consideration .

this draft legislation is linked to proposed amendments to the iraqi constitution regarding the role of the federal government and regions and the management of oil revenues .

under the existing constitution , if there is a contradiction between regional and national law with respect to a matter outside the exclusive authority of the federal government , regional law takes priority and regional powers have the right to amend the application of the national legislation within that region .

as oil revenue sharing is not a power exclusively reserved for the federal government in the existing constitution , according to officials , regions may determine how and whether they share locally generated oil revenues with the remainder of iraq , regardless of what is stated in the federal law .

in response , the iraqi constitutional review committee has proposed amendments to the constitution that would provide for the national collection and distribution of oil revenues .

legislation restructuring the ministry of oil has been drafted but has not yet been submitted to the council of ministers , according to state .

legislation establishing the iraq national oil company ( inoc ) is being drafted , according to state .

enacting and implementing legislation on procedures to form semi - autonomous regions .

iraq's constitution requires the council of representatives to enact a law that defines the executive procedures needed to form regions within 6 months of the date of its first session .

some iraqi legislators believe that the right to form regions , with authority similar to the kurdistan region , would help protect their rights .

in october 2006 , the iraqi legislature passed a law establishing procedures to form regions , but the law delays implementation for 18 months .

according to u.s. officials , this means that no steps to form regions , such as holding provincial referendums , can be taken before april 2008 .

according to state , this is in the best interests of iraq as it will allow the government to deal with some outstanding issues .

the united nations has identified two issues that may impact implementation of this law — the ongoing review of iraq's constitution and the capacity of new regional governments .

according to members of iraq's constitutional review committee ( crc ) , the law on procedures to form regions was delayed for 18 months to allow the constitutional review process to be completed .

some of the proposed amendments to the constitution would clarify the powers of the federal government versus regions and governorates for example , according to the united nations , the crc proposed amendments that would give federal law priority over regional law with respect to water , customs , ports , and oil and revenue sharing .

other proposed amendments would give the federal government exclusive power over electricity generation , railways , and pension funds .

moreover , the constitutional review could also help resolve the status of disputed areas , which could impact regional boundaries .

until the constitutional review is completed and the constitutional referendum is held , residents in areas considering regional formation may not have all the information they need to make decisions .

the capability of the regions to govern themselves will also impact implementation of the law .

article 121 of the constitution accords significant executive , judicial , and management authorities to the regions .

the regions have responsibility for maintaining their internal security forces , administering allocations from national revenues , and maintaining representational offices in embassies and consuls .

moreover , the law on formation of regions provides that once formed , the regions must undertake to create elected provisional legislative councils .

according to the united nations , this will require a substantial investment of resources and significant management responsibility .

gao has reported on significant shortages of competent personnel in national ministries charged with delivering services to the iraqi people ; moreover , these shortages are greater at the provincial level of government , according to state and usaid officials .

we have also reported that the poor security situation and high levels of violence have contributed to the continued and accelerating “brain drain” of professional iraqis that would be needed to manage the new regional administrations .

enacting and implementing legislation establishing an independent high electoral commission , provincial elections law , provincial council authorities , and a date for provincial elections .

when provincial elections were first held on january 2005 , many sunnis boycotted the election , resulting in largely shi'a and kurd provincial councils in provinces with majority sunni populations .

to redress the under - representation of sunnis in provincial councils , iraq needs to hold new provincial elections , but must first establish an electoral commission , write provincial election laws , define provincial powers so voters know the stakes , and set a date for elections .

although the government of iraq has enacted and implemented legislation establishing an independent high electoral commission ( ihec ) , it has not enacted and implemented legislation establishing a provincial elections law , provincial council authorities , or a date for provincial elections .

although the government of iraq has enacted and implemented legislation to establish an ihec , certain steps still remain in establishing the commission .

according to the u.s. government , the council of representatives ( cor ) passed the ihec law on january 23 , 2007 , and subsequently appointed the nine ihec commissioners , as required under the law , in a process the un deemed in compliance with international standards .

however , a provision in the ihec law requires the cor to nominate and the board of commissioners to appoint the directors of the governorate electoral offices in each province .

twelve of these positions are vacant , but , according to state , the process of appointing the directors is progressing .

the law also requires the ihec to establish and update a voter registry in collaboration with the governorate and regional electoral offices .

however , before they can complete an update of the voter registry ( which was last updated in mid - 2005 ) , an election law must be enacted that defines the residency and voter eligibility requirements .

finally , the ihec still needs a budget to fund its activities .

iraq has not enacted and implemented legislation for provincial elections .

according to the u.s. embassy in baghdad , the prime minster's office is drafting legislation governing provincial elections , including setting a date for elections to occur .

however , according to the embassy , some key political parties are hesitant to hold provincial elections due to concerns that they will lose representation , potentially to more extreme parties .

additionally , several parties are demanding that any election law ensure that eligible refugees and internally displaced persons be allowed to vote .

provincial powers legislation , which will define the authorities and structures of local governments , has not been enacted and implemented .

according to the u.s. government , the draft legislation has been approved and submitted to the council of representatives , where it has had two of the three required readings .

however , the u.s. government reported in july 2007 that changes were being considered , particularly related to the powers of the governor and the authority of the federal government at the local level .

the u.s. embassy cited key issues with the draft , including that it cedes most power to the provinces .

the united nations pointed out that the draft fails to clarify the role of the governorate and that the draft law does not deal adequately with the effective delivery of public goods and services in the governorates .

according to the u.s. embassy , on july 8 , 2007 , the relevant cor committee presented a report outlining suggested changes to the law , some of which the embassy supported .

the government of iraq has not set a date for provincial elections .

the iraq study group emphasized the need for provincial elections at the earliest possible date .

the embassy is urging the iraqi government to take the legislative and administrative action necessary to ensure timely and fair elections .

according to the u.s. embassy , it is intensively engaged with the iraqi government and the cor at all levels to expedite legislation or amendments to existing legislation that will allow provincial elections to take place and secure funding for elections .

in comments on this appendix , state said that this benchmark should be partially met since the iraq high electoral commission has been established and the benchmark calls only for its establishment .

however , the benchmark requires more than the establishment of the ihec , and iraq has not enacted and implemented a provincial elections law , provincial council authorities , or a date for provincial elections , as required by the benchmark .

enacting and implementing legislation addressing amnesty .

iraqi government officials believe that amnesty for insurgents and others who have not committed terrorist acts is an important tool to promote reconciliation and could help pacify insurgents .

in addition , the iraqi government and coalition forces hold thousands of detainees , some of whom could be eligible for an amnesty program when conditions are right .

the iraqi government has not drafted legislation on amnesty , according to u.s. officials , and the conditions for a successful program are not present .

as figure 2 in the cover letter shows , many steps remain in the legislative process , including drafting the legislation and obtaining approval in the iraqi cabinet and council of representatives .

however , the government of iraq is not pressing for the development of amnesty legislation .

although amnesty was proposed as part of the prime minister's national reconciliation plan in june 2006 , little progress has been made .

the plan called for issuing amnesty to prisoners not involved in crimes against humanity or terrorist acts .

at that time , the iraqi government announced that it would release 2,500 detainees ; 2,500 prisoners were subsequently released .

according to u.s. officials in baghdad , no large - scale releases have been made since 2006 , and there has been little discussion of amnesty since then .

however , the prime minister's office and iraq's disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration committee sponsored a workshop on amnesty in may 2007 .

the workshop recommended that amnesty should not proceed , but rather should result from national reconciliation and that the government's military has to be superior to armed groups as a condition for offering amnesty .

the scope of an amnesty program is also an issue .

the united nations takes the position that in considering the categories of perpetrators to be included or excluded in amnesty , international law does not allow amnesty to be granted to those who committed genocide , crimes against humanity , or other serious violations of international humanitarian law .

in addition , iraqi government officials have recommended that an amnesty program consider all detained individuals held by iraq and by coalition forces .

there are currently thousands of detainees , including over 24,000 held by coalition forces .

according to multinational force officials , there could be considerably more detainees in the future as the baghdad security plan progresses .

the coalition's task force 134 is building and expanding prison facilities to accommodate additional detainees .

enacting and implementing legislation establishing a strong militia disarmament program to ensure that such security forces are accountable only to the central government and loyal to the constitution of iraq .

militias contribute to the high levels of violence in iraq , are responsible for sectarian killings , fuel ongoing corruption , and have heavily infiltrated the iraqi army and national police .

efforts to dissolve or bring militias under control have been ongoing since 2004 .

in march 2007 , 77 percent of iraqis in a nationwide poll agreed that militias should be dissolved .

the iraqi government has not drafted legislation on disarming militias .

cpa order 91 , issued in 2004 , prohibited armed forces and militias within iraq , except for those allowed under the order .

multiple steps are needed to enact and implement further legislation to disarm militias .

more importantly , according to u.s. officials , conditions are not right for a traditional disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration program ( ddr ) ; accordingly , there is currently no momentum in the government of iraq for such a program .

thus , militias pose a severe challenge to stability and reconciliation in iraq .

militias have contributed to the high levels of violence in iraq .

according to the defense intelligence agency director , the jayash al - mahdi ( the militia associated with muqtada al sadr ) , often operates under the protection or approval of iraqi police to detain and kill suspected sunni insurgents and civilians .

a june 2007 defense department report further notes that many jayash al - mahdi fighters have left baghdad as a result of expanded coalition and iraqi presence .

they now engage in ethnic and sectarian violence in northern and central iraq and have increased conflict with the badr organization in southern iraq leading to a significant increase in attacks against the coalition in basrah .

the june 2007 report also states that shi'a militia infiltration of the ministry of interior is a problem .

militia influence impacts every component of the ministry , particularly in baghdad and other key cities .

despite the challenge the militias pose , little progress has been made to disarm and demobilize them .

nine parties , with militias numbering an estimated 100,000 fighters , agreed to a transition and reintegration process in 2004 .

the coalition provisional authority estimated that 90 percent of these fighters would complete the transition and reintegration process by january 2005 .

however , according to the administration's july 15 , 2007 report , no armed group has committed to disarm .

moreover , according to u.s. officials in baghdad , the iraqi ddr commission has not developed a plan for ddr and has not received funding for its work .

gao , stabilizing iraq: factors impeding the development of capable iraqi security forces , gao - 07-612t ) washington , d.c.: march 13 , 2007 ) ; gao , securing , stabilizing , and rebuilding iraq: key issues for congressional oversight , ( gao - 07-308sp ) washington , d.c.: january 9 , 2007 ; gao , rebuilding iraq: dod reports should link economic , governance , and security indicators to conditions for stabilizing iraq , ( gao - 06-217c ) washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2005. demobilization , but according to u.s. reports , some external groups are not helpful .

for example , iran's islamic revolutionary guard provides deadly arms and funding to iraq's militias and contributes to the ongoing instability .

the iraqi government provided $150 million for ddr in its 2007 budget and the congress has made available up to $156 million from the iraq security forces fund , to be used to assist the government of iraq for this purpose .

however , iraq has prepared no plan for ddr and has not made progress in enacting legislation .

thus , it is uncertain whether such funding is needed at this time .

establish supporting political , media , economic , and services committees in support of the baghdad security plan .

the u.s. and iraqi governments began the current baghdad security plan in mid - february 2007 to stem the violence in baghdad and surrounding areas .

during the summer of 2006 , mnf - i and the iraqi security forces implemented two other plans to secure baghdad , but these operations failed to reduce violence for a variety of reasons .

unlike the earlier operations , the current baghdad security plan encompasses political , economic , and security activities that the iraqi government needed to coordinate at the national level .

in february 2007 , the iraqi government created the executive steering committee ( the executive committee ) and six subcommittees to coordinate political , economic and military activities and make decisions in support of the baghdad security plan .

according to a department of state official , the executive committee's major objective was to increase the coordination and capacity of the iraqi government to improve the quality of life of baghdad's population as part of the baghdad security plan .

each of the subcommittees addresses one of six issues related to the plan's implementation: economics , services , political , communication , popular mobilization , and security .

the executive committee and subcommittees meet on a weekly basis .

the committees consist of iraqi and u.s. participants .

the iraqi prime minister chairs the executive committee , while senior - level iraqi ministry officials chair the various subcommittees .

for example , a deputy prime minister chairs the economic subcommittee and the services subcommittee .

representatives from the relevant iraqi ministries serve on each subcommittee .

two senior u.s. officials are observers to the executive committee and attend its weekly meetings .

a senior mnf - i or u.s. embassy official is also assigned to each subcommittee .

this official provides advice on the subcommittees' agendas and other support when called upon .

according to a department of state official , the executive committee and subcommittees have worked to ensure that the iraqi government provided sufficient iraqi forces to assist mnf - i in implementing the baghdad security plan .

for example , when the iraqi army provided brigades that were not at full strength , the executive committee and security subcommittee identified forces from other parts of the country to move to baghdad .

the committees also found ways to house and feed the iraqi troops supporting the security plan .

in addition , the communication subcommittee has helped publicize the security plan's goals and the other subcommittees' efforts to get resources to baghdad districts that have been cleared of insurgents .

we did not assess the effectiveness of the executive committee or subcommittees in providing overall coordination and supporting the implementation of the baghdad security plan .

however , the administration's july 2007 report to congress stated that the effectiveness of each committee varied .

provide three trained and ready iraqi brigades to support baghdad operations .

during the summer of 2006 , a large number of iraqi security forces refused to deploy to baghdad to conduct operations in support of the previous baghdad security plans .

in january 2007 , the president said that the iraqi government had agreed to resolve this problem under the current plan and had committed three additional iraqi brigades to support the new plan .

since february 2007 , the iraqi government deployed nine iraqi army battalions equaling three brigades for 90-day rotations to support the baghdad security plan .

in the july 2007 report , the administration stated that the iraqi government had difficulty deploying three additional army brigades to baghdad at sufficient strength .

in commenting on our draft report , dod stated that current present for duty rates for deployed units is 75 percent of authorized strength .

however , the july 2007 administration report stated that the government has deployed battalions from multiple iraqi army divisions to provide the required three brigade - equivalent forces to support the baghdad security plan .

after the initial deployment of the required brigades , the iraqi government began the rotation plan .

19 units have currently deployed in support of the baghdad security plan .

several of these units voluntarily extended , and others were rotated every 90 days in accordance with the plan .

in addition , all of the iraqi units had pre - deployment training to support operations in baghdad .

the administration's july 2007 report states that progress toward this benchmark has been satisfactory , and the overall effect has been satisfactory in that three brigades are operating in baghdad .

however , in commenting on this report , dod stated that performance of the units currently supporting baghdad operations has been varied .

some units had performed exceptionally well , proven themselves and raised their readiness ratings .

others had marked time and slowly regressed over their 90-day deployment .

of the 19 iraqi units that had supported operations in baghdad , 5 units had performed well while the remaining had proven to be problematic for several reasons: lack of personnel , lack of individual fighting equipment and lack of vehicles to conduct their assigned missions .

we obtained classified information that indicates other problems with these iraqi army units .

our classified briefing report provides more information on this benchmark .

providing iraqi commanders with all authorities to execute this plan and to make tactical and operational decisions , in consultation with u.s commanders , without political intervention , to include the authority to pursue all extremists , including sunni insurgents and shi'ite militias .

as stated in the president's january 10 , 2007 , speech on the baghdad security plan , previous baghdad security plans failed , in part , because iraqi political and sectarian interference prevented forces from taking action against militias .

according to the administration's initial assessment , iraq's prime minister stated that political or sectarian interference in the affairs of the iraqi security forces will not be tolerated , and actions have been taken to address political intervention .

in july 2007 , the administration reported that the government of iraq has not made satisfactory progress toward providing iraqi commanders with all authorities to execute the baghdad security plan and to make tactical and operational decisions in consultation with u.s. commanders without political intervention .

the report noted that political intervention in the conduct of some security operations continues even though new rules of engagement for the baghdad operational command have come into effect and commanders have been given the authority to attack insurgents and militias .

according to u.s. officials and other experts , sectarian and political interference in the conduct of military operations continues .

tribal and ethno - sectarian loyalties remain strong within many iraqi military units , hindering efforts to take actions against militias .

these loyalties are often the basis for relationships between key officers in units and higher - level authorities who are not always in the direct chain of command .

for example , sectarian militias control many local police .

additionally , some army units sent to baghdad have mixed loyalties , and some have had ties to shi'a militias making it difficult to target shi'a extremist networks .

further , according to dod , evidence exists of target lists emanating from the office of the commander in chief that bypassed operational commanders and directed lower - level intelligence officers and commanders to make arrests , primarily of sunnis .

in addition , sectarian bias in the appointment of senior military and police commanders continues , giving rise to suspicions that political considerations may drive iraqi commanders' decisions about which operations to undertake or support .

in commenting on this benchmark , dod noted that all 9 of the brigade commanders and 17 of the 27 national police battalion commanders have been replaced for failure to command or enforce non - sectarian operations .

ensuring that iraqi security forces are providing even - handed enforcement of the law .

during 2006 , according to a department of state human rights report , the iraqi security forces committed serious human rights violations in baghdad and other areas of iraq .

these actions added to the increasing violence against the civilian population during 2006 .

in support of the baghdad security plan , the iraqi prime minister pledged to provide even - handed enforcement of the law .

according to u.s. reports , the government of iraq has not ensured that the iraqi security forces are providing even - handed enforcement of the law .

in may 2007 , the u.s. commission on international religious freedom reported that iraq's shi'a - dominated government bears responsibility for engaging in sectarian - based human rights violations , as well as tolerating abuses committed by shi'a militias with ties to political factions in the governing coalition .

according to the commission , the iraqi government through its security forces has committed arbitrary arrest , prolonged detention without due process , targeted executions , and torture against non - shi'a iraqis .

in committing these abuses , the security forces target sunnis on the basis of their religious identity , as well as terrorists and insurgents .

and have committed such abuses as abductions , beatings , targeted killings , intimidation , forced resettlement , murder , rape , and torture .

according to the commission's report , relationships between these militias and leading shi'a factions within iraq's ministries and governing coalition indicate that the jayash al - mahdi and badr organization are parastate actors operating with impunity or even with governmental complicity .

in mid - august 2007 , department of state officials stated that the iraqi government and security forces continue to engage in sectarian - based abuses .

state's march 2007 human rights report cited widely reported incidents of unauthorized government agent involvement in extrajudicial killings throughout the country .

these incidents included shi'a militia members wearing police uniforms and driving police cars in carrying out killings and kidnapping in the southern city of basra .

in addition , death squads affiliated with the ministry of interior targeted sunnis and conducted kidnapping raids in baghdad and its environs , largely with impunity .

the administration's july 2007 report stated that the iraqi government and many iraqi security force units are still applying the law on a sectarian basis when left on their own .

the report attributed any progress made by the security forces in enforcing the law more even - handedly to the presence of coalition units and embedded training teams , rather than to the iraqi government .

ensuring that , according to president bush , prime minister maliki said ‘‘the baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for any outlaws , regardless of sectarian or political affiliation. .

as stated in the president's january 10 , 2007 , speech on the baghdad security plan , previous plans to secure baghdad have failed , in part , because political and sectarian interference and rules of engagement in place for those plans prevented iraqi and coalition forces from entering neighborhoods that are safe havens to those fueling the sectarian violence .

on january 6 , 2007 , the iraqi prime minister stated , “the baghdad security plan will not offer a safe shelter for outlaws regardless of their ethnic and political affiliations , and we will punish anyone who hesitates to implement orders because of his ethnic and political background. .

although the iraqi government has allowed mnf - i to conduct operations in all areas of baghdad , temporary safe havens still exist due to strong sectarian loyalties and militia infiltration of security forces .

according to state , terrorist safe havens are defined as ungoverned , under - governed , or ill - governed areas of a country and non - physical areas where terrorists that constitute a threat to u.s. national security interests are able to organize , plan , raise funds , communicate , recruit , train , and operate in relative security because of inadequate governance capacity , political will , or both .

maintain only one joint security station on the border of sadr city , with none within the city itself ( see fig .

4 ) .

in addition to joint security stations , mnf - i established about 30 coalition outposts throughout baghdad , including one on the border of sadr city .

temporary safe havens still exist in baghdad , which supports a rating of partially met .

a june 2007 dod report describes some of the conditions that allow safe havens to exist .

for example , the shi'a militia continues to function as the de facto government in sadr city .

further , militia influence impacts every component of the iraqi ministry of the interior , particularly in baghdad and several other key cities , according to the dod report .

our classified briefing report provides more information on the existence of safe havens .

reducing the level of sectarian violence in iraq and eliminating militia control of local security .

during 2006 , according to state and un reports , insurgents , death squads , militias , and terrorists increased their attacks against civilians , largely on a sectarian basis .

in addition , the number of internally displaced persons in iraq sharply increased following the february 2006 bombing of the samarra mosque , primarily as a result of sectarian intimidation and violence that forced many people from their homes .

by the end of 2006 , according to the un , many baghdad neighborhoods had become divided along sunni and shi'a lines and were increasingly controlled by armed groups claiming to act as protectors and defenders of these areas .

in january 2007 , the president announced that the united states would increase force levels in iraq to help the iraqis carry out their campaign to reduce sectarian violence and bring security to baghdad .

while it is not clear if sectarian violence has been reduced , militia control over security forces has not been eliminated and remains a serious problem in baghdad and other areas of iraq .

murders in determining trends in sectarian violence .

the administration's july 2007 report concluded that the iraqi government , with substantial coalition assistance , had made satisfactory progress toward reducing sectarian violence .

the report acknowledged that precise measurements vary , and it was too early to determine if the decrease would be sustainable .

gao cannot determine whether sectarian violence in iraq has been reduced because measuring such violence requires understanding the perpetrator's intent , which may not be known .

the number of attacks targeting civilians and population displacement resulting from sectarian violence may serve as additional indicators .

for example , as displayed in figure 5 , the average number of daily attacks against civilians remained about the same over the last six months .

the decrease in total average daily attacks in july is largely due to a decrease in attacks on coalition forces rather than civilians .

security will continue to improve modestly , but that levels of insurgent and sectarian violence will remain high over the next 6 to 12 months .

similarly , recent march and june 2007 united nations reports state that attacks against civilians persist and the continuing systematic , widespread attacks against the civilian population in iraq are tantamount to crimes against humanity and violate the laws of war .

the violence in iraq has resulted in a large number of iraqis displaced from their homes .

a report by the iraqi red crescent organization found that internally displaced persons increased from about 499,000 in february 2007 to about 1,128,000 in july 2007 .

the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) estimated that an additional 1.8 million iraqi citizens were displaced to nearby countries , primarily to jordan , syria , lebanon , iran , and egypt .

the unhcr predicted that 40,000 to 50,000 people will continue to be displaced each month even if the security plan succeeds in solving the displacement problem .

currently , the number of displaced persons is increasing at an average of 80,000 to 100,000 each month , according to the red crescent .

the august 2007 national intelligence estimate for iraq stated that population displacement resulting from sectarian violence continues , imposing burdens on provincial governments and some neighboring states .

as the international organization for migration and the un recently reported , most of iraq's internally displaced persons are moving from mixed areas to seek refuge in homogeneous areas , largely because of direct threats or forcible displacement from their homes due to their religious and sectarian identities .

where population displacements have led to significant sectarian separation , according to the august 2007 national intelligence estimate , conflict levels have diminished to some extent because warring communities find it more difficult to penetrate communal enclaves .

our classified report provides further information on trends associated with violence in iraq .

militia control over local security forces – the second part of the benchmark — has not been eliminated .

numerous u.s. and un reports have stated that militias still retain significant control or influence over local security in parts of baghdad and other areas of iraq .

for example , in july 2007 , the administration reported that militia presence is still strong and will likely remain so until the security situation begins to stabilize .

the report stated that the iraqi government has made unsatisfactory progress towards eliminating militia control of local security , which continues to negatively affect the public perception of the authority and fairness of the iraqi government .

in addition , dod's june 2007 report to congress called militia influence of local police a significant problem and added that some security forces remain prone to intimidation by , or collusion with , criminal gangs .

further , the department of state's human rights report characterized iraqi police effectiveness as seriously compromised by militias and sectarianism , with rampant corruption and a culture of impunity .

finally , in march 2007 , the united nations reported cases of possible collusion between armed militia and iraqi security forces in raids and security operations , as well as the failure of these security forces to intervene and prevent kidnapping and murder and other crimes .

establishing all of the planned joint security stations in neighborhoods across baghdad .

past baghdad security plans failed , in part , because the coalition and iraqi forces did not hold neighborhoods after clearing them of insurgents .

the current baghdad security plan and the related increase of u.s. and iraqi forces into baghdad is intended to clear insurgents , militias , and organized criminal gangs from neighborhoods ; maintain a security presence in those areas ; and provide for follow - on assistance efforts .

as part of this effort , mnf - i and iraqi security forces are establishing joint security stations across baghdad to improve population protection by providing a continuous presence in baghdad's neighborhoods .

as of august 9 , 2007 , the iraqi government , with substantial coalition assistance , had established 32 of the 34 planned joint security stations in baghdad ( see fig .

6 ) .

this figure includes joint security stations that had achieved initial or full operational capability .

joint security stations are staffed by iraqi local police , national police , and army personnel , as well as coalition forces .

according to the administration's july 2007 report , the security stations are designed to improve population protection by providing a 24-hour security presence in baghdad neighborhoods .

they also allow greater oversight of iraqi security forces by u.s. military personnel .

increasing the number of iraqi security forces' units capable of operating independently .

in august 2003 , the coalition provisional authority dissolved the iraqi military and began the process of rebuilding the iraqi military and police .

since 2003 , the united states has provided about $19.2 billion to train and equip about 350,000 iraqi soldiers and police officers , in an effort to develop iraqi security forces , transfer security responsibilities to them and the iraqi government , and ultimately withdraw u.s. troops from iraq .

the coalition began embedding transition teams with iraqi security forces in 2005 to help develop their ability to conduct counterinsurgency operations .

these teams use the operational readiness assessment process to evaluate the readiness of iraqi security force units to conduct operations with or without coalition support .

while the iraqi security forces have grown in size and are increasingly leading counterinsurgency operations , the number of iraqi army units operating independently decreased between march 2007 and july 2007 .

according to the administration's july 2007 report , an iraqi unit can be considered independent if it has achieved an operational readiness assessment rating of level 1 , which means it is capable of planning , executing , and sustaining counterinsurgency operations .

operating independently , according to dod reports .

sectarian and militia influences further complicate the development of iraqi forces .

in june 2007 , dod reported that while coalition forces are the target of most enemy attacks , iraqi security forces and civilians account for the majority of casualties , contributing to the decline in the readiness of some iraqi units .

attrition also has affected the iraqi security forces .

annual attrition is estimated to be between 15 and 18 percent for the iraqi army and between 20 and 22 percent for the police .

in addition , according to a june 2007 report from dod to congress , only about 65 percent of authorized iraqi personnel are in the field at any given time due to a liberal leave policy and absences without leave .

to increase the number of soldiers on hand for operations , the iraqi government and mnf - i decided that they will increase manning to 120 percent of authorization levels .

due to iraq's immature logistics systems , many iraqi military and police units will continue to depend on mnf - i for key sustainment and logistics support until december 2008 .

dod reports that the iraqi forces' limited capacity in these areas hinders their ability to assume missions from mnf - i and requires continued development in some key areas through the end of 2008 .

for instance , dod has set a december 2008 goal for the iraqi government to provide day - to - day items such as food , water , and electricity to the ministry of defense's national depot .

in addition , the ministry of interior aims to become self sufficient in procuring and managing repair parts by the end of 2008. with corruption and illegal activity , constrains progress in the development of ministry of interior forces .

ensuring that the rights of minority political parties in the iraqi legislature are protected .

minority parties or groups had no rights under the former ba'athist regime .

ensuring the rights of minority parties was a key iraqi goal to ensure broad representation and fairness in the new iraq .

the rights of minority political parties in the iraqi legislature are protected through provisions in the iraqi constitution and the council of representatives' by - laws .

however , in practice , the rights of minorities throughout iraq remain unprotected .

the iraqi constitution and the council of representatives' by - laws include provisions to ensure the full participation of minority political parties within the iraqi council of representatives .

these provisions include: article 39 of iraq's constitution , which guarantees the freedom to form and join associations and political parties and also prohibits forcing any person to join in any party , society , or political entity or to continue membership in it .

article 3 of the council of representatives by - laws , which guarantees the freedom of expressions , opinions , and thoughts of all members of the council of representatives .

this guarantee is made regardless of a representative's party or political affiliation in a way that does not contradict the provisions of the constitution , including the freedom of objective opposition , constructive criticism , and achieving cooperation between the council of representatives and other constitutional institutions .

according to iraqi legislators from minority parties , their rights in the legislature are protected and they are not physically intimidated .

the legislators also said that they have the right to speak before parliament , and to offer legislation even though they are often not consulted on legislative issues .

according to the u.s. government , the electoral system — provincial proportional representation — that was used to elect the current council was chosen in 2005 to balance a number of factors , including the ability of women and small minority parties to gain representation .

the council of representatives elected in december 2005 includes members from the shi'a , sunni , kurdish , turkmen , chaldo - assyrian christian , and yazidi communities .

although the rights of minority parties are protected in the legislature , widespread violence across iraq has seriously compromised the government's ability to protect human rights .

according to the united nations , attacks against religious and ethnic minorities continued unabated in most areas of iraq , prompting these communities to seek ways to leave the country .

the conflicts reportedly bear the mark of sectarian polarization and “cleansing” in neighborhoods formerly comprised of different religions .

according to a non - governmental organization , all of iraq's minority communities have suffered violations that include destruction and defacement of religious buildings ; mass murder of congregations gathered in and around them ; abduction , ransoming , and murder of religious and civic leaders and individuals including children ; and forced conversion to islam using tactics such as death threats , rape , and forced marriage .

their communities has a direct bearing on their work in the legislature , their freedom of movement to and from the legislature , and their ability to engage fully in iraq political life .

allocating and spending $10 billion in iraqi revenues for reconstruction projects , including delivery of essential services on an equitable basis .

the president's new way forward in iraq identified iraq's inability to fully spend its own resources to rebuild its infrastructure and deliver essential services as a critical economic challenge to iraq's self - reliance .

iraqi government funds are a necessary source of financing for iraq's rebuilding effort , particularly since the united states has obligated most of the $40 billion it provided to iraq for reconstruction since 2003 .

however , the government of iraq has had difficulty spending its resources on capital projects .

in 2006 , the government spent only 22 percent of its non - provincial capital projects and reconstruction budget .

furthermore , in the critical oil sector , which provides over 90 percent of iraq's revenues , the government spent less than 3 percent of the $3.5 billion allocated for oil reconstruction projects in 2006 .

in its 2007 budget , iraq committed to spending $10 billion on capital projects and reconstruction .

according to u.s. and coalition officials .

we are conducting a review of u.s. efforts to help iraq spend its budget and will issue a separate report at a later date .

the u.s. embassy in baghdad reported that iraqi government ministries spent about $1.5 billion , or 24 percent , of the $6.25 billion allocated to their capital projects and reconstruction budgets through july 15th , just over half - way through the fiscal year .

this level of spending already exceeds the $1.4 billion spent in 2006 .

however , iraqi ministries have less than 6 months left in the year to spend the remaining 76 percent of their budgets .

in its july 2007 report , the administration cited satisfactory progress with this benchmark because the ministry of finance was releasing funds to ministries and provinces .

the u.s. embassy reported that the ministry of finance released 25 percent and 10 percent of 2007 capital project and reconstruction budget funds to ministries and provinces , respectively , in the first 5 months of the year .

however , funding releases are not expenditures and may not be a reliable indicator of future spending by ministries and provinces .

the administration's report noted that capacity constraints and security problems may affect iraq's ability to accelerate its spending and procurement activities .

instead shifted them to its subsidiaries , such as the state oil marketing organization , which have responsibility for spending much of the oil ministry's capital projects and reconstruction budget .

collected and reported by provincial reconstruction teams , the provinces had committed 44 percent of their 2007 allocation to contracts for capital projects , as of july 15 , 2007 .

however , it is not clear whether the value of committed contracts is a reliable indicator of actual spending .

given the capacity and security challenges currently facing iraq , many committed contracts may not be executed and , therefore , would not result in actual expenditures .

the government of iraq is undertaking a number of initiatives , including budget execution training sessions , to help provincial officials spend their capital budgets , according to u.s. officials .

ensuring that iraq's political authorities are not undermining or making false accusations against members of the iraqi security forces .

according to u.s. government reporting , qualified iraqi officers may be discouraged from operating in a professional , non - sectarian manner if iraq's political authorities undermine or make false accusations against members of the iraqi security forces ( isf ) .

iraq's political authorities continue to undermine and make false accusations against members of the isf .

according to u.s. government officials , little has changed since the u.s. administration's july 2007 initial benchmark assessment .

each month the u.s. government receives reports alleging wrongdoing by isf members considered by mnf - i to be non - sectarian in their approach to security .

the u.s. assessment further stated that in most cases the u.s. government was unable to determine the validity of these allegations but believed them to be untrue .

the assessment concluded that these accusations undermine the independence and non - sectarianism of the isf and that the iraqi government does not adequately address the accusations .

according to mnf - i officials in baghdad , some cases resulted in detention of military officers , but the cases did not provide justification or specific charges against the officers .

further information is classified .

influential sectarian leaders linked to the security ministries .

these actions have reportedly led to the arrest and detention of several military officials .

according to u.s. officials , this tactic is primarily used against sunni ministry of defense officials and does not occur at the predominantly shi'a ministry of interior .

the u.s. government also reported that some sunni politicians have made unsubstantiated claims against isf officials .

moreover , iraqi government support for the isf has been uneven .

some members of the council of ministers and council of representatives have publicly supported isf leaders while behind the scenes they continue to ignore sectarian activities , according to the u.s. government .

ppendix xix: origin of iraqi benchmarks appendix xix: origin of iraqi benchmarks iraq's policy committee on national security agreed upon a set of political , security , and economic benchmarks and an associated timeline in september 2006 .

these were reaffirmed by the presidency council on october 16 , 2006 .

in december 2006 , mnf - i and the government of iraq agreed to establish joint security stations .

forming contittionl review committee nd then completing the contittionl review .

encting nd implementing legition on de - ba'athifiction .

encting nd implementing legition to ensure the equitable ditribution of hydrocon rerce of the people of iraq withot regrd to the ect or ethnicity of recipient , nd encting nd implementing legition to ensure tht the energy rerce of iraq enefit sunni arabs , shi arabs , krd , nd other iraqi citizen in n equitable mnner .

encting nd implementing legition on procedre to form emi - autonomous region .

encting nd implementing legition eablihing n independent high electorl commission , provincil electionw , provincil concil authoritie , nd te for provincil election .

encting nd implementing legition ddressing mnety .

encting nd implementing legition eablihing trong militi disarmment progrm to ensure thsuch ecrity force re ccontable only to the centrl government nd loyl to the contittion of iraq .

eablihing supporting politicl , medi , economic , nd ervice committee in support of the bghdecrity pln .

providing three trined nd redy iraqrigde to support bghdd opertion .

providing iraqi commnder with ll authoritie to execte thi plnd to mke tcticnd opertionl deciion , in consulttion with u.s. commnder , withot politicl intervention , to inclde the authority to psull extremi , inclding sunni insurgent nd shiite militias .

ensuring tht the iraqsecrity force re providing even - hnded enforcement of the lw .

ensuring tht , ccording to preident bush , prime miniter mliki said ‘‘the bghdecrity pln will not provide safe hven for ny otl , regrdless of ectrin or politicffilition.'' redcing the level of ectrin violence in iraq nd eliminting militi control of locecrity .

eablihing ll of the plnned joint ecrity tion in neighorhood cross bghdd .

increasing the ner of iraqecrity forces' nitable of operting independently .

ensuring tht the right of minority politicl prtie in the iraqi legire re protected .

allocting nd pending $10 illion in iraqi reven for recontrction project , inclding delivery of essentiervice , on n equitable bas .

ensuring tht iraq's politicauthoritie re not ndermining or mking fccusation int memer of the iraqecrity force .

according to the u.s. state department , conditions are not present for these benchmarks .

the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act of 2007 ( the act ) requires gao to submit to congress by september 1 , 2007 , an independent assessment of whether or not the government of iraq has met 18 benchmarks contained in the act and the status of the achievement of the benchmarks .

this report ( 1 ) provides an assessment of whether or not the iraqi government has met 18 legislative , security , and economic benchmarks , and ( 2 ) provides information on the status of the achievement of each benchmark .

these benchmarks address 8 legislative , 9 security and 1 economic - related action .

to complete this work , we reviewed u.s. agency documents and interviewed officials from the departments of defense , state , and the treasury ; the multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) and its subordinate commands ; the defense intelligence agency ; the central intelligence agency ; the national intelligence council ; and the united nations .

these officials included ryan crocker , the u.s .

ambassador to iraq , and general david h. petraeus , commander of multi - national force - iraq ( mnf - i ) .

we also reviewed translated copies of iraqi documents and met with officials from the government of iraq and its legislature .

as part of this work , we made multiple visits to iraq during 2006 and 2007 , including a visit from july 22 to august 1 , 2007 .

our analyses were enhanced by approximately 100 iraq - related audits we have completed since may 2003 .

we provided drafts of the report to the relevant u.s. agencies for review and comment , which we incorporated as appropriate .

although we analyzed classified data , this report only contains unclassified information , as of august 30 , 2007 .

we conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

political parties in the iraqi legislature are protected , we took a number of actions .

specifically , we interviewed and reviewed documentation from the iraqi government , iraqi legislators in baghdad , un , u.s. institute for peace , ifes , the independent high electoral commission , non - governmental organizations , and the departments of defense and state in washington , d.c. and baghdad , iraq .

the documents reviewed included the administration's july 2007 initial benchmark assessment , the iraqi constitution , draft laws related to each of the benchmarks , the international compact with iraq 2007 mid - year progress report , and un analyses of the laws addressed by the benchmarks .

for our assessment of the status of the hydrocarbon legislation , we relied on prior gao reporting and updated information where appropriate .

we interviewed and reviewed documentation from the iraqi government , un , u.s. institute for peace , and state department in washington , d.c. and baghdad , iraq .

we compared central government draft oil laws with the iraqi constitution and the kurdistan regional government oil and gas law .

additionally , to determine if the iraqi government is ensuring that the rights of minority political parties in the iraqi legislature are protected , we obtained and reviewed the administration's report on progress in iraq , the iraqi constitution , and the council of representatives bylaws .

we interviewed iraqi legislators in baghdad , iraq , including the leader of the iraqi minority council .

we also reviewed human rights reports from nongovernmental organizations , the united nations , and the u.s. government to determine whether the rights of minorities throughout iraq are protected .

intervention ; ( 4 ) ensuring that the iraqi security forces are providing even - handed law enforcement ; ( 5 ) eliminating safe havens ; ( 6 ) reducing the level of sectarian violence and eliminating militia control of local security ; ( 7 ) establishing all planned joint security stations ; ( 8 ) increasing the number of security units capable of operating independently ; and ( 9 ) ensuring that iraq's political authorities are not undermining or making false accusations against members of the iraqi security forces , we took a number of actions .

specifically , we examined u.s. department of state cables and other documents that discussed the establishment of the supporting committees .

we reviewed classified and unclassified documents and reports showing the iraqi army units that had deployed to baghdad and analyzed the u.s. department of defense operational readiness assessments ( ora ) formerly known as transitional readiness assessments , for these units .

in addition , we reviewed classified and unclassified assessments of the authorities granted to unit commanders , the level of sectarian influence and levels of militia infiltration of army and police units , and reports of incidents where iraqi officials interfered with the chain of command .

to understand the range of methodological issues associated with measuring levels of sectarian violence , and to collect information related to broader trends in population security , we interviewed officials from the u.s. department of state and department of defense in washington , d.c. , and baghdad , iraq ; the central intelligence agency ; the defense intelligence agency ; the national intelligence council ; the united nations ; and the international organization for migration in washington , d.c. , baghdad , iraq , and amman , jordan .

we also met with these officials to discuss the other benchmarks .

cooperation data on capital expenditures reported by multinational force - iraq .

we also reviewed unofficial unreconciled data on capital budget execution by the provinces in 2006 and 2007 collected by u.s .

provincial reconstruction teams .

we compared 2007 capital allocations to the provinces with their populations to assess the equity of capital funding allocations .

we discussed the reliability of allocation and expenditure data with u.s. treasury officials and contractors advising the ministry of finance .

we also reviewed relevant reports by dod and state , the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction , world bank , imf , public accountants and iraqi government budget implementation documents .

we found that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of showing trends in budget expenditures .

the following are gao's comments on the state department's letter dated august 30 , 2007 .

devising a package of necessary amendments , the iraqi legislature had not voted on the package , and a referendum had not been held .

11 .

we added information to our already existing reference to the kurdish national assembly legislation .

12 .

we revised this sentence .

13 .

under our criteria , this benchmark was not met .

14 .

we revised the text to reflect state's comments .

15 .

we revised the text to reflect state's comments .

16 .

our paragraph provides context for the committees' work and the text makes it clear that these actions were in the past so we retained our original language .

17 .

see comment 6 .

18 .

see comment 6 .

19 .

see comment 5 .

20 .

we revised the text .

21 .

see comment 6 .

the following are gao's comments on dod's letter dated august 30 , 2007 .

1 .

we have revised the text .

2 .

we have revised the text .

3 .

we have modified the sentence by adding not “always.” 4 .

we have replaced this chart .

5 .

we have qualified the sentence by adding “parts of .” 6 .

we disagree with dod's comment .

the iraq benchmark calls for increasing the number of iraqi security units capable of operating independently .

a key impediment to iraqi training and readiness , particularly of the police , is sectarian and militia influence .

dod's june 2007 report to congress states that sectarian bias has constrained the development of moi forces .

7 .

dod commented that 71 percent of iraqi authorized personnel are in the field at any one time , compared to 65 percent , which we report .

we are retaining the 65 percent in our report because it is from a published dod source and we do not have further documentation on the new figure .

steve lord , david bruno , howard cott , tim fairbanks , mattias fenton , whitney havens , dorian herring , bruce kutnick , judy mccloskey , tet miyabara , and kathleen monahan .

in addition , robert alarapon ashley alley , monica brym , lessie m burke - johnson , joe carney , miriam carroll , thomas costa , lynn cothern , debra chung , joyee dasgupta , martin de alteriis , etana finkler , muriel forster , patrick hickey , michael jenkins , sona kalapura , jeremy latimer , mary moutsos , mimi nguyen , sidney schwartz , jena sinkfield , audrey solis , cynthia taylor , and christina werth provided technical assistance .

