in recent years , a number of reports and newspaper articles have cited concerns regarding the level of protection and the available amounts of body armor to protect deployed service members .

as part of gao's efforts to monitor the department of defense's ( dod ) and the services' action to protect ground forces , gao reviewed the army and marine corps's actions to address these concerns .

army and marine corps body armor currently meets theater ballistic requirements and the required amount needed for personnel in theater , including the amounts needed for the surge of troops into iraq .

the interceptor body armor ( iba ) consists of an outer tactical vest with ballistic inserts or plates that cover the front , back , and sides .

the vest and inserts currently meet the theater ballistic requirements .

the vest provides protection from 9mm rounds , while the inserts provide protection against 7.62mm armor - piercing rounds .

centcom requires that all u.s. military forces and all dod civilians in the area of operations receive the body armor system .

currently , service members receive all service - specific standard components of the body armor system prior to deploying .

the army and the marine corps provide the dod civilians with components of the armor system .

on april 26 , 2007 , gao issued a report regarding the army and the marine corps's individual body armor systems .

today's testimony summarizes the report's findings regarding the extent to which the army and marine corps ( 1 ) have met the theater requirements for body armor , ( 2 ) have the controls in place to assure that the manufacturing and fielding of body armor meet requirements , and ( 3 ) have shared information regarding their efforts on body armor ballistic requirements and testing .

the report also included additional information concerning whether contractors or non - dod civilians obtain body armor in the same way as u.s. forces and dod civilians given the number of contractors and non - dod civilians in centcom's area of operation .

gao did not make recommendations in the report .

dod officials did not provide written comments on the report but technical comments were incorporated as appropriate .

the army and marine corps have controls in place during manufacturing and after fielding to assure that body armor meets requirements .

both services conduct quality and ballistic testing prior to fielding , and lots ( a grouping of items varying in number ) are rejected if the standards are not met .

they also conduct formal testing on every lot of body armor ( vests and protective inserts ) prior to acceptance and issuance to troops .

during production , which is done at several sites , the lots of body armor are sent to a national institute of justice - certified laboratory for ballistic testing and to the defense contract management agency for quality testing ( size , weight , stitching ) prior to issuance to troops .

although not required to do so , after the systems have been used in the field , the army does limited ballistic and environmental testing to determine future improvements .

the army and marine corps share information regarding ballistic requirements and testing although they are not required to do so .

title 10 of the u.s. code allows each service to have separate programs , according to army and marine corps officials .

nevertheless , the services are sharing information regarding ongoing research and development for the next generation of body armor .

www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 07-911t .

to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above .

for more information , contact william m.solis at ( 202 ) 512-8365 or solisw@gao.gov .

dod instruction 3020.41 allows dod to provide body armor to contractors and non - dod civilians where permitted by applicable dod instructions and military department regulations and where specified under the terms of the contract .

it is centcom's position that body armor will be provided to contractors if it is part of the terms and conditions of the contract .

however , the officials indicated that commanders , at their discretion , can provide body armor to any personnel within their area of operation .

mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss our findings regarding army and marine corps's individual body armor systems .

as you know , since combat operations began in iraq and afghanistan , u.s. forces have been subjected to frequent and deadly attacks from insurgents using various weapons such as improvised explosive devices ( ied ) , mortars , rocket launchers , and increasingly lethal ballistic threats .

since 2003 , to provide protection from ballistic threats , u.s. central command ( centcom ) , which is responsible for operations in iraq and afghanistan and other areas , has required service members and department of defense ( dod ) civilians in its area of operations to be issued the interceptor body armor ( iba ) system .

congress has expressed strong interest in the quality of our ground force's body armor protection , especially since combat operations began in iraq and afghanistan and news reports citing concerns regarding body armor shortages and quality issues .

in response to these concerns , we reviewed the army and marine corps's actions regarding individual body armor systems , and on april 26 , 2007 , issued a report .

my testimony today summarizes the findings in this report .

specifically , i will discuss the extent to which the army and marine corps ( 1 ) have met the theater requirements for body armor , ( 2 ) have the controls in place to assure that the manufacturing and fielding of body armor meet requirements , and ( 3 ) have shared information regarding their efforts on body armor ballistic requirements and testing .

i will also include additional information concerning whether contractors or non - dod civilians obtain body armor in the same way as u.s. forces and dod civilians given the number of contractors and non - dod civilians in centcom's area of operation .

to assess these issues we focused on army and marine corps body armor systems for u.s. service members and dod and non - dod civilian personnel deployed within centcom's area of operations , including iraq and afghanistan .

to determine whether the army and marine corps are meeting the theater ballistic and inventory requirements for body armor , we reviewed documentation and interviewed officials from key dod , army , and marine corps organizations , such as the office of the under secretary of defense , acquisition , technology , and logistics , the defense logistics agency , and centcom , which are responsible for managing theater ballistic and inventory requirements .

we analyzed the ballistic requirements and compared these requirements to the body armor systems provided to personnel .

moreover , we concentrated on the body armor system currently being used in centcom's area of operation .

we also obtained and reviewed the amount of body armor systems available worldwide for the army and marine corps to determine if the available amount met the quantity needed in theater .

we analyzed the distribution practices to assure that personnel were receiving body armor systems that met ballistic theater requirements and that these systems were available for those preparing to deploy .

we did not independently verify that deployed personnel wore the body armor systems as recommended by their commanders .

to assess the extent to which the services have controls in place during manufacturing and after fielding to assure that body armor meets requirements , we reviewed documentation and discussed the services' ballistic test processes and procedures with their program and technical officials .

we analyzed these test processes and procedures to determine if controls are in place that assure body armor meets ballistic requirements during manufacturing and after fielding .

our analysis included ballistic test methods for the tactical vests and the protective plate inserts ; however , we did not independently verify test results .

in addition , we reviewed the services' past experiences where the services concluded that fielded body armor systems failed to meet contract specifications and ballistic testing requirements .

we analyzed the services' actions to determine if their actions corrected the failures .

we also reviewed documentation and interviewed army and marine corps body armor program officials who provided manufacturer production quality and ballistic testing lot failures for early 2006 through early 2007 .

to identify the extent to which the army and marine corps share information regarding their efforts on body armor ballistic requirements and testing , we analyzed the services' body armor programs and policies and discussed with service officials whether there is a requirement to share information between the services regarding their separate programs .

we also discussed with officials and reviewed documentation to determine whether the services do share information and if shared , what specific actions they take .

to determine whether contractors or non - dod civilians obtain body armor in the same way as u.s. forces and dod civilians in centcom's area of operations , we obtained and analyzed dod and centcom policy regarding personal protection for contractors and non - dod civilians .

we also interviewed army , marine corps , and centcom officials on this issue .

we did not make recommendations in our report .

dod officials did not provide written comments on the report but technical comments were incorporated as appropriate .

we conducted our review from november 2006 to march 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

used by all u.s. military service members and dod civilians in the area of operations , the iba consists of an outer tactical vest with ballistic inserts or plates that cover the front , back , and sides .

as the ballistic threat has evolved , ballistic requirements have also changed .

the vest currently provides protection from 9mm rounds , while the inserts provide protection against 7.62mm armor - piercing rounds .

additional protection can also be provided for the shoulder , throat , and groin areas .

figure 1 details the body armor components .

concerns regarding the level of protection and amount of iba needed to protect u.s. forces have been raised in recent years , prompted by a number of reports , newspaper articles , and recalls of issued body armor by both the army and the marine corps .

in may 2005 , the marine corps recalled fielded body armor because it concluded that the body armor failed to meet contract specifications , and in november 2005 , the army and marine corps recalled 14 lots of body armor that failed original ballistic testing .

additionally , in april 2005 , we reported on shortages of critical force protection items , including individual body armor .

specifically , we found that the shortages in body armor were due to material shortages , production limitations , and in - theater distribution problems .

in the report , we did not make specific recommendations regarding body armor , but we did make several recommendations to improve the effectiveness of dod's supply system in supporting deployed forces for contingencies .

dod agreed with the intent of the recommendations and cited actions it had or was taking to eliminate supply chain deficiencies .

army and marine corps body armor currently meets theater ballistic requirements and the required amount needed for personnel in theater , including the amounts needed for the surge of troops into iraq .

used by all u.s. military service members and dod civilians in the area of operations , the iba consists of an outer tactical vest with ballistic inserts or plates that cover the front , back , and sides .

the vest and inserts currently meet the theater ballistic requirements .

the vest provides protection from 9mm rounds , while the inserts provide protection against 7.62mm armor - piercing rounds .

additional protection can also be provided for the shoulder , throat , and groin areas .

the army and marine corps body armor meets the required amounts needed for personnel in theater as well .

table 1 details army and marine corps theater requirements and worldwide inventory quantities of the body armor as of february 2007 .

centcom requires that all u.s. military forces and all dod civilians in the area of operations receive the body armor system .

currently , service members receive all service - specific standard components of the body armor system prior to deploying .

for example , the army issues the shoulder protection equipment to all its forces ; however , marine corps personnel receive this equipment item in theater on an as - needed basis .

the army and the marine corps provide the dod civilians with components of the armor system .

however , the time frame for receipt of these items varies as some receive the body armor prior to deploying and others upon arrival in theater .

army unit commanders only reported one body armor issue in their december 2006 to february 2007 classified readiness reports .

this one issue did not raise a significant concern regarding the body armor .

moreover , marine corps commanders' comments contained in the december 2006 and january 2007 readiness reports did not identify any body armor issues affecting their units' readiness .

in december 2006 and january 2007 , the army , in its critical equipment list did not identify body armor as a critical equipment item affecting its unit readiness .

the army and marine corps have controls in place during manufacturing and after fielding to assure that body armor meets requirements .

both services conduct quality and ballistic testing prior to fielding and lots are rejected if the standards are not met .

they both also conduct formal testing on every lot of body armor ( vests and protective inserts ) prior to acceptance and issuance to troops .

during production , which is done at several sites , the lots of body armor are sent to a national institute of justice - certified laboratory for ballistic testing and to the defense contract management agency for quality testing ( size , weight , stitching ) prior to issuance to troops .

figure 2 illustrates the lot acceptance process .

once approved , the body armor is issued to operating forces .

currently , both army and marine corps personnel are issued body armor prior to deployment .

the army lot failure rate from january 2006 to january 2007 was 3.32 percent for the enhanced small arms inserts , and there were no failures for the outer tactical vests .

from february 2006 to february 2007 , the marine corps lot failure rate was 4.70 percent for the outer tactical vests .

although not required to do so , after the systems have been used in the field , the army does limited ballistic testing of outer tactical vests and environmental testing of the outer tactical vests and the inserts .

the marine corps visually inspects the vest and the plates for damage .

according to army officials , there has been no degradation of body armor based on ballistic and environmental testing results .

additionally , to determine future improvements , the army and the marine corps body armor program offices monitor and assess the use of body armor in the field , including the review of medical reports from the armed forces medical examiner .

for example , the army and marine corps added side plates and throat protection based on body armor usage in the field .

dod has a standard methodology for ballistic testing of the hard body armor plates , but not for the soft body armor vest .

currently , dod's director , operational test and evaluation office is developing a standard methodology for ballistic testing of the soft body armor to eliminate discrepancies in testing methodologies .

the new standard is expected to be issued sometime in 2007 .

the army and marine corps share information regarding ballistic requirements and testing , and the development of future body armor systems , although they are not required to do so .

for example , in august 2006 , the marine corps attended the army's test of next generation body armor types at fort benning , georgia .

similarly , the army sent representatives to attend the marine corps's operational assessment of the new modular tactical vest .

dod officials indicate that there is no requirement to share information .

title 10 of the u.s. code allows each service to have separate programs , according to army and marine corps officials .

nevertheless , the services are sharing information regarding ongoing research and development for the next generation of body armor .

regarding contractors or non - dod civilians , dod instruction 3020.41 allows dod to provide body armor to contractors where permitted by applicable dod instructions and military department regulations and where specified under the terms of the contract .

it is centcom's position that body armor will be provided to contractors if it is part of the terms and conditions of the contract .

according to centcom officials , non - dod government civilians such as state department civilians are expected to make their own arrangements to obtain this protection .

however , the officials said that commanders , at their discretion , can provide body armor to any personnel within their area of operation .

in conclusion , mr. chairman , the army and marine corps have taken several actions to address concerns , including assuring that the body armor systems meet the current theater requirements and that the amounts needed in theater are available .

however , ballistic theater threats can change , and the services will need to continue to monitor and evaluate the theater ballistic threats in order to develop and provide individual body armor that can counter these changing threats .

the services also will need to monitor and evaluate new technologies that may counter emerging theater ballistic threats .

moreover , they will need to continue to assure that controls are in place during manufacturing and after fielding to assure that existing and future body armor systems meet theater ballistic requirements .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have .

for more information regarding this testimony , please call me at ( 202 ) 512- 8365 .

individuals making key contributions to the testimony include: grace coleman , alfonso garcia , lonnie mcallister , lorelei st. james , and leo sullivan .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

