thank you for the opportunity to discuss our preliminary observations on the safety and security of students in the job corps program .

job corps is the nation's largest residential , educational , and career and technical training program for low - income youth generally between the ages of 16 and 24 .

the program is administered by the office of job corps in the department of labor's ( dol ) employment and training administration ( eta ) , and serves approximately 50,000 students each year at 125 job corps centers nationwide .

dol office of inspector general audits in 2009 , 2010 , and 2015 found that the office of job corps did not properly address serious incidents related to student safety because of deficiencies in its oversight of program disciplinary policies .

in addition , the deaths of two students at two separate job corps centers in 2015 raised concerns .

since then , eta and the office of job corps have taken a number of steps to address safety and security concerns .

in a march 2017 review , however , the office of inspector general found that the office of job corps lacked an overall policy requiring centers to report potentially serious criminal misconduct to law enforcement , and that 12 job corps centers had physical security weaknesses , among other concerns , and made related recommendations .

in its response to a draft of the office of inspector general's report , eta said it had already implemented most of these recommendations .

my testimony today will provide preliminary information on ( 1 ) the number and types of reported safety and security incidents involving job corps students , and ( 2 ) student perceptions of safety at job corps centers .

this statement is based on our ongoing work examining safety and security issues in the job corps program .

to assess what is known about the number and types of reported incidents involving student safety and security at job corps centers , we analyzed eta's incident data from january 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2016 .

eta captures this data in its significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) .

we assessed the reliability of the sirs data by reviewing relevant agency documentation about the data and the system that produced them , and interviewing eta officials knowledgeable about the data .

we also interviewed officials from dol's office of inspector general , which recently found that these data were incomplete for a non - generalizable sample of 12 of 125 job corps centers because they failed to report over a third of the incidents that occurred .

we determined , however , that the sirs data were sufficiently reliable to report the minimum number of incidents , in aggregate , that occurred from january 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2016 .

however , it is likely that the actual number of incidents was greater than the number we report in this statement .

we plan to examine incident data in a more comprehensive manner in our ongoing work .

the incident categories and definitions in this statement are taken directly from eta documents and represent how eta categorizes these incidents .

we did not assess these categories and definitions , nor did we conduct any research into the nature of the underlying events that led to the reporting of the incident .

in some cases , we made minor editorial changes to the names of the incident categories for reporting purposes .

to assess what is known about student perceptions of safety and security at job corps centers , we analyzed eta's national , summary - level student satisfaction survey data from march 2007 through march 2017 .

we assessed the reliability of the data by reviewing relevant agency documentation about the data and the system that produced them , and interviewing eta officials knowledgeable about the data .

based on this assessment , we determined that the student survey data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we plan to examine student survey data in a more comprehensive manner in our ongoing work .

in addition , we reviewed job corps policies and guidance related to safety and security , including the job corps policy and requirements handbook , which establishes program policies and requirements , and technical guidance for entering sirs data .

we also interviewed eta officials regarding eta's efforts to improve safety for job corps students .

we are conducting the work upon which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

to be eligible for the job corps program , an individual must generally be 16 to 24 years old at the time of enrollment ; be low income ; and have an additional barrier to education and employment , such as being homeless , a school dropout , or in foster care .

once enrolled in the program , youth are assigned to a specific job corps center , usually one located nearest their home and which offers a job training program of interest .

the vast majority of students live at job corps centers in a residential setting , while the remaining students commute daily from their homes to their respective centers .

this residential structure is unique among federal youth programs and enables job corps to provide a comprehensive array of services , including housing , meals , clothing , academic instruction , and job training .

eta administers job corps' 125 centers through its national office of job corps under the leadership of a national director and a field network of six regional offices located in atlanta , boston , chicago , dallas , philadelphia , and san francisco .

job corps is operated primarily through contracts , which according to eta officials , is unique among eta's employment and training programs ( other such programs are generally operated through grants to states ) .

among the 125 centers , 99 are operated under contracts with large and small businesses , nonprofit organizations , and native american tribes .

the remaining 26 centers ( called civilian conservation centers ) are operated by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) forest service through an interagency agreement with dol .

job corps center contractors and the usda forest service employ center staff who provide program services to students .

according to eta officials , the primary responsibility for ensuring safety and security at job corps centers resides with center operators .

also , according to eta officials , the office of job corps has oversight and monitoring responsibility to ensure that contract operators are in full compliance with their contract and that both contract centers and usda - operated civilian conservation centers follow job corps' policy and requirements handbook .

in september 2015 , as part of its overall effort to improve safety and security for students , eta established the division of regional operations and program integrity within the national office of job corps .

this division is responsible for coordinating regional operations and activities , including efforts to strengthen communications between the national and regional offices , strengthen quality assurance , and promote continuous improvement .

the division is also responsible for reviewing the results of all risk management data , center safety and culture assessments , and responses to safety and security deficiencies at individual centers .

for example , this division is to monitor the safety and security of job corps centers through ongoing oversight by regional offices , including daily monitoring of sirs data .

job corps' policy and requirements handbook requires centers to report certain significant incidents to the national office of job corps and to regional offices in sirs within 6 or 24 hours of becoming aware of them , depending on the incident .

specifically , centers are required to report numerous categories of incidents , including deaths , assaults , alcohol and drug - related incidents , serious illnesses and injuries , and hospitalizations ( see appendix i for definitions of these categories of incidents ) .

centers must report incidents involving both job corps students and staff , and incidents that occur onsite at centers as well as those that occur at offsite locations .

offsite incidents include those that occur while students are participating in program - related activities , such as off - center training and field trips .

offsite incidents also include those that occur while students are not participating in program - related activities , such as when they are at home during breaks .

in some cases , the incident categories in sirs are related to the specific infractions defined in the policy and requirements handbook , which are classified according to their level of severity .

level i infractions are the most serious , and include such infractions as arrest for a felony or violent misdemeanor or possession of a weapon , and are required to be reported in sirs .

level ii infractions include such infractions as possession of a potentially dangerous item like a box cutter , or arrest for a non - violent misdemeanor .

the majority of these infractions are required to be reported in sirs .

minor infractions — the lowest level of infractions — include failure to follow center rules , and are not required to be reported in sirs .

within the policy and requirements handbook , eta establishes a zero tolerance policy , which specifies actions that centers must take in response to certain incidents .

eta implemented changes to this policy effective on july 1 , 2016 , which impacted the categorization and number of reportable incidents .

under the prior zero tolerance policy , there were fewer infractions categorized as level i , which are the most severe and result in termination from the program .

the july 2016 policy changes broadened the types of infractions categorized as level i .

for example , eta elevated several infractions previously classified as level ii to level i , and added several new categories of reportable incidents .

according to eta officials , they made these changes to reflect a heightened emphasis on student safety .

eta currently surveys all students enrolled in job corps in march and september each year to collect information on a variety of topics , including their perceptions of safety at job corps centers .

the current student survey contains 49 questions on various aspects of the job corps program , including career development services , interactions between students and staff , access to alcohol and drugs , and overall satisfaction with the program .

the survey includes 12 questions on students' perceptions of safety at centers .

eta has been conducting this survey since 2002 , and in recent years has administered it twice a year .

eta officials told us they plan to survey students more frequently beginning in july 2017 .

specifically , they plan to survey students on a monthly basis regarding their perceptions of safety , and on a quarterly basis regarding their overall satisfaction with the program .

eta uses the responses to the safety - related survey questions to calculate a center safety rating , which represents the percentage of job corps students who report feeling safe at each center , as well as a national safety rating , which represents the percentage of job corps students who report feeling safe nationwide .

our preliminary analysis of eta's sirs data shows that job corps centers reported 49,836 safety and security incidents , including those that occurred both onsite and offsite , from january 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2016 .

during this time period , approximately 539,000 students were enrolled in the program , according to eta officials .

three types of incidents represented 60 percent of all reported incidents: serious illnesses or injuries ( 28 percent ) , assaults ( 19 percent ) , and drug - related incidents ( 13 percent ) .

the remaining 40 percent of reported incidents included theft or damage to center , staff , or student property ( 12 percent ) , breaches of security or safety ( 6 percent ) , and all other types of incidents ( 22 percent ) .

during this time period , job corps centers reported 265 deaths , including 61 deaths that occurred onsite and 204 that occurred offsite .

most of these reported deaths were homicides ( 25 percent ) , due to medical causes ( 23 percent ) , and due to accidental causes ( 22 percent ) .

in figure 1 below , 246 of these deaths are captured in the “other” category , and 19 of these deaths are captured in the “assault” category .

our preliminary analysis showed that from january 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2016 , 76 percent of the reported safety and security incidents occurred onsite at job corps centers , and 24 percent occurred at offsite locations ( see fig.2 ) .

while most reported incidents occurred onsite , our preliminary analysis showed that the majority of reported deaths occurred offsite .

during this time period , of the 265 reported deaths , 77 percent occurred offsite , and 23 percent occurred onsite .

the vast majority of homicides reported during this time period occurred offsite , and very few occurred onsite .

of 65 reported homicides , 61 occurred at offsite locations and 4 occurred onsite .

during this time period , the most common types of reported onsite incidents were generally different from the most common types of reported offsite incidents , although reported assaults were common in both locations .

the most common types of reported onsite incidents were the same as the most common types of incidents overall: serious illnesses or injuries ( 33 percent ) , assaults ( 20 percent ) , and drug - related incidents ( 16 percent ) .

of all reported offsite incidents , the most common types were thefts or damage to center , staff , or student property ( 23 percent ) , motor vehicle accidents ( 15 percent ) , assaults ( 14 percent ) , and serious illnesses or injuries ( 14 percent ) ( see fig.3 ) .

our preliminary analysis showed that from january 1 , 2007 through june 30 , 2016 , most reported violent incidents — specifically assaults , homicides , and sexual assaults that occurred both onsite and offsite — involved job corps students , and considerably fewer of these incidents involved program staff .

during this time period , job corps centers reported 10,531 violent incidents , which represented 21 percent of all reported onsite and offsite incidents .

students were victims in 72 percent of these reported violent incidents , while staff were victims in 8 percent of these incidents .

similarly , students were perpetrators in 85 percent of these reported violent incidents , while staff were perpetrators in 1 percent of these incidents ( see table 1 ) .

each of these reported violent incidents involved at least one victim or perpetrator who was a job corps student or staff member , but some of these incidents also involved victims or perpetrators who were not associated with the job corps program .

our preliminary analysis of eta's student satisfaction survey data from march 2007 to march 2017 showed that while students generally reported feeling safe at job corps centers , they reported feeling less safe on certain safety and security issues .

overall , across all 12 of the safety - related survey questions , an average of 72 percent of students reported feeling safe during this time period .

however , the average percentage of students who reported feeling safe on each individual survey question ranged from 44 percent to 91 percent .

for 7 of the 12 questions , student responses were above the 72 percent average , which indicates students felt more safe ; however , for 5 of the questions , student responses were below the average , which indicates students felt less safe ( see table 2 ) .

for example , an average of 44 percent of students reported that they had never heard students threaten each other , or had not heard such threats within the last month .

the remaining 56 percent of students , on average , reported hearing such threats at least once in the last month .

eta uses students' responses to the safety - related survey questions to calculate a safety rating for each job corps center and a national safety rating for the program overall .

according to eta officials , the center safety rating represents the percentage of students who report feeling safe at a center , and the national safety rating represents the percentage of students who report feeling safe nationwide .

throughout the period of march 2007 through march 2017 , the national safety rating remained above 82 percent , according to eta data .

eta officials said they use these ratings as management tools to assess students' perceptions of safety at individual centers and nationwide , and to determine whether eta needs to act upon these results to better address students' safety and security concerns .

chairwoman foxx , ranking member scott , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared remarks .

i look forward to answering any questions you may have .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact cindy brown barnes at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov .

contact points of our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include mary crenshaw ( assistant director ) , caitlin croake ( analyst in charge ) , david chrisinger , alexander galuten , latoya jeanita king , rebecca kuhlmann taylor , grant mallie , sheila mccoy , meredith moore , mimi nguyen , lorin obler , matthew saradjian , monica savoy , almeta spencer , amy sweet , walter vance , kathleen van gelder , and ashanta williams .

appendix i .

categories of incidents in the significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) .

eta's definition an incident involving the discovery of alcohol on center , or involving any student found in possession of alcohol or charged by local law enforcement agencies with illegal alcohol consumption or possession .

incidents which require medical treatment due to the physical effects of drug use ( alcohol poisoning , etc. ) .

should be reported under the “medical incident” primary incident code .

this code applies when a student is arrested for an incident that occurred prior to his / her enrollment in job corps .

these are acts that are commonly known as assault , battery , or mugging ; any assault with a weapon or object ; or any altercation resulting in medical treatment for injuries .

mugging ( robbery ) is included in this category because it pertains more to an assault upon a person than on property .

homicide has been removed as a primary incident code and is now listed under assault as a secondary incident code .

this code applies to any incidents that threaten the security and safety of center students , staff , and property which may result in injury , illness , fatality , and / or property damage .

examples include arson , bomb threat , gang - related incidents , possession of gun , possession of an illegal weapon , unauthorized access to center buildings , grounds , or restricted areas , and verbal threats .

attempted suicide is a deliberate action by student to self - inflict bodily harm in an attempt to kill one's self .

centers need only report a suicide threat ( suicidal ideation ) if it results in evaluation by a physician or mental health consultant .

centers must report the death of any student who is enrolled in job corps regardless of his / her duty status .

centers are only required to report the death of a staff member if the death occurs while on duty , either on center or off center .

incidents involving any student or staff found in possession of or charged by local law enforcement agencies with a drug offense ( e.g .

the illegal use , possession , or distribution of a controlled substance ) , or the discovery of drugs on center .

incidents which require medical treatment due to the physical effects of drug use ( overdose , etc. ) .

should be reported under the “medical incident” primary incident code .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

sexual misconduct includes the intentional touching , mauling , or feeling of the body or private parts of any person without the consent of that person .

sexual harassment or unsolicited offensive behavior such as unwelcome sexual advances , requests for sexual favors , and other verbal or physical contact of a sexual nature is also included .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

eta's definition eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

eta's significant incident reporting system ( sirs ) technical guide does not provide a definition of this category .

motor vehicle accidents involving any job corps student , on duty staff member , and / or center - owned vehicle should be reported using this code .

incidents in which a pedestrian is struck by a motor vehicle should be reported under the “medical incident” primary incident code .

safety / hazmat are incidents involving hazardous materials / chemicals in any solid , liquid , or gas form that can cause harm to humans , plants , animals , property , or the environment .

a hazardous material can be radiological , explosive , toxic , corrosive , biohazard , an oxidizer , an asphyxiant or have other characteristics that render it hazardous in specific circumstances .

hazmat / toxic - mercury , gasoline , asbestos , lead , used syringe , blood hazmat / non - toxic - water , oxygen ( can become hazardous under specific circumstances ) medical incidents include any diagnosis of injury , illness , or disease which is serious or widespread among students and / or staff , ( e.g .

communicable disease outbreak , reaction to medication / immunization , emergency surgery , hospitalization , emergency room treatment , etc. ) .

incidents which require medical treatment due to the physical effects of drug and / or alcohol use ( drug overdose , alcohol poisoning , etc. ) .

should be included in this category .

sexual assault includes any alleged non - consenting sexual act involving forceful physical contact including attempted rape , rape , sodomy , and others .

if forceful physical contact is not used , the incident should be reported as a sexual misconduct .

property incidents are any incident by students or staff that involve the destruction , theft , or attempted theft of property ; this includes but is not limited to automobile theft , burglary , vandalism , and shoplifting .

if any type of force is used against another person , the incident is to be reported under the “assault” primary incident code .

property incidents also include natural occurrences / disasters or any other incident threatening to close down the center or disrupting the center's operation ( e.g .

hurricane , flooding , earthquake , water main break , power failure , fire , etc. ) .

these incident categories were added to sirs in june 2016 .

some of these new categories previously existed in sirs , but were renamed in june 2016 .

others were entirely new categories as of june 2016 .

centers were not required to officially report data in these new categories until july 1 , 2016 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

