in fiscal year 2018 , federal agencies obligated more than $550 billion to acquire products and services such as military aircraft , information technology software , and maintenance services .

of this amount , about $350 billion — or 63 percent — was obligated under competitively awarded contracts .

when awarding a contract competitively , agencies have a number of source selection processes they can use to evaluate firms' proposals .

one process is a best value , lowest price technically acceptable ( lpta ) process .

in the lpta process , an agency awards the contract to the firm presenting the lowest evaluated price that is technically acceptable , and no trade - offs are permitted .

alternatively , an agency can use a best value trade - off process , in which it can vary the relative importance of cost or price to other factors such as a firm's technical capability or past performance .

in these cases , the agency may award a contract to a firm offering other than the lowest priced proposal if it determines that this is in the best interest of the government .

section 813 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 , as amended , required the department of defense ( dod ) to revise the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) to allow the use of the lpta process only when eight criteria are met .

for example , one criterion is that defense contracting officials must determine that little or no value would be gained from a proposal exceeding the solicitation's minimum technical requirements .

subsequently , section 880 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 required the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) to be revised to allow civilian agency use of the lpta process only when six similar criteria are met .

for the purposes of this report , we refer to section 813 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 , as amended , as “the defense provisions” and section 880 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 as “the civilian provisions.” both provisions also placed limitations on the use of the lpta process in procurements for certain categories of products and services , such as personal protective equipment and information technology services , by requiring agencies to avoid use of the lpta process in these procurements to the maximum extent practicable .

the specific criteria and limitations stemming from these defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process are discussed in the background section of this report .

section 813 of the ndaa , as amended , also included a provision that we report on the number of instances where dod used the lpta process for contracts exceeding $5 million , as well as provide an explanation of how acquisition officials considered the new criteria in making a determination to use the lpta process .

we have previously issued two reports in response to this provision .

subsequently , section 880 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 included a provision that we report on the number of instances where civilian agencies used the lpta process for contracts exceeding $5 million , as well as provide an explanation of how acquisition officials considered the six criteria in making a determination to use the lpta process .

this report , which addresses both provisions , describes ( 1 ) the status of regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which dod and selected civilian agencies used the lpta process to competitively award contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 , and what they bought using this process .

to address both objectives and select the dod components and civilian agencies included in our scope , we used data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) to identify the dod components and civilian agencies that awarded the highest number of contracts and orders in fiscal year 2018 that were reported as competitively awarded and valued at $5 million or more .

for dod , we focused our review on the top four dod components — army , navy , air force , and defense logistics agency ( dla ) — which accounted for about 5,400 — or about 88 percent — of all dod contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 .

for civilian agencies , we focused our review on the top five agencies — the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and agriculture ( usda ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) — which accounted for about 3,000 — or about 66 percent — of all civilian agency contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 .

to describe the status of regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process , we obtained information on agency officials' efforts to amend the dfars and the far .

we also interviewed officials from dod and the office of federal procurement policy .

we analyzed agency guidance and interviewed acquisition and contracting policy officials at dod and each of the selected civilian agencies to determine whether the agencies had existing guidance that already addressed the defense and civilian provisions , in whole or in part , and the extent to which they were developing such guidance .

according to officials , dod and the selected civilian agencies do not maintain centralized data on whether the lpta process is used to award contracts and orders .

consequently , to describe the extent to which the dod components and the civilian agencies within our scope used the lpta process in fiscal year 2018 , we used data from fpds - ng to select two generalizable samples of competitively awarded contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more .

for each contract and order in our sample , we requested that the selected agencies identify whether the lpta process was used .

we independently verified agency responses by reviewing the solicitations for each of the contracts and orders within our two samples .

from these samples , we also summarized the products and services that were purchased using the lpta process .

we determined that all the data we used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

for example , we verified fpds - ng data on estimated value and competition using agency - provided documentation for the contracts and orders we reviewed .

appendix i contains a detailed description of our scope and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to september 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

far part 15 describes negotiated contracting , which includes the use of several competitive source selection processes .

the processes are associated with the best value continuum , which includes the lpta process on one end and the trade - off process on the other ( see figure 1 ) .

federal agencies may elect to use the lpta process where the requirement is clearly defined and the risk of unsuccessful contract performance is minimal .

in such cases , agencies can determine that cost or price should play a dominant role in the source selection .

when using the lpta process , the agency specifies the evaluation factors that establish the requirements of acceptability in the solicitation .

firms submit their proposals and the agency determines which of the proposals meet those requirements .

no trade - offs between cost or price and non - cost factors ( for example , technical capabilities or past performance ) are permitted .

non - cost factors are rated on an acceptable or unacceptable basis .

the award is made based on the lowest priced , technically acceptable proposal submitted to the government .

in contrast , agencies may elect to use the trade - off process in acquisitions where the requirement is less definitive , more development work is required , or the acquisition has a greater performance risk .

in these instances , non - cost factors may play a dominant role in the source selection process .

trade - offs between price and non - cost factors allow agencies to accept other than the lowest priced proposal .

the far requires the solicitation to state whether all evaluation factors other than cost or price , when combined , are significantly more important than , approximately equal to , or significantly less important than cost or price .

contracting officials have broad discretion in the selection of the evaluation criteria that will be used in an acquisition .

when one is required , a written acquisition plan generally should include a description of the acquisition's source selection process and the relationship of the evaluation factors to the acquisition objectives .

the far does not explicitly require contracting officials to document the reasons why the specific source selection process was chosen .

the defense and civilian provisions required the dfars and far , respectively , be revised to require that the lpta process only be used if certain criteria are met , as described in table 1 .

the defense and civilian provisions also required that the use of the lpta process be avoided , to the maximum extent practicable , in procurements that are predominantly for the products and services identified in table 2 .

the process for revising the far and dfars is governed by statute , which generally requires agencies to issue a proposed rule in the federal register .

agencies are also required to provide at least a 30-day public comment period following publication of the proposed rule .

figure 2 illustrates the basic process that is generally used to revise the far and the dfars .

we have issued two reports in response to the defense provisions requiring us to review dod's use of the lpta process .

in november 2017 , we found that the army , navy , and air force used the lpta process for information technology and other services in 9 out of 133 instances when awarding contracts valued at $10 million or more in the first half of fiscal year 2017 .

contracting officials stated that the lpta process was used in these instances , in part , because the requirements were well - defined , noncomplex , or recurring .

we also found that contracting officials' use of the lpta process was generally consistent with the criteria listed in the defense provisions .

in november 2018 , we estimated that about 26 percent of dod's contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2017 were competitively awarded using the lpta process .

we found that dod used the lpta process to buy equipment , fuel , information technology services , and construction services , among other things .

we also found that contracting officials used the lpta process for reasons consistent with the criteria in the defense provisions .

specifically , contracting officials associated with the 14 contracts and orders we selected used the lpta process , in part , because they determined there was no trade - off available or determined that dod would not derive any benefit from paying a premium for offers that exceeded the minimum capabilities .

finally , we found that some contracting officials were confused about how to apply two of the criteria included in the defense provisions .

specifically , contracting officials were confused regarding how to assess life cycle costs associated with their procurements ( shown as criterion 6 in table 1 ) or whether the products and services they were acquiring would be considered expendable in nature ( criterion 8 ) .

absent clarification on how to consider these two criteria , we found there was potential for increased risk that dod contracting officials would not consistently apply the criteria of the defense provisions .

accordingly , we recommended that dod address how contracting officials should apply these two criteria when using the lpta process .

dod concurred with our recommendations , and plans to address them by issuing guidance concurrent with publication of the final rule at the end of fiscal year 2019 .

in december 2018 , dod issued a proposed dfars rule for public comment to address the defense provisions for using the lpta process .

the december 2018 proposed rule reflected the criteria and limitations for using the lpta process set forth in the defense provisions , and provided further clarification that these provisions were applicable to both contracts and orders .

the public comment period ended on february 4 , 2019 , during which time the defense acquisition regulations council received 15 comments .

in commenting on the proposed rule , industry representatives generally indicated their support for the proposed rule .

on june 19 , 2019 , the council agreed to move forward with the process for issuing a final rule revising the dfars .

defense pricing and contracting officials stated that dod expects to finalize the rule by the end of fiscal year 2019 .

the time required to develop and finalize the revisions to the dfars has been longer than provided for under the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 , which required the dfars be revised within 120 days after enactment , which would have been in april 2017 .

in july 2019 , we found that it can take a year or longer to issue a final dfars rule .

for this dfars case , a defense pricing and contracting official cited several reasons why the revisions have been delayed , including the need to address lpta - related provisions in two separate ndaas and the need to resolve a backlog of dfars changes .

in addition to ongoing efforts to update dfars regulations , dod officials plan to update the dfars procedures , guidance and information to provide defense contracting officers with supplemental guidance on applying the new criteria for using the lpta process .

a defense pricing and contracting official stated that this update would be finalized by the end of fiscal year 2019 to coincide with the issuance of the final dfars rule .

the far council has also initiated efforts to incorporate the civilian provisions for using the lpta process into the far .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 required that the far be revised to incorporate the civilian provisions within 120 days after enactment , which would have been in december 2018 .

officials from the office of federal procurement policy told us , however , that it generally takes much longer than 120 days to revise the far .

according to an analysis provided by dod , it takes 483 days on average to issue a far rule .

the far case to implement the civilian lpta provisions was initiated in august 2018 — the same month the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 was enacted .

office of federal procurement policy officials stated that a proposed far rule is scheduled to be published in the federal register in september 2019 .

the public comment period for the proposed rule is scheduled to end in november 2019 .

figure 3 shows when the defense and civilian provisions were enacted , when the rules were required to be implemented , and some of the efforts associated with revising both the dfars and the far .

of the six agencies we reviewed , we found that dod and dhs had existing source selection guidance that already reflected some of the criteria for using the lpta process identified in the defense and civilian provisions .

the other four civilian agencies did not have source selection guidance specific to using the lpta process .

table 3 shows the status of selected agencies' existing guidance related to the lpta process .

we found the following: dod's march 2016 source selection procedures generally includes five of the eight criteria for using the lpta process .

a defense pricing and contracting official stated that this guidance could be updated after the dfars rule is implemented and the procedures , guidance , and information resource is updated .

the dhs september 2013 source selection guide generally includes the first four of the six criteria for using the lpta process .

dhs officials stated that they plan to update their guidance after the far is amended to reflect the criteria and limitations for using lpta .

acquisition policy officials from va , gsa , usda , and hhs stated that they do not have agency - specific guidance for using the lpta process beyond what is currently provided for under the far .

these officials stated that they were waiting for regulations to be finalized before determining if there is a need to develop any new guidance .

based on the results of our generalizable samples , we estimate that the selected dod components used the lpta process for about 25 percent of competitive contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 , compared to about 7 percent of such contracts and orders at selected civilian agencies , as shown in table 4 .

our findings regarding how often dod uses the lpta process are consistent with what we found in our prior work .

in november 2018 , for example , we reported that army , navy , air force , and dla awarded about 26 percent of contracts and orders using the lpta process in fiscal year 2017 .

in november 2017 , we reported that officials told us the lpta process was used in instances where the requirements were well - defined , noncomplex , or recurring .

this is the first year we were required to evaluate civilian agencies' use of the lpta process .

civilian agency officials we interviewed provided various perspectives on the extent to which their agency used the lpta process .

hhs officials told us that their acquisitions are generally complex , so the lpta process is not often deemed the appropriate mechanism for determining best value .

usda officials told us that they have few acquisitions valued at more than $5 million , and that those acquisitions are likely to have more complex requirements .

in such cases , the officials told us , technical and performance considerations generally would be more important than price factors .

in analyzing fpds - ng data , we found that 1 percent of usda's fiscal year 2018 contracts and orders were valued at more than $5 million .

gsa officials told us their agency often procures services where it is beneficial for industry to propose solutions to a stated need , rather than gsa dictating the solution , such as professional services or information technology systems for a secure network solution .

in these cases , officials said they would not have the technical specifications that an lpta process would require .

officials from dhs and va stated that they do not centrally track the source selection method used and they do not have sufficient information to say why their agencies use lpta less frequently than other source selection methods .

within the sample of contracts we reviewed , we found dod and the five selected civilian agencies bought a variety of products and services using the lpta process in fiscal year 2018 ( see table 5 ) .

we found that four of these dod contracts and orders and one civilian agency order were for services that could be considered within the categories for which the defense and civilian provisions place limitations on , but do not prohibit , use of the lpta process .

in november 2018 , we found that dod contracting officers generally justified the use of the lpta process for products and services in these categories .

as described earlier in this report , the dfars and far are in the process of being revised and do not currently address the limitations on the use of lpta for these products and services .

we provided a draft of this report to ofpp , dod , va , hhs , gsa , dhs , and usda for review and comment .

ofpp , dod , gsa , dhs and hhs provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

va and usda told us that they had no comments on the draft report .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of defense , the administrator of general services , the secretary of veterans affairs , the secretary of homeland security , the secretary of agriculture , and the secretary of health and human services .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or dinapolit@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

section 813 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 , as amended , included a provision that we report on the number of instances where department of defense ( dod ) used the lowest price technically acceptable ( lpta ) process for contracts exceeding $5 million , as well as provide an explanation of how acquisition officials considered the new criteria in making a determination to use the lpta process .

we have previously issued two reports in response to this provision .

subsequently , section 880 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2019 included a provision that we report on the number of instances where civilian agencies used the lpta process for contracts exceeding $5 million , as well as provide an explanation of how acquisition officials considered the six criteria in making a determination to use the lpta process .

this report , which addresses both provisions , describes ( 1 ) the status of regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions for using the lpta process and ( 2 ) the extent to which dod and selected civilian agencies used the lpta process to competitively award contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 , and what they bought using this process .

to address both objectives and select the dod components and civilian agencies included in our scope , we used data from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) to identify the population of dod and civilian agency contracts and orders that were reported as competitively awarded and valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 .

for dod , we focused our review on the top four dod components — army , navy , air force , and defense logistics agency ( dla ) — because they accounted for about 5,400 — or about 88 percent — of all dod contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 .

similarly , we focused our analysis on the top five civilian agencies — the departments of veterans affairs ( va ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and agriculture ( usda ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) — which accounted for about 3,000 — or about 66 percent — of all civilian agency contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that were reported as competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 .

to describe the status of regulatory changes governing the use of the lpta process , we obtained information on agency officials' efforts to amend the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) .

to do this , we met with dod and office of federal procurement policy officials responsible for overseeing the regulatory changes .

we also reviewed dod's december 2018 proposed rule to revise the dfars and the 15 public comments dod received on the proposed rule .

because revisions to the far and dfars have not been finalized , regulations do not yet require or provide guidance to acquisition officials on how to consider the new criteria .

therefore , we also analyzed agency guidance and interviewed acquisition and contracting policy officials at dod and each of the selected civilian agencies to determine whether agencies had existing guidance that addressed the defense and civilian provisions , in whole or in part .

specifically , we reviewed agency - specific source selection guidance from dod , dhs , and va. gsa , usda , and hhs do not have source selection guidance that specifically addresses the lpta process .

according to officials , dod and the selected civilian agencies do not maintain centralized data on whether the lpta process is used to award contracts and orders .

consequently , to describe the extent to which dod and civilian agencies used the lpta process in competitively awarded contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more in fiscal year 2018 , we used fpds - ng to select two generalizable random samples of contracts and orders to estimate the use of lpta by the dod components and the civilian agencies within our scope .

this resulted in samples of 102 contracts and orders for the four selected dod components and 100 for the five selected civilian agencies .

we removed five contracts and orders from our dod sample: two contracts and one order because they were incorrectly reported by the agency in fpds - ng as having been competitively awarded , and two contracts because they were classified .

we removed three contracts and orders from our civilian agency sample: two orders because they were incorrectly reported by the agency in fpds - ng as having been competitively awarded , and one contract because it was incorrectly reported as having an estimated value of more than $5 million .

after removing these contracts and orders , our generalizable sample consisted of 97 dod contracts and orders and 97 civilian agency contracts and orders .

for each contract and order in our sample , we requested that the selected agencies identify whether the lpta process was used .

we independently verified agency responses by reviewing the solicitations for each of the contracts and orders within our two samples .

we also verified relevant fpds - ng data on estimated value and competition using agency - provided documentation for the contracts and orders we reviewed .

based on this , we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for us to estimate the percentage of contracts and orders valued at $5 million or more that the four components within dod and the five selected civilian agencies competitively awarded in fiscal year 2018 using the lpta process .

we also used fpds - ng product and service codes to identify whether the lpta contracts and orders in our sample could be considered to be within one of the categories that the defense and civilian provisions direct agencies to avoid use of the lpta process to the maximum extent practicable .

the regulatory changes required by the defense and civilian provisions are not yet in place , and the defense and civilian provisions do not explicitly prohibit use of the lpta process to acquire these categories of products and services .

therefore , we did not evaluate the reasons why an agency may have used the lpta process in these instances .

the findings based on our review of the product and services codes for the lpta contracts and orders in our sample are not generalizable .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2019 to september 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in addition to the contact named above , justin jaynes ( assistant director ) , heather b. miller ( analyst - in - charge ) , sarah cantatore , matthew t. crosby , lorraine ettaro , lori fields , stephanie gustafson , julia kennon , sarah martin , alyssa weir , and khristi wilkins made key contributions to this report .

