i am pleased to have the opportunity to comment on the claims - processing challenges and opportunities facing the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) disability compensation and pension programs .

through these programs , va provided about $34.5 billion in cash disability benefits to more than 3.5 million veterans and their survivors in fiscal year 2006 .

for years , the claims process has been the subject of concern and attention by va , the congress , and veterans service organizations , due in large part because of long waits for decisions and large claims backlogs .

veterans of the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan , and survivors of servicemembers who have died in those conflicts , are facing these same issues as they seek va disability benefits .

in january 2003 , we designated modernizing va and other federal disability programs as a high - risk area , because of these service delivery challenges , and because our work over the past decade has found that these programs are based on outmoded concepts from the past .

you asked us to discuss va's disability claims process , in light of the ongoing conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

my statement draws on a number of prior gao reports and testimonies , ( see related gao products ) , and information we have updated to reflect the current status of va claims processing and initiatives .

in summary , va continues to face challenges in improving service delivery to veterans .

between fiscal years 2003 and 2006 , the inventory of rating - related claims grew by almost half to a total of about 378,000 , in part because of increased filing of claims , including those filed by veterans of the iraq and afghanistan conflicts .

during the same period , the average number of days these claims were pending increased by 16 days , to an average of 127 days .

meanwhile , appeals resolution remains a lengthy process .

in fiscal year 2006 , it took an average of 657 days to resolve appeals .

several factors may be affecting va's claims - processing performance .

these include the potential impacts of laws and court decisions , continued increases in the number and complexity of claims being filed , and difficulties in obtaining the evidence needed to adjudicate claims in a timely manner , such as military service records .

to help improve claims - processing performance , va has taken a number of steps , including requesting funding for additional staff and undertaking initiatives to reduce appeal remands .

the president's fiscal year 2008 budget requests an increase of over 450 full - time equivalent employees to process compensation claims .

through training and information sharing , va is also working to reduce appeals processing times by decreasing the number of cases sent back from the appeals level for further development .

despite the steps va is taking , opportunities for significant performance improvement may lie in more fundamental reform of va's disability compensation program .

this would include reexamining program design as well as the structure and division of labor among field offices .

for example , we found that va's and other federal disability programs have not been updated to reflect the current state of science , medicine , technology , and labor market conditions .

for example , the criteria for disability decisions are based primarily on estimates made in 1945 about the effect of service - connected impairments on the average individual's ability to perform jobs requiring manual labor .

in addition , va and other organizations have identified potential changes to field operations that could enhance productivity in processing disability claims .

while major reexamination may be daunting , there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort .

for example , the congressionally chartered commission on veterans' disability benefits has been studying a number of program design issues and will report to the congress later this year .

va pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service - connected disabilities ( injuries or diseases incurred or aggravated while on active military duty ) according to the severity of the disability .

va also pays compensation to some spouses , children , and parents of deceased veterans and servicemembers .

va's pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors .

when a veteran submits a claim to any of the veterans benefits administration's ( vba ) 57 regional offices , a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim .

such evidence includes veterans' military service records , medical examinations , and treatment records from va medical facilities and private medical service providers .

once a claim has all the necessary evidence , a rating specialist evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits .

if the veteran is eligible for disability compensation , the rating specialist assigns a percentage rating based on degree of disability .

a veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision can appeal to va's board of veterans' appeals , and then to u.s. federal courts .

if the board finds that a case needs additional work , such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors , it is sent back to the veterans benefits administration , which is responsible for initial decisions on disability claims .

in november 2003 , the congress established the veterans' disability benefits commission to study the appropriateness of va disability benefits , including disability criteria and benefit levels .

the commission is scheduled to report the results of its study to the congress in october 2007 .

several factors are continuing to create challenges for va's claims processing , despite its steps to improve performance .

while va made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory , it has lost ground since then .

this is due in part to increased filing of claims , including those filed by veterans of the iraq and afghanistan conflicts .

other factors include increases in claims complexity , the effects of recent laws and court decisions , and challenges in acquiring needed evidence in a timely manner .

va's steps to improve performance include requesting funding for additional staff and undertaking initiatives to reduce appeal remands .

va's inventory of pending claims and their average time pending has increased significantly in the last 3 years , in part because of an increase in the number of claims .

the number of pending claims increased by almost one - half from the end of fiscal year 2003 to the end of fiscal year 2006 , from about 254,000 to about 378,000 .

during the same period , the number of claims pending longer than 6 months increased by more than three - fourths , from about 47,000 to about 83,000 ( see fig .

1 ) .

similarly , as shown in figure 2 , va reduced the average age of its pending claims from 182 days at the end of fiscal year 2001 to 111 days at the end of fiscal year 2003 .

however , by the end of fiscal year 2006 , average days pending had increased to 127 days .

meanwhile , the time required to resolve appeals remains too long .

the average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in fiscal year 2004 to 657 days in fiscal year 2006 .

the increase in va's inventory of pending claims , and their average time pending is due in part to an increase in claims receipts .

rating - related claims , including those filed by veterans of the iraq and afghanistan conflicts , increased steadily from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,000 in fiscal year 2006 , an increase of about 39 percent .

while va projects relatively flat claim receipts in fiscal years 2007 and 2008 , it cautions that ongoing hostilities in iraq and afghanistan , and the global war on terrorism in general , may increase the workload beyond current levels .

va also attributes increased claims to its efforts to increase outreach to veterans and servicemembers .

for example , va reports that in fiscal year 2006 , it provided benefits briefings to about 393,000 separating servicemembers , up from about 210,000 in fiscal year 2003 , leading to the filing of more original compensation claims .

va has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time .

moreover , according to va , the complexity of claims is also increasing .

for example , some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past .

because each disability needs to be evaluated separately , these claims can take longer to complete .

additionally , va notes that it is receiving claims for new and complex disabilities related to combat and deployments overseas , including those based on environmental and infectious disease risks and traumatic brain injuries .

further , va is receiving increasing numbers of claims for compensation for post - traumatic stress disorder , which are generally harder to evaluate , in part because of the evidentiary requirements to substantiate the event causing the stress disorder .

since 1999 , several court decisions and laws related to va's responsibilities to assist veterans in developing their benefit claims have significantly affected va's ability to process claims in a timely manner .

va attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a september 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be deferred , many for 90 days or longer .

also , va notes that legislation and va regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims .

for example , in recent years , laws and regulations have created new presumptions of service - connected disabilities for many vietnam veterans and former prisoners of war .

also , va expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and va disability compensation .

additionally , claims - processing timeliness can be hampered if va cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner .

for example , to obtain information needed to fully develop some post - traumatic stress disorder claims , vba must obtain records from the u.s. army and joint services records research center ( jsrrc ) , whose average response time to vba regional office requests is about 1 year .

this can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim .

in december 2006 , we recommended that vba assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records rather than submitting all research requests to jsrrc .

vba agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to jsrrc .

va has recently taken several steps to improve claims - processing .

in its fiscal year 2008 budget justification , va identified an increase in claims - processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness .

according to va , with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced , it can successfully meet the veterans' needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds .

the fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full - time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension , which would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006 .

in addition , the budget justification cites near - term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed , such as using retired va employees to provide training and the increased use of overtime .

even as staffing levels increase , however , va acknowledges that it still must take other actions to improve productivity .

va's budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity , in terms of claims decided per full - time equivalent employee .

while va expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced , it expects productivity to increase in the longer term .

also , va has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity .

for example , va plans to pilot paperless benefits delivery at discharge , where servicemembers' disability claim applications , service medical records , and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge .

va expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims .

to resolve appeals faster , va has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the board of veterans' appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors .

to do so , va has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the board .

va reports that it has reduced the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscal year 2004 to about 32 percent in fiscal year 2006 , and expects its efforts to lead to further reductions .

also , va reports that it has improved the productivity of the board's judges from an average of 604 appeals decided in fiscal year 2003 to 698 in fiscal year 2006 .

the board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008 .

while va is taking actions to address its claims - processing challenges , there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing .

these include reexamining program design , as well as the structure and division of labor among field offices .

after more than a decade of research , we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation , and we placed modernizing federal disability programs on our high - risk list in january 2003 .

specifically , our research showed that the disability programs administered by va and the social security administration ( ssa ) lagged behind the scientific advances and economic and social changes that have redefined the relationship between impairments and work .

for example , advances in medicine and technology have reduced the severity of some medical conditions and have allowed individuals to live with greater independence and function in work settings .

moreover , the nature of work has changed in recent decades as the national economy has moved away from manufacturing - based jobs to service - and knowledge - based employment .

yet va's and ssa's disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past , particularly the concept that impairment equates to an inability to work .

because of this , and because of continuing program administration problems , such as lengthy claims - processing times , we found that these programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for americans with disabilities .

in august 2002 , we recommended that va use its annual performance plan to delineate strategies for and progress in periodically updating labor market data used in its disability determination process .

we also recommended that va study and report to the congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs' eligibility criteria and benefits package .

this study would include estimates of the effects on the size , cost , and management of va's disability programs and other relevant va programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes .

in addition to program design , va's regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations .

vba and others who have studied claims processing have suggested that consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims - processing efficiency and save overhead costs .

we noted in december 2005 that va had made piecemeal changes to its claims - processing field structure .

va consolidated decisionmaking on benefits delivery at discharge claims , which are generally original claims for disability compensation , at the salt lake city and winston - salem regional offices .

va also consolidated in - service dependency and indemnity compensation claims at the philadelphia regional office .

these claims are filed by survivors of servicemembers who die while in military service .

va consolidated these claims as part of its efforts to provide expedited service to these survivors , including servicemembers who died in operations iraqi freedom and enduring freedom .

however , va has not changed its basic field structure for processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices , which experience large performance variations .

unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure , vba is likely to miss opportunities to substantially improve productivity , especially in the face of future workload increases .

we have recommended that va undertake a comprehensive review of its field structure for processing disability compensation and pension claims .

while reexamining claims - processing challenges may be daunting , there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort , including the congressionally chartered commission currently studying veterans' disability benefits .

in november 2003 , the congress established the veterans' disability benefits commission to study the appropriateness of va disability benefits , including disability criteria and benefit levels .

the commission is to examine and provide recommendations on ( 1 ) the appropriateness of the benefits , ( 2 ) the appropriateness of the benefit amounts , and ( 3 ) the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a disability or death of a veteran should be compensated .

the commission held its first public hearing in may 2005 , and in october 2005 , the commission established 31 research questions for study .

these questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity , and how va's claims - processing operation compares to other disability programs , including the location and number of processing centers .

these issues and others have been raised by previous studies of vba's disability claims process .

the commission is scheduled to report to the congress by october 1 , 2007 .

mr. chairman , this concludes my remarks .

i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

for further information , please contact daniel bertoni at ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

also contributing to this statement were shelia drake , martin scire , greg whitney , and charles willson .

veterans' disability benefits: long - standing claims processing problems persist .

gao - 07-512t .

washington , d.c.: march 7 , 2007 .

high - risk series: an update .

gao - 07-310 .

washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2007 .

veterans' disability benefits: va can improve its procedures for obtaining military service records .

gao - 07-98 .

washington , d.c.: december 12 , 2006 .

veterans' benefits: further changes in vba's field office structure could help improve disability claims processing .

gao - 06-149 .

washington , d.c.: december 9 , 2005 .

veterans' disability benefits: claims processing challenges and opportunities for improvements .

gao - 06-283t .

washington , d.c.: december 7 , 2005 .

veterans' disability benefits: improved transparency needed to facilitate oversight of vba's compensation and pension staffing levels .

gao - 06- 225t .

washington , d.c.: november 3 , 2005 .

va benefits: other programs may provide lessons for improving individual unemployability assessments .

gao - 06-207t .

washington , d.c.: october 27 , 2005 .

veterans' disability benefits: claims processing problems persist and major performance improvements may be difficult .

gao - 05-749t .

washington , dc .

: may 26 , 2005 .

va disability benefits: board of veterans' appeals has made improvements in quality assurance , but challenges remain for va in assuring consistency .

gao - 05-655t .

washington , d.c.: may 5 , 2005 .

veterans benefits: va needs plan for assessing consistency of decisions .

gao - 05-99 .

washington , d.c.: november 19 , 2004 .

veterans' benefits: more transparency needed to improve oversight of vba's compensation and pension staffing levels .

gao - 05-47 .

washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2004 .

veterans' benefits: improvements needed in the reporting and use of data on the accuracy of disability claims decisions .

gao - 03-1045 .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2003 .

department of veterans affairs: key management challenges in health and disability programs .

gao - 03-756t .

washington , d.c.: may 8 , 2003 .

veterans benefits administration: better collection and analysis of attrition data needed to enhance workforce planning .

gao - 03-491 .

washington , d.c.: april 28 , 2003 .

veterans' benefits: claims processing timeliness performance measures could be improved .

gao - 03-282 .

washington , d.c.: december 19 , 2002 .

veterans' benefits: quality assurance for disability claims and appeals processing can be further improved .

gao - 02-806 .

washington , d.c.: august 16 , 2002 .

veterans' benefits: vba's efforts to implement the veterans claims assistance act need further monitoring .

gao - 02-412 .

washington , d.c.: july 1 , 2002 .

veterans' benefits: despite recent improvements , meeting claims processing goals will be challenging .

gao - 02-645t .

washington , d.c.: april 26 , 2002 .

veterans benefits administration: problems and challenges facing disability claims processing .

gao / t - hehs / aimd - 00-146 .

washington , d.c.: may 18 , 2000 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

