for more than a decade , the presence of transnational criminal organizations ( tco ) has led to increased crime , violence , and lawlessness in parts of mexico , and has also threatened security along the u.s. – mexico border .

in addition , in the midst of an unprecedented opioid crisis in the united states , tcos in mexico supply the majority of heroin consumed in the united states .

according to u.s. government reports , organized crime – related violence in mexico declined from 2011 to 2014 , but rose to record levels in 2017 .

as a result of this violence , more than 109,000 people may have died since december 2006 , and the government of mexico ( gom ) estimates that more than 40,000 people in mexico may have disappeared .

in october 2007 , the united states and mexico created the mérida initiative and , in doing so , committed to work together to address crime and violence , and enhance the rule of law in mexico .

through this bilateral partnership , the united states has funded mérida initiative projects broadly related to the four pillars of the initiative — combating tcos , rule of law and human rights , border security , and building strong and resilient communities — with the goals of mitigating the impact of the drug trade on the united states and reducing violence in mexico .

since fiscal year 2008 , u.s. funding allocated for the mérida initiative has totaled about $3 billion .

you asked us to review u.s. government assistance for the mérida initiative .

this report describes ( 1 ) funding for the mérida initiative from the department of state ( state ) , bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( state / inl ) and the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 , and ( 2 ) the number and type of mérida initiative projects in place during this period .

to describe the funding provided for the mérida initiative , we analyzed data provided by state / inl and usaid on funding allocated for the mérida initiative from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 .

the data were categorized by agency — state / inl or usaid — and by u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories .

to describe the number and type of mérida initiative projects active during this period , we analyzed detailed project - level data provided to us by state / inl and usaid , including implementers , project descriptions , time frames , and obligated or estimated funding amounts .

some projects that were active from fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2018 started before this time frame and some projects ended after this time frame .

we assessed the reliability of the funding and project data by checking for missing data and obvious errors , and by interviewing state and usaid officials about how the data were compiled .

when we found potential errors or duplicate data , we contacted relevant agency officials , and obtained additional information to resolve these data issues .

we also obtained additional information about mérida initiative funding and projects by reviewing relevant agency documentation , and by interviewing officials from state , usaid , and the departments of justice ( doj ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and defense ( dod ) in washington , d.c. , and mexico city .

we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives .

as part of our review of mérida initiative project information , we reviewed state / inl and usaid strategy documents to determine how the initiative's projects align with the initiative's goals .

in particular , we reviewed state / inl's mexico country plans and usaid's mexico country development cooperation strategy , which outline each agency's goals and objectives related to the mérida initiative .

we conducted this performance audit from november 2018 to september 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

when mexico and the united states created the mérida initiative in 2007 , the mexican government pledged to tackle crime and corruption and the u.s. government pledged to address domestic drug demand and the illicit trafficking of firearms and bulk currency to mexico .

during the early years of the mérida initiative , much of the u.s. funding for the initiative was intended to purchase equipment to support mexican federal security forces , including about $591 million for aircraft and helicopters from fiscal years 2008 through 2010 .

in 2011 , u.s. and mexican officials agreed to expand the scope of the initiative to prioritize institution building , and later increased the initiative's focus on community engagement and human rights efforts .

according to state , an executive order on tcos issued in 2017 signaled that the focus of the mérida initiative would shift to countering tcos' illicit activities , such as drug production and the cross - border movement of drugs , cash , and weapons .

state / inl and usaid are the lead u.s. agencies for developing the mérida initiative's programming .

in these roles , state / inl and usaid work with gom officials to help outline mérida initiative projects' plans , objectives , and intended impact .

state / inl and usaid both manage and fund the mérida initiative with the support of a wide range of project implementers , including doj , dhs , dod , contractors , nongovernmental organizations , and international organizations .

all mérida initiative projects are currently funded through three appropriations accounts: the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account administered by state / inl , the economic support fund ( esf ) account , from which the mérida initiative project funding is administered by usaid , and the development assistance ( da ) account , also from which the mérida initiative project funding is administered by usaid .

according to state / inl and usaid officials , gom does not provide direct funding to mérida initiative projects .

instead , state / inl considers any gom funding for justice , national security / defense , and public order and domestic security as indirectly supporting the goals of the mérida initiative .

in addition , according to usaid data , mexican nonprofit and private sector entities provided about $23 million in matching funds for usaid - funded mérida initiative projects active from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 .

from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 , state / inl and usaid allocated about $723 million for mérida initiative projects under the following five u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories: civil society , counternarcotics , good governance , rule of law and human rights , and transnational crime .

u.s. agencies use these government - wide categories to broadly define foreign assistance programs for planning , budgeting , and reporting , which provides a common language to describe programs across agencies , countries , and regions .

over 80 percent of the funding , or $589 million , went toward rule of law and human rights , and counternarcotics efforts .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

funding allocated for the mérida initiative has decreased over time from $178 million in fiscal year 2014 to $139 million in fiscal year 2018 .

of the $723 million , state / inl allocated about $542 million and usaid allocated about $182 million .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

four hundred and forty - five mérida initiative projects were active from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 , with state / inl funding 388 projects and usaid funding 57 generally larger projects .

state / inl and usaid each categorized their projects with greater specificity than the broad categories used for overall allocated funding .

both state / inl and usaid funded projects to assist mexico's transition to a newly reformed criminal justice system that includes oral arguments and the presumption of innocence , categorized by state / inl as “criminal justice” and by usaid as “rule of law.” in addition to projects related to criminal justice , most funding for state / inl projects was for those that focused on border and port security , professionalizing the police , and counternarcotics .

for example , numerous state / inl projects provided training ; technical assistance ; and equipment — including for drug detection , border surveillance , and forensic drug laboratories — for mexican law enforcement , border security , justice sector , and military officials .

in addition to rule of law projects , most funding for usaid projects was for those that focused on crime and violence prevention , human rights , and transparency and accountability .

similar to state / inl , numerous usaid projects provided technical assistance to mexican justice sector officials .

other usaid projects were designed to engage with civil society groups to address crime and violence , and corruption , and to promote trust in government .

state / inl and usaid implemented these projects primarily through contracts , grants , cooperative agreements , interagency agreements , and agreements with international organizations .

state / inl - funded mérida projects focused on criminal justice , border and port security , professionalizing the police , and counternarcotics .

state / inl categorizes its mérida initiative projects under priority lines of effort developed by state / inl mexico specifically for the mérida initiative .

these lines of effort are defined in state / inl's mexico country plan: advance criminal justice , counternarcotics , disrupt illicit finance , professionalize the police , and secure border and ports .

while state / inl uses these lines of effort to categorize state / inl - funded mérida initiative projects , these lines of effort also align with the broader u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories outlined in figure 1 above .

see table 1 for a description of state / inl's lines of effort for the mérida initiative , and how these lines of effort align with the u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories .

the state / inl projects with the highest percentage of state / inl funding were those focused on advancing criminal justice ( 28 percent ) and securing borders and ports ( 25 percent ) .

law enforcement related categories — counternarcotics and professionalize the police — also constituted a substantial proportion ( 30 percent ) of state / inl funding , as shown in figure 3 .

for a list of state / inl's highest dollar value projects active from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 by these categories , see appendix i .

below are some examples of state / inl - funded mérida initiative projects supporting the agency's five lines of effort in mexico: advance criminal justice .

these 99 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $241 million , focused on providing training , technical assistance , and equipment to mexican justice sector and law enforcement officials as they transition to a new judicial system .

these projects also provided tools and guidance to civil society to promote the rule of law and trust in government .

for example: one doj project supported criminal investigations and prosecutions by providing training to gom officials to improve their forensic laboratories , and by providing technical assistance to forensic scientists testifying as expert witnesses in criminal cases .

through another project , doj developed training materials and instructors to assist the gom attorney general's office with the mechanics of mexico's judicial system reforms and to create a culture of professionalization within the attorney general's office .

some criminal justice projects engaged with civil society , such as a project that worked to promote a culture of lawfulness among mexican children who attend elementary school in high - crime areas .

counternarcotics .

these 76 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $115 million , focused on assisting mexican agencies countering the illicit drug trade in mexico , primarily through technical assistance and equipment , including for forensic labs , drug detection , and surveillance .

for example: intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance technology has been provided to the mexican navy to expand its capacity to conduct counternarcotics operations .

the organization of american states implemented a project that expanded mexico's drug treatment courts , which offer rehabilitation services and other nonpunitive alternatives for drug offenders who would otherwise face time in prison .

disrupt illicit finance .

these nine projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $17 million , provided equipment , training , and a public awareness campaign to assist the gom in its efforts to address tco's money - laundering and other illicit financial activities .

for example: one doj project provided anti – money laundering training to mexican prosecutors at the state and federal levels .

another united nations office on drugs and crime project aims to combat money laundering through a public awareness campaign and complaint call center in mexico .

professionalize the police .

many of these 97 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $144 million , provided training and technical assistance to mexican law enforcement officials at all levels to improve their effectiveness , accountability , and adherence to the rule of law .

an aspect of one project conducted surveys with law enforcement personnel and civil society to better inform effective police practices and to link these practices with levels of citizen trust .

two other projects supported tours to the united states for mexican officials to study issues related to gender - based violence and women's access to justice .

secure borders and ports .

these 68 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $217 million , focused on various efforts and equipment for gom border and military officials — including equipment for biometrics , surveillance , and telecommunications — to secure mexico's air , land , and sea borders and ports .

for example , dhs's customs and border patrol provided mentors and training to gom border officials to improve their capacity to stem the northward flow of migrants entering mexico along its southern border .

usaid - funded mérida initiative projects focused on crime and violence prevention , rule of law , transparency and accountability , and human rights efforts .

usaid categorizes its mérida initiative projects under the following development objectives developed by usaid mexico and outlined in usaid's mexico country development cooperation strategy: crime and violence prevention , human rights , rule of law , and transparency and accountability .

similar to state / inl's mérida initiative lines of effort , usaid mexico uses its development objectives to categorize usaid - funded mérida initiative projects .

these objectives also align with the broader u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories outlined in figure 1 .

see table 2 for a description of usaid's development objectives for the mérida initiative , and how these objectives align with the u.s. government – wide foreign assistance funding categories .

the usaid projects with the highest percentage of usaid funding were those focused on rule of law ( 39 percent ) or crime and violence prevention ( 22 percent ) with transparency and accountability and human rights constituting slightly smaller percentages ( 15 percent and 14 percent , respectively ) .

while funding for usaid projects was concentrated in the rule of law category , the number of usaid projects was spread relatively evenly among the categories of crime and violence prevention , human rights , and transparency and accountability , as shown in figure 4 .

for a list of usaid's highest dollar value projects active from fiscal years 2014 through 2018 , see appendix ii .

below are some examples of usaid - funded mérida projects supporting the agency's four development objectives in mexico for the mérida initiative: crime and violence prevention .

these 20 projects , with usaid funding estimated at $70 million , worked with civil society , nongovernmental organizations , the private sector , and gom officials to implement various activities , such as training , workshops , and outreach efforts , to mitigate crime and violence .

a number of these projects focused on building the skills and knowledge of at - risk youth , such as those in high - crime areas or at risk of dropping out of school .

for example , one project aimed to help at - risk youth in communities and detention centers return to school , gain employment , and improve life skills .

human rights .

these 15 projects , with usaid funding estimated at $46 million , worked to advance human rights through various activities that , for example , focused on protecting journalists and human rights defenders , preventing forced disappearances , and promoting freedom of expression .

for example , one project supported the gom's efforts to implement its national human rights plan by implementing clear procedures in line with international human rights standards .

rule of law .

these three projects , with usaid funding estimated at $126 million primarily provided technical assistance and outreach to assist mexican officials as they transitioned to a new judicial system .

for example , two large projects — one $68 million project and one $56 million project that has since closed — provided a wide range of technical assistance to gom judges , public defenders , and attorneys general .

another smaller project worked with law schools to adapt their curricula to the new criminal justice system .

transparency and accountability .

these 15 projects , with usaid funding estimated at $49 million engaged with mexican officials and civil society to address corruption and promote ethical behavior .

projects helped mexican officials develop and implement anticorruption policies , strengthen transparency in their procurement processes , and implement gom's national anti - corruption system .

for example , one project aimed to deter corruption and support transparency by improving the quality of investigative and data journalism in mexico .

state / inl and usaid implement mérida initiative projects primarily through contracts , grants , and agreements with international organizations , but state / inl also employs agreements with u.s. agencies ( doj , dhs , and dod ) .

see tables 3 and 4 for the number of and funding for each type of state / inl and usaid funding mechanism , respectively .

we provided a draft of this report to state and usaid for review and comment .

state and usaid both provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

usaid also provided formal comments , which are reproduced in appendix iii .

in these comments , usaid noted that , with its support , the mérida initiative has been instrumental in advancing reforms to the mexican criminal justice sector , promoting human rights , building strong and resilient communities , and improving integrity and accountability .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , and the usaid administrator .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7141 or groverj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

this appendix provides a detailed list of the 10 highest dollar value department of state , bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( state / inl ) mérida initiative projects active from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 by state / inl's five lines of effort — advance criminal justice , counternarcotics , disrupt illicit finance , professionalize the police , and secure border and ports .

state / inl provided the details in tables 5 to 9 below .

this appendix provides a detailed list of the 10 highest dollar value united states agency for international development ( usaid ) mérida initiative projects active from fiscal year 2014 through 2018 .

usaid provided the details in table 10 below .

in addition to the contact named above , james michels ( assistant director ) , teresa heger ( analyst - in - charge ) , terry allen , ashley alley , lilia chaidez , martin dealteriis , neil doherty , francisco enriquez , john hussey , and andrew kincare made key contributions to this report .

