as of february 2007 , the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) , a retirement savings and investment plan for federal workers , held approximately $210 billion in retirement assets for 3.7 million current and former federal employees .

similar to private sector 401 ( k ) plans , tsp allows employees to save for retirement by diverting a portion of their pretax income into investment accounts that can grow tax - free until withdrawn in retirement .

in april 2006 , the house committee on oversight and government reform held hearings on tsp issues , resulting in concerns being raised about the adequacy of the current oversight structure of tsp .

the federal retirement thrift investment board ( frtib ) is responsible for day - to - day operations of tsp , and the department of labor ( dol ) has some oversight responsibilities , primarily through conducting audits of tsp's operations .

subsequently , you asked us to examine ( 1 ) the current structure for overseeing frtib , ( 2 ) how the statutorily defined fiduciary responsibilities of frtib compare to the responsibilities of private plan sponsors and how frtib fulfills its responsibilities , ( 3 ) how frtib's investment policies differ from those of private plan sponsors , and ( 4 ) frtib's statutory responsibilities to educate plan participants about tsp and other retirement issues and how these responsibilities compare with those of private and state and local government employee plan sponsors .

to address our objectives , we analyzed provisions of the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( fersa ) , which governs the administration of tsp , and the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , which governs the administration of pension plans in the private sector .

to examine the current structure for overseeing frtib , as well as our other objectives , we interviewed dol officials , and analyzed various documents from both dol and frtib , including dol regulations , audit manuals , and reports .

additionally , to determine how frtib's statutorily defined fiduciary responsibilities compare to the responsibilities of private plan sponsors , and how frtib fulfills its responsibilities , as well as what frtib's investment policies are and how its policies differ from those of private plan sponsors , we interviewed representatives of industry associations and reviewed related documents , including frtib memos , policies , board meeting minutes , and correspondences , and dol's guidance to private plan sponsors .

to determine frtib's responsibilities for educating plan participants about tsp and other retirement issues , we examined information from tsp's web site , spoke with office of personnel management ( opm ) officials , and reviewed frtib documents .

to compare frtib's education responsibilities with those of other plan sponsors , we interviewed representatives of industry associations , and officials representing sponsors of five defined contribution plans — four state and local government employee pension plans and one private plan .

we selected plan sponsors based on plan assets , plan type , and absence of fiduciary malfeasance .

appendix i describes the selection of plan sponsors in greater detail .

we also reviewed a 2005 industry survey to obtain additional information about how private plan sponsors educate their participants .

we conducted our work between august 2006 and june 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

the federal employees' retirement system act of 1986 ( fersa ) created tsp to provide options for retirement planning and encourage personal retirement savings among the federal workforce .

most federal workers are allowed to participate in tsp , which is available to federal and postal employees , including members of congress and congressional employees and members of the uniformed services , and members of the judicial branch .

as of february 2007 , tsp held approximately $210 billion in retirement assets for 3.7 million current and former federal employees and their families .

participants may allocate their contributions and any associated earnings among five investment fund options: the g fund , f fund , c fund , s fund , and i fund .

since august 2005 , tsp participants also may choose one of five lifecycle funds , which diversify participant accounts among the g , f , c , s , and i funds , using investment mixes that are tailored to different time horizons for retirement and withdrawal .

the investment mix of each lifecycle fund adjusts quarterly to more conservative investments as the participant nears retirement .

pension plans are classified either as defined benefit or as defined contribution plans .

defined benefit plans promise to provide , generally , a fixed level of monthly retirement income that is based on salary , years of service , and age at retirement regardless of how the plan's investments perform .

in contrast , benefits from defined contribution plans are based on the contributions to and the performance of the investments in individual accounts , which may fluctuate in value .

examples of defined contribution plans include 401 ( k ) plans , employee stock ownership plans , and profit - sharing plans .

as with other defined contribution plans , tsp is structured to allow eligible federal employees to contribute a fixed percentage of their annual base pay or a flat amount , subject to internal revenue service limits , into an individual tax - deferred account .

additionally , fers participants are eligible for automatic 1 percent contributions and limited matching contributions from the employing federal agency .

according to frtib , tsp provides federal ( and in most cases , state ) income tax deferral on contributions and their related earnings , similar to those offered by many private sector 401 ( k ) - type pension plans .

participants can manage their accounts and conduct a variety of transactions similar to those available to 401 ( k ) participants , such as reallocating contributions , borrowing from the account , making withdrawals , or purchasing annuities .

administration of tsp falls under the purview of the federal retirement thrift investment board , an agency established by congress under fersa .

frtib is composed of five board members appointed by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate .

they are authorized to appoint the executive director , who hires additional personnel , and an employee thrift advisory council .

the employee thrift advisory council is a 15- member council that provides advice to the board and the executive director on the investment policies and administration of the tsp .

the board is responsible for establishing policies for the investment and management of the tsp , as well as administration of the plan .

the executive director and staff of frtib are responsible for implementing the board's policies and managing the day - to - day operations of tsp , prescribing regulations to administer fersa , and other duties .

the board members and the executive director serve as plan fiduciaries .

the department of labor and congress both play roles in overseeing frtib .

as we have previously reported , dol is charged with conducting regular compliance audits to determine if the board is fulfilling its fiduciary duties and properly safeguarding tsp participants' assets .

congress created frtib and has the ability to change the structure for overseeing frtib .

as with every federal agency , congress may exercise oversight of frtib .

currently , congress requires frtib to submit its budget and other reports regularly , but it has not typically held hearings unless a challenge has arisen or there has been a proposed change to legislation .

in addition , dol officials do not have in place a specific mechanism for sharing their audit program findings or other issues of concern with congress .

dol's oversight of frtib is based on a fersa requirement that the secretary of labor establish an audit program and conduct audits of frtib and its operations .

dol compliance audits are designed to determine whether frtib is complying with fersa and applicable laws and regulations .

this includes whether tsp fiduciaries are acquiring , protecting , and using plan resources prudently , efficiently , and solely in the interest of participants and beneficiaries .

the dol employee benefits security administration's ( ebsa ) office of the chief accountant has administered the audit program since its inception in fiscal year 1988 .

according to dol officials , dol's audit program reviews all significant activities of frtib , including frtib's policy formulation and administration , record keeping , and other functions handled by service providers under contract , and functions of federal agencies related to contributions and employee participation programs .

the audits include on - site reviews of tsp's principal service providers .

because service providers carry out many day - to - day operations of tsp , from record keeping to investment management , audits are primarily conducted on tsp's service providers .

dol officials have developed an audit manual that includes detailed audit guides , but a firm carries out the audits under contract with dol .

dol officials said that their ongoing audit presence for tsp is greater than its presence for most of the private plans it oversees , which numbered about 730,000 in 2002 .

according to dol , each year , dol develops a strategic plan that identifies how many and which functions it could audit based on risk and funding .

for example , due to frtib's increased use of private contractors to provide call center and other plan services formerly provided by the u.s. department of agriculture's national finance center , two of dol's five audits in fiscal year 2006 looked at particular operations of newer providers , including certain internal controls .

dol officials also said that the number of audits in a given year is based on the level of funding allocated to the audit program .

fiscal year 2006 funding for the contract audits was $630,000 and covered five audits .

dol exercises its authority over frtib by making recommendations for improving operations based on audit findings .

dol officials and the contract auditor meet with the board members at least once a year to highlight significant issues from audits and to present the department's future compliance audit schedule .

dol's recommendations to frtib and its service providers generally address compliance with fersa and frtib policies , significant weaknesses in internal controls , or areas where frtib could improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its operations .

for example , during its fiscal year 2005 audit cycle , dol's contractor audited one of frtib's customer call centers , which is operated by a contractor .

the audit report included recommendations for frtib to implement and enforce policies for information security , designated as a fundamental internal control by dol , at the contractor's sites ; establish additional performance measures ; and implement consistent monitoring of call volume at the two call centers .

as of september 2006 , dol considered the first recommendation partially implemented and the other two recommendations implemented .

dol cannot compel frtib or its service providers to implement its audit recommendations .

however , frtib generally had implemented a high percentage of dol's audit recommendations .

according to dol and frtib officials , this voluntary implementation of audit recommendations has worked well for them because dol and frtib have a longstanding and positive working relationship .

congress has not required frtib or dol to testify regularly before congress on tsp operations , although it does receive routine reports from frtib .

as with other federal agencies , congress may exercise oversight of frtib by investigating agency operations , holding hearings , issuing subpoenas , and requiring the agency to submit performance or financial reports .

congressional committees have typically held hearings on tsp when a challenge has arisen or when there was a proposed change to legislation .

for example , frtib officials were asked to testify in response to customer service issues with tsp in 2003 and in response to abusive trading practices in the private sector in 2004 .

in the 20 years since tsp has been in existence , frtib estimates it has been called to testify approximately a dozen times .

most recently , board members and the executive director provided testimony in 2005 and 2006 about adding a new fund to tsp's investment options .

according to dol officials , congress does not require dol to meet with committee staff or testify about tsp or its audit findings on a regular basis .

dol has testified at least three times on its audit program — in 1994 , 2003 , and 2004 .

congress requires frtib to submit its budget and to have an independent financial audit each year , performed under contract by a public accounting firm .

frtib also provides a list of each audit report , including dol's compliance audits , and summaries of any particularly significant findings , to congress each year , as required by the inspector general act of 1978 .

the 2006 summary contained little information about audit recommendations .

dol is not required to submit its audit reports directly to congress , and congress has not asked dol to share its audit findings on a regular basis through hearings or meetings with committee staff .

consequently , congress may be unaware of concerns dol may have .

in a 2003 report , we noted that there have been times when dol has had issues of concern with frtib outside of its audit findings .

we recommended that congress consider amending fersa to require dol to establish a formal process by which the secretary of labor can report to congress areas of critical concern about the actions of the executive director and board members , but no changes have yet been made .

frtib's fiduciary duties are similar to those of private sector plan fiduciaries , and frtib has adopted various policies and practices to fulfill these responsibilities , but unlike private plan fiduciaries , board members and the executive director have special liability protections .

both fersa and erisa require fiduciaries to act prudently and solely in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries .

however , unlike erisa , fersa does not authorize dol to bring civil action against board members or the executive director for the breach of their duty , whereas dol can take such actions against fiduciaries of private plans and other tsp fiduciaries .

congress amended fersa to provide special liability protections for the board members and the executive director , given the potential assets of tsp and concerns about the availability of fiduciary insurance .

frtib and private plan fiduciaries have similar fiduciary duties .

tsp's authorizing statute , fersa , and erisa set the overarching requirements for fiduciaries to act prudently and solely in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries .

that is , fiduciaries must exercise an appropriate level of care and diligence given the scope of the plan and act for the exclusive benefit of plan participants and beneficiaries , rather than for their own or another party's gain .

in addition , fersa and erisa specifically prohibit fiduciaries from engaging in certain transactions that that could raise questions about their ability to fulfill their duties , unless certain safeguards are met or waivers are granted by dol .

for tsp , the statute specifically lists board members , the executive director , and any person who has or exercises discretionary authority or control over the management or disposition of tsp assets as fiduciaries .

frtib has adopted a range of policies and practices that are similar to those that private plans should follow to carry out these broad duties .

dol has issued guidance for private plans describing important policies and practices to fulfill fiduciary responsibilities .

while the guidance is not specifically designed for tsp , frtib has implemented policies and practices for several of the areas in dol's guidance .

for example , frtib has policies and practices for selecting and monitoring service providers , as well as measuring investment performance .

because private service providers perform many of tsp's operations , including record keeping for participant accounts and investment management of all funds but one , these areas are important for acting prudently and solely in the interest of participants and beneficiaries .

specifically: frtib generally uses a competitive process in order to select qualified service providers at a reasonable cost .

according to frtib , contracts for major activities undergo review and competition at least every 5 years .

while we did not review its procurement documentation , dol reviews the selection and monitoring of service providers as part of its compliance audit program .

frtib noted that it uses several approaches to monitor service providers .

frtib has included performance measures in certain service providers' contracts .

also , since 2004 , frtib has reviewed quarterly financial reports for most of its major private providers , including financial statements , credit scores , and overall viability .

frtib further noted that it monitors providers through daily contact with them , periodic on - site visits , and reports from the provider , such as monthly and annual reports from the annuity vendor .

frtib also reviews its performance measures monthly , including the investment performance of each fund .

the company providing investment management services must provide monthly reports to frtib showing how closely each option is tracking its underlying index .

a measure of the difference between the performance of the tsp fund and the underlying index is known as the “tracking error,” and by contract , the investment manager must report the amount and reasons for the error .

because the investment manager is allocated fiduciary responsibility by contract , given the manager's control of plan assets , this measurement of performance is essential for both frtib and the investment manager to act prudently and ensure that the investment manager is not trading needlessly or for self - gain .

the secretary of labor can take civil action against private plan fiduciaries .

under erisa , dol is allowed to seek remedies if fiduciaries of private plans do not fulfill their fiduciary duties , including using litigation when necessary .

according to dol , its primary goal in litigating a case is to ensure that a plan's assets , and therefore its participants and beneficiaries , are protected .

for example , dol has brought legal actions or filed briefs against private plan fiduciaries for investing imprudently in company stock , not investing exclusively for participants' benefit , and failing to monitor appointed fiduciaries .

dol cannot bring civil actions against board members or the executive director for breaching their plan duties or engaging in prohibited transactions .

fersa allows dol to bring civil actions against any fiduciary , such as the investment manager , other than a board member or the executive director .

while dol was initially authorized under fersa to bring civil actions against any tsp fiduciary , a 1988 amendment established an exception from such actions for board members and the executive director .

the 1988 amendment was passed , in part , in response to frtib's concerns about obtaining fiduciary insurance .

according to the then - executive director , it would be difficult to buy adequate insurance for these tsp fiduciaries , as frtib officials expected tsp to become the largest plan of its kind in the country .

congress took this action in the face of concerns that , without protection , board members would resign and that they would be hard to replace .

with regard to plan participants' recourse , participants can take civil action against private plan fiduciaries and all frtib fiduciaries , including board members and the executive director .

under erisa , available remedies include awards for plan losses through monetary damages and restoring any profits made from a fiduciary's improper use of plan assets .

fiduciaries of private plans may guard against the legal risks of personal liability by having fiduciary liability insurance , which the fiduciary , the plan , or the employer may purchase .

fiduciary liability insurance provides reimbursement for costs related to legal actions for breach of their fiduciary responsibilities , including the costs of defending and settling actions or awards of monetary damages .

dol officials said that although fiduciaries of private pension plans may have insurance to largely insulate them from the personal risks associated with their personal liability as fiduciaries , they still face financial risks in certain circumstances due to policy limits or exclusions .

for example , fiduciary liability insurance often includes coverage exceptions for intentional harm , criminal acts , or self - dealing .

similarly , under fersa , tsp participants or beneficiaries may bring civil actions against board members or the executive director , as well as other tsp fiduciaries , for breaching their plan duties or engaging in prohibited transactions .

the 1988 amendment provided that any such claims against a board member or the executive director will be defended by the attorney general of the united states and , if he certifies that the board member or executive director was acting as a tsp fiduciary , deemed claims under the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) .

as a result , rather than any monetary relief awarded in such cases being paid personally by any board member or executive director who may commit a breach ( or through applicable fiduciary liability insurance ) , it would be paid out of the judgment fund established to pay claims under the ftca .

according to dol officials , treating claims against a board member or the executive director in this way provides tsp participants with a greater ability to obtain monetary relief than that available to participants in other pension plans .

in addition , dol officials told us that without the special liability protections , dol could be in the unusual position of suing frtib — another federal entity — and receiving assistance with prosecutions from the department of justice , which is also responsible for defending board members or the executive director .

tsp has been relatively free from any allegations that tsp fiduciaries have breached their fiduciary duties or engaged in prohibited transactions .

dol and frtib officials were aware of only one civil claim against the board , which is currently pending in federal district court .

the board has less discretion than private sector plan sponsors in setting investment policy because the investment options available to tsp participants are largely outlined in law , whereas private sector plan sponsors are responsible for choosing which investment options to offer participants .

frtib may select the particular indexes for the funds to follow as well as review the investment options and suggest additional funds .

however , congress must amend fersa to approve a change in tsp investment options offered to participants .

frtib has limited discretion in setting investment policy because fersa largely sets the investment options available to tsp participants .

dol and frtib officials noted that fersa serves as tsp's overall investment policy .

fersa states that frtib shall establish a government securities investment fund , fixed income investment fund , a common stock index investment fund , a small capitalization stock index investment fund , and an international stock index investment fund .

for the index funds , fersa states that the board shall invest in a portfolio designed to replicate the performance of a commonly recognized index for that fund .

for the government securities investment fund , fersa states that the secretary of the treasury is authorized to issue special interest - bearing obligations of the united states for the purchase by tsp .

fersa has other investment policy provisions , such as who can exercise voting rights associated with the ownership of stocks held by tsp .

frtib has developed individual policies for each fund .

these policies , which frtib reaffirms quarterly , provide the rationale for selecting the fund's investments .

factors influencing the policies include the level of risk and return , low costs , and the legislative history of fersa .

a consultant to frtib reported in january 2006 that the indexes that frtib selected were appropriate and changes to certain indexes would not be cost - effective .

table 1 shows fersa requirements and frtib's policies for each fund .

in the past , frtib has periodically conducted a major review of its investment policy and suggested additional funds for tsp to congress besides the initial g , f , and c funds .

frtib's process for reviewing and suggesting additional funds has included investment analysis , consideration of industry practices , and communication with congress and the employee thrift advisory council , which represents participants .

for example , in the early 1990s , frtib analyzed possible funds to add to the lineup of options for participants to invest in , based on factors like diversification , risk and return , cost , and administrative issues .

it submitted a legislative proposal in 1995 to add funds for international stocks ( the i fund ) and for stocks in small and medium - sized u.s. companies ( the s fund ) , and congress amended fersa in 1996 accordingly .

in 2005 , frtib introduced lifecycle funds without an amendment to fersa because it determined that the lifecycle funds are combinations of the five existing funds tailored to different time horizons for withdrawal .

frtib developed these funds partly based on its analysis of inefficient participant behavior whereby participants were not periodically shifting , or rebalancing , their investment portfolio or diversifying their balances among the five funds , which the lifecycle funds would do automatically for the participant .

in 2005 , given congressional interest in having frtib study the desirability of adding new funds , frtib hired an outside consultant to analyze the existing tsp options , who recommended in 2006 that frtib not add any additional funds to the plan .

according to frtib , having relatively few tsp options based on broad - based indexes encourages participation and limits costs .

private plans under erisa have considerable latitude in selecting investment options for their plans .

according to dol , an important part of the fiduciary duties of acting prudently and solely in participants' interest involves selecting investment options .

erisa requires plan fiduciaries to use prudence in selecting and monitoring funds for participants , and to offer diversified funds .

within these parameters , private plans can offer a wide array of options for participants .

unlike tsp , private plans can decide , among other things , the number and types of funds , whether to include funds that specialize in one sector , like telecommunications , or those that track a specific market index .

besides funds tracking a specific market index , which are one kind of passively managed funds , private plans can offer actively managed options , in which the investment manager selects particular investments trying to obtain higher than average returns .

private plan sponsors also may offer employer stock .

further , private plans can also offer features like a self - directed brokerage option , which allows participants to invest in individual stocks or mutual funds .

given that private plans have greater discretion than tsp to select options , many private plans have adopted an investment policy statement to guide their decision - making process .

according to a 2005 industry survey , 79 percent of responding plans had an investment policy statement .

while these statements are not required by erisa , dol has issued regulations about written statements of investment policy .

the regulations note that a statement may set guidelines about investment decisions for the investment manager .

according to one industry association , besides clarifying the intended goals and performance of the plan , the statement — which may include the process for selecting , monitoring , and altering investments — can guide future decisions and limit liability by showing that fiduciaries are following a prudent process .

frtib , opm , and staff of employing federal agencies have responsibility for educating tsp participants about their retirement plan and other retirement issues , and responsibilities vary for private and state and local government employee plans .

frtib has responsibility for providing information to tsp plan participants to facilitate informed decision making about what level of contribution to make and how to invest those contributions .

opm is required to establish a training program for all retirement counselors and to develop , in consultation with frtib , a retirement financial literacy and education strategy for federal employees .

retirement counselors are employed by federal agencies , and they provide employees with information on their retirement benefits , including information about tsp .

erisa requires private retirement plan sponsors to provide certain documents to participants , such as a summary plan description , but many plans provide more information than is required .

state and local government employee plans' education requirements vary , but all of the plans we studied are required to provide participants with benefit statements .

they also make other types of information available to participants , such as tools for calculating retirement needs .

fersa requires frtib to provide participants with periodic statements about their accounts and a summary description of the plan's investment options to facilitate informed decision making .

to further inform participants about the plan , frtib provides additional information , such as how to roll over or transfer funds from other plans into tsp , information on agency matching contributions , tsp's loan program , and the monthly returns of tsp funds and their related indexes .

frtib provides this information on tsp's web site .

according to frtib , the tsp web site is its primary method for communicating with participants , but information is also available by telephone , and in written materials .

the tsp web site also includes a retirement calculator that participants can use to estimate how much they will need to save each year to meet their retirement goals , and a quarterly newsletter .

for example , the newsletter's january 2007 feature article was titled “pension reform law benefits tsp participants,” and included information about provisions in the pension protection act of 2006 that apply to tsp .

in addition to the educational materials available on the tsp web site , frtib occasionally sends mailings to tsp participants .

for example , mailings were sent to participants raising awareness about the new lifecycle funds .

opm is responsible for providing general retirement education to federal employees , including tsp participants , and it does this primarily through training retirement counselors at federal agencies , who provide federal employees with information on retirement benefits , including tsp .

retirement counselors' roles were expanded with passage of the thrift savings plan open elections act of 2004 .

to implement the act , opm's training will include information about retirement financial literacy and education .

according to information provided by opm , it will provide comprehensive training on the tools and resources it is developing , such as the retirement readiness index , an age - based profile containing information about an employee's state of readiness according to various dimensions .

as of april 2007 , opm had produced and made available on its web site a retirement video .

according to opm , the video provides an overview of critical information federal employees need to know as they plan for their retirement .

opm is required to consult with frtib about its implementation of the act .

in addition to retirement counselors , federal agencies have tsp agency coordinators that , among other things , inform eligible employees of tsp options and benefits , maintain tsp informational materials , and respond to inquiries from active employees .

tsp officials offer training to agency coordinators .

sometimes individuals serve as both agency coordinators and retirement counselors .

the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) requires plan sponsors to give plan participants in writing the information they need to know about their retirement benefit plans , including plan rules , financial information , and documents on the operation and management of the plan .

erisa requires sponsors of private retirement plans to make available to participants the following: an annual report , which is a summary of an annual financial report that most plans must file with the department of labor ; a summary plan description , which provides information about what the plan provides and how it operates , such as when an employee can begin to participate , how service and benefits are calculated , when benefits become vested , when and in what form benefits are paid , and how to file a claim for benefits ; and account statements one or more times per year or upon request .

a 2005 industry survey found that many private plan sponsors provide additional educational information , not required under erisa , for such purposes as increasing employee participation , increasing satisfaction with their plans , and improving asset allocation .

they provide this information through enrollment kits , seminars and workshops , fund performance sheets , newsletters , retirement calculators , and internet and intranet sites .

for example , the private plan sponsor we spoke with provides one - on - one financial and investment counseling to its employees through a service provider .

additionally , almost half of the plans that responded to the industry survey indicated that they offer participants investment advice .

state and local government employee pension plan sponsors are required to educate their participants in a manner consistent with the state or local requirements and plan documents that govern their plans .

each of the four plans we studied require that a statement be sent to participants periodically or at the participant's request .

at least two of the plan sponsors provide participants with summary plan descriptions , and at least one plan sponsor requires that participants be sent an annual report .

local and state officials expressed the importance of providing plan participants with information on a broad range of services and topics , for example , how to make contributions and the array of investment options .

each plan sponsor provides some information on its web site ; such information may include answers to frequently asked questions , forms , and information about investment options and retirement planning conferences .

all of the officials we spoke with provide some type of general retirement information or non - plan - specific information to participants , such as retirement calculators .

three of the plan sponsors make general retirement information available to their participants through service providers .

through fersa , congress established frtib to administer tsp and charged dol with establishing a program to carry out audits to determine the level of tsp compliance with fersa requirements .

according to dol , its audit findings and recommendations provide details on all significant aspects of tsp operations , from the management of tsp investments to the information security of participants' data , and can also shape future oversight of frtib and its service providers .

although frtib is required by law to provide congress each year with a list of audits , including summaries of significant dol audit findings , there have been times when dol has had issues of concern with frtib outside of its audit findings .

in such instances , dol has no formal process to communicate its issues of dispute .

consequently , we previously recommended that congress amend fersa to require dol to establish a formal process by which it can report to congress issues of critical concern .

historically , communications between congressional committees of jurisdiction with frtib and dol have been limited .

although congress has occasionally held hearings where dol and frtib officials have testified , such hearings are held irregularly , usually in response to a particular issue , such as abusive trading practices or when congress was considering legislative changes to fersa , such as adding an additional fund to tsp's investment options .

congress created tsp as one of the basic elements of a new retirement system for federal workers .

since its inception , tsp has grown to become one of the largest defined contribution plans in the country , affecting the retirement of millions of current and former federal employees .

as the size and complexity of tsp have grown , an appropriate level of oversight of frtib is critical to ensuring that federal workers' retirement savings are properly managed .

we provided a draft of this report to the federal retirement thrift investment board ( frtib ) , the department of labor ( dol ) , and the office of personnel management ( opm ) for review and comment .

frtib suggested that the report will be useful to the continued improvement of the tsp , and expressed appreciation for our constructive approach in conducting the review .

both frtib and dol provided technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate .

frtib's written comments are reproduced in appendix ii .

as agreed with your staff , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the executive director of frtib , the secretary of dol , and the director of opm , appropriate congressional committees , and others who are interested .

we will also make copies available to others upon request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors are listed in appendix iii .

to compare the federal retirement thrift investment board's ( frtib ) education responsibilities with those of other plan sponsors , we reviewed documents and interviewed officials representing sponsors of five defined contribution plans — four government employee pension plans and one private plan .

the plans we studied were selected from a list of the 200 largest u.s. employee retirement plans as reported by pensions & investments , a trade journal for plan sponsors and other investors , as of september 30 , 2005 .

plans were selected based on three criteria — plan assets , plan type , and absence of fiduciary malfeasance .

tsp is the largest defined contribution plan in the nation .

the plans we studied , while having significantly fewer assets than tsp , were among the largest in total defined contribution plan assets .

the five plans had assets ranging from approximately $3 billion to $21 billion .

the plans we studied , like tsp , are participant directed , that is , investors make investment decisions and plan fiduciaries may receive limited liability from the results of these decisions .

additionally , we reviewed pension & investments online and lexisnexis , and could find no citations over the last 2 years for fiduciary malfeasance for the five plans we studied .

the four government employee pension plans we studied are a state supplemental 401 ( k ) plan , a state 401 ( k ) plan for all newly hired employees , a university plan that includes a 401 ( a ) plan and a tax deferred 403 ( b ) plan , and a large city supplemental deferred compensation plan with a 401 ( k ) plan .

the private plan was a fortune 100 company .

we contacted seven private pension plans , but only one agreed to speak with gao staff .

the private plan sponsor we spoke with was willing to participate in our study , and its characteristics may or may not reflect the characteristics of other private pension plans .

the interviews we conducted with plan sponsors are solely for illustrative purposes and are not generalizable .

in addition to the contact named above , the following individuals made important contributions to this report: tamara cross , assistant director ; ramona burton ; lara laufer ; patrick bernard ; matthew saradjian ; roger thomas ; rachael valliere ; walter vance ; and craig winslow .

