i am pleased to be here today as you explore the issue of states' use of intergovernmental transfers in the federal - state medicaid program .

medicaid finances health care for an estimated 53 million low - income americans at a cost of $244 billion .

medicaid is the third - largest mandatory spending program in the federal budget and one of the largest components of state budgets , second only to education .

the program fulfills a crucial national role by providing health coverage for a variety of vulnerable populations , including low - income families with children and certain people who are elderly , blind , or disabled .

congress has structured medicaid as a shared responsibility of the federal government and the states , with the federal share of each state's medicaid payments determined by a formula specified by law .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is the federal agency responsible for the program , and the states design and administer their programs with considerable discretion and flexibility .

for more than a decade , states have used a number of creative financing schemes to inappropriately increase the federal share of medicaid expenditures .

intergovernmental transfers , or igts , are one of the tools that have enabled them to do so .

state and local governments use igts to carry out their shared governmental functions , such as collecting and redistributing revenues to provide essential government services .

but by using igts , states can also transfer funds to or from local - government entities , such as government - owned nursing homes , as part of complex financing schemes that inappropriately boost the federal share of medicaid costs .

in my testimony today , i will ( 1 ) describe how some state financing schemes have operated , including the role of igts in these schemes ; ( 2 ) discuss how such financing schemes compromise the federal - state partnership that is the foundation of the medicaid program ; and ( 3 ) discuss what can be done to further curtail state financing schemes .

my testimony today is based on our prior work assessing state financing schemes and federal oversight of them .

we conducted this body of work from june 1993 through january 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in summary , for many years states have used varied financing schemes , sometimes involving igts , to inappropriately increase federal matching payments .

taking advantage of statutory and regulatory loopholes , some states , for example , have made large medicaid payments to certain providers , such as nursing homes operated by local governments , which have greatly exceeded the established medicaid payment rate .

these state expenditures would enable states to claim large federal matching payments .

such transactions create the illusion of valid expenditures for services delivered by local - government providers to medicaid - eligible individuals .

in reality , the spending is often only temporary because states require the local governments to return all or most of the money to the states through igts .

once states receive the returned funds , they can use them to supplant the states' own share of future medicaid spending or even use them for non - medicaid purposes .

because such arrangements effectively increase the federal medicaid share above what is set under law , they violate the fiscal integrity of medicaid's federal - state partnership .

as new schemes have come to light , congress and cms have taken legislative and regulatory actions to curtail them ; nonetheless , problems remain .

we believe congress and cms should continue their efforts to preclude states' ability to claim excessive federal medicaid payments , and we suggest that congress consider a recommendation that remains open from our prior work , that is , to prohibit medicaid payments that exceed actual costs for any government - owned facility .

title xix of the social security act authorizes federal funding to states for medicaid , which finances health care services including acute and long - term care for certain low - income , aged , or disabled individuals .

states have considerable flexibility in designing and operating their medicaid programs .

within broad federal requirements , each state determines which services to cover and to what extent , establishes its own eligibility requirements , sets provider payment rates , and develops its own administrative structure .

in addition to groups for which federal law requires coverage — such as children and pregnant women at specified income levels and certain persons with disabilities — states may choose to expand eligibility or add benefits that the statute defines as optional .

medicaid is an open - ended entitlement: states are generally obligated to pay for covered services provided to eligible individuals , and the federal government is obligated to pay its share of a state's expenditures under a cms - approved state medicaid plan .

the federal share of each state's medicaid expenditures is based on a statutory formula linked to a state's per capita income in relation to national per capita income .

in 2002 , the specified federal share of each state's expenditures ranged from 50 percent to 76 percent ; in the aggregate , the federal share of total medicaid expenditures was 57 percent .

the social security act provides that up to 60 percent of the state share of medicaid spending can come from local - government revenues and sources .

some states design their medicaid programs to require local governments to contribute to the programs' costs .

for more than a decade , some states have used various financing schemes , some involving igts , to create the illusion of a valid state medicaid expenditure to a health care provider .

this payment has enabled states to claim federal matching funds regardless of whether the program services paid for had actually been provided .

as various schemes have come to light , congress and cms have taken actions to curtail them ( see table 1 ) .

many of these schemes involve payment arrangements between the state and government - owned or government - operated providers , such as local - government - operated nursing homes .

a variant of these creative financing arrangements involves states' exploitation of medicaid's upper payment limit ( upl ) provisions .

these schemes share certain characteristics , including igts , with other financing schemes from prior years ( see table 1 ) .

in particular , these arrangements create the illusion that a state has made a large medicaid payment — separate from and in addition to medicaid expenditures that providers have already received for covered services — which enables the state to obtain a federal matching payment .

in reality , the large payment is temporary , since the funds essentially make a round - trip from the state to the medicaid providers and back to the state .

as a result of such round - trip arrangements , states obtain excessive federal medicaid matching funds while their own state expenditures remain unchanged or even decrease .

figure 1 , which is based on our earlier work , illustrates how this mechanism operated in one state ( michigan ) .

as shown in figure 1 , the state made medicaid payments totaling $277 million to certain county health facilities ; the total included $155 million in federal funds and $122 million in state funds ( step 1 ) .

on the same day that the county health facilities received the funds , they transferred all but $6 million back to the state , which retained $271 million ( steps 2 and 3 ) .

from this transaction , the state realized a net gain of $149 million over the state's original outlay of $122 million .

in cases like this , local - government facilities can use igts to easily return the excessive medicaid payments to the state via electronic wire transfers .

we have found that these round - trip transfers can be accomplished in less than 1 hour .

the igt is critical , because if the payment does not go back to the state , the state gains no financial benefit and actually loses from the arrangement because it has simply paid the provider more than its standard medicaid payment rate for the services .

in a variant of this practice , some states require a few counties to initiate the transaction , by taking out bank loans for the total amount the states determined they can pay under the upl .

the counties wire the funds to the states , which then send most or all of the funds back to the counties as medicaid payments .

the counties use these “medicaid payments” to repay the bank loans .

meanwhile , the states claim federal matching funds on the total amount .

consistent with past actions , congress and cms have taken steps to curtail upl financing schemes when they have come to light .

at the direction of congress , the agency — then called the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) — finalized a regulation in 2001 that significantly narrowed the upl loophole by limiting the amount of excessive funds states could claim .

hcfa estimated that its 2001 regulation would reduce the federal government's financial liability due to inappropriate upl arrangements by $55 billion over 10 years ; a related 2002 regulation was estimated to yield an additional $9 billion over 5 years .

cms recognized that some states had developed a long - standing reliance on these excessive upl funds , and the law and regulation authorized transition periods of up to 8 years for states to come into compliance with the new requirements .

as we recently reported , however , even under the new regulations , states can still aggregate payments to all local - government nursing homes under one upl to generate excessive federal matching payments beyond their standard medicaid claims .

for example , cms information about states complying with the new regulation indicates that , through upl arrangements with public nursing homes and other public facilities , states can still claim about $2.2 billion annually in federal matching funds exceeding their standard medicaid claims .

states' use of these creative financing mechanisms undermines the federal - state medicaid partnership as well as the program's fiscal integrity in at least three ways .

first , state financing schemes effectively increase the federal matching rate established under federal law by increasing federal expenditures while state contributions remain unchanged or even decrease .

for example , for one state we analyzed ( wisconsin ) , we estimated that by obtaining excessive federal matching payments and using these funds as the state share of other medicaid expenditures , the state effectively increased the federal matching share of its total medicaid expenditures from 59 percent to 68 percent in state fiscal year 2001 .

the state did so by generating nearly $400 million in excessive federal matching funds via round - trip arrangements with three counties .

similarly , the hhs office of the inspector general found that a comparably structured arrangement in pennsylvania effectively increased that state's statutorily determined matching rate from 54 percent to about 65 percent .

second , cms has no assurance that these increased federal matching payments are used for medicaid services .

federal medicaid matching funds are intended for medicaid - covered services for the medicaid - eligible individuals on whose behalf payments are made .

under state financing schemes , however , states can use funds returned to them at their own discretion .

we recently examined how six states with large upl financing schemes involving nursing homes used the federal funds they generated .

as in the past , some states in our review deposited excessive funds from upl arrangements into their general funds , which the states may or may not use for medicaid purposes .

for example , one state ( oregon ) has used funds generated by its upl arrangement to help finance education programs .

table 2 provides further information on how states used their upl funds in recent years , as reported by the six states we reviewed .

third , these state financing schemes undermine the fiscal integrity of the medicaid program because they enable states to make to providers payments that significantly exceed their costs .

in our view , this practice is inconsistent with the statutory requirement that states ensure that medicaid payments are economical and efficient .

under upl financing arrangements , some states pay a few public providers excessive amounts , well beyond the cost of services provided .

we found , for example , that virginia's proposed arrangement would allow the state to pay six local - government nursing homes , on average , $670 in federal funds per medicaid nursing home resident per day — more than 12 times the $53 daily federal payment these nursing homes normally received , on average , per medicaid resident .

although cms and the congress have often acted to curtail states' financing schemes , problems persist .

improved cms oversight and additional congressional action could help address continuing concerns with upl financing schemes and other inappropriate arrangements .

we recently reported that cms has taken several actions to improve its oversight of state upl arrangements , including forming a team to coordinate its review of states' proposed and continuing arrangements , drafting internal guidelines for reviewing state methods for calculating upl amounts , and conducting financial reviews that have identified hundreds of millions of dollars in improper claims .

starting in august 2003 , when considering states' proposals to change how they would pay nursing homes or other institutions , cms also began to ask states to provide previously unrequested information .

the information includes sources of state matching funds for supplemental payments to medicaid providers , the extent to which total payments would exceed providers' costs , how a state would use the additional funds , and whether a state required providers to return payments ( and , if so , how the state planned to spend such funds ) .

as of october 2003 , cms indicated that it had asked 30 states with proposed state medicaid plan amendments to provide additional information , and the agency was in the process of receiving and reviewing states' initial responses .

we also reported , however , that cms's efforts do not go far enough to ensure that states' upl claims are for medicaid - covered services provided to eligible beneficiaries .

moreover , we remain concerned that in carrying out its oversight responsibilities , cms at times takes actions inconsistent with its stated goals for limiting states' use of these arrangements .

for example , we previously reported that while the agency was attempting to narrow the glaring upl loophole in 2001 , it was allowing additional states to engage in the very schemes it was trying to shut down , at a substantial cost to the federal government .

more recently , we reported that cms's granting two states the longest available transition period of 8 years , for phasing out excessive claims under their upl arrangements , was not consistent with the agency's stated goals .

we estimated that , as a result of these decisions , these two states can claim about $633 million more in federal matching funds under their 8-year transition periods than they could have claimed under shorter transition periods consistent with cms's stated policies and goals .

in our view , additional congressional action also could help address continuing concerns about medicaid financing schemes .

although congress and cms have taken significant steps to help curb inappropriate upl arrangements and other financing schemes , states can still claim federal matching funds for more than a public provider's actual costs of providing medicaid - covered services .

as long as states are allowed to make payments exceeding a facility's actual costs , the loophole remains .

a recommendation open from one of our earlier reports would , if implemented , close the existing loophole and thus mitigate these continuing concerns .

we previously recommended that congress consider prohibiting medicaid payments that exceed actual costs for any government - owned facility .

if this recommendation were implemented , a facility's payment would be limited to the reasonable costs of covered services it actually provides to eligible beneficiaries , thus eliminating the possibility of the exorbitant payments that are now passed through individual facilities to states .

the administration appears to support such legislative action ; the president's budget for fiscal year 2005 sets forth a legislative proposal to cap medicaid payments to government providers ( such as public hospitals or county - owned nursing homes ) to the actual cost of providing services to medicaid beneficiaries .

the term “igts” has come to be closely associated — if not synonymous — with the abusive financing schemes undertaken by some states in connection with illusory payments for medicaid services to claim excessive federal matching funds .

igts are a legitimate state budget tool and not problematic in themselves .

but when they are used to carry out questionable financial transactions that inappropriately shift state medicaid costs to the federal government , they become problematic .

we believe the problem goes beyond igts .

an observation we made in our first report on this issue in 1994 is as valid today as it was then: in our view , the medicaid program should not allow states to benefit from arrangements where federal funds purported to benefit providers are given to providers with one hand , only to be taken back with the other .

state financing schemes , variants of which have been applied for a decade or longer , circumvent the federal and state funding balance set under law .

they have also resulted in the diversion of federal funds intended to pay for covered services for medicaid - eligible individuals to whatever purpose a state chooses .

although congress and cms have often acted to address medicaid financing schemes once they become apparent , new variations continue to emerge .

experience shows that some states are likely to continue looking for creative means to supplant state financing , making a compelling case for the congress and cms to sustain vigilance over federal medicaid payments .

understandably , states that have relied on federal funding as a staple for their own share of medicaid spending are feeling the budgetary pressure from the actual or potential loss of these funds .

the continuing challenge remains to find the proper balance between states' flexibility to administer their medicaid programs and the shared federal - state fiduciary responsibility to manage program finances efficiently and economically in a way that ensures the program's fiscal integrity .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have .

for future contacts regarding this testimony , please call kathryn g. allen at ( 202 ) 512-7118 .

katherine iritani , tim bushfield , ellen w. chu , helen desaulniers , behn miller kelly , and terry saiki also made key contributions to this testimony .

medicaid: improved federal oversight of state financing schemes is needed .

gao - 04-228 .

washington , d.c.: february 13 , 2004 .

major management challenges and program risks: department of health and human services .

gao - 03-101 .

washington , d.c.: january 2003 .

medicaid: hcfa reversed its position and approved additional state financing schemes .

gao - 02-147 .

washington , d.c.: october 30 , 2001 .

medicaid: state financing schemes again drive up federal payments .

gao / t - hehs - 00-193 .

washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2000 .

state medicaid financing practices .

gao / hehs - 96-76r .

washington , d.c.: january 23 , 1996 .

michigan financing arrangements .

gao / hehs - 95-146r .

washington , d.c.: may 5 , 1995 .

medicaid: states use illusory approaches to shift program costs to federal government .

gao / hehs - 94-133 .

washington , d.c.: august 1 , 1994 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

