in the past 30 years , the rate of childhood obesity has increased considerably , almost tripling for children aged 6 to 11 years .

along with this increase , the rate of childhood health problems commonly associated with obesity , such as hypertension and type ii diabetes , has also risen , leading some policy makers to rank childhood obesity as a critical health threat .

in a 2005 report , we highlighted expert views that increasing physical activity is the most important strategy in any program aimed at preventing or reducing childhood obesity .

in addition to its positive health benefits , research on physical activity among children also suggests a strong correlation between children's fitness and their academic performance , as measured by grades in core subjects and scores on standardized tests .

moreover , some experts contend that physical activity provides both personal and social benefits , including the development of leadership skills and increased self - esteem .

the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) physical activity guidelines for americans state that children aged 6 to 17 years should get at least 60 minutes of physical activity each day , but the agency acknowledges that most children do not attain this recommended level .

schools are uniquely positioned to be an access point for students to engage in physical activity through physical education classes and sports teams .

according to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , quality physical education can serve as the cornerstone of a comprehensive school - based physical activity program because it provides a unique opportunity for students to obtain the knowledge and skills needed to establish and maintain physically active lifestyles throughout childhood and adolescence and into adulthood .

toward that end , cdc promotes the national association for sports and physical education's ( naspe ) guidelines for physical education , which recommend that schools provide 150 minutes per week of physical education instruction to elementary school students and 225 minutes per week to middle and high school students .

other school - based physical activities , such as interscholastic and intramural sports , should complement rather than take the place of physical education by providing opportunities to practice and apply the skills taught during physical education , according to cdc .

in view of the federal government's role in promoting the health and welfare of children , the congress is currently considering a number of proposals aimed in part at increasing physical activity of youth .

the congress as it considers options for increasing physical activity for students , we reviewed: ( 1 ) the status of opportunities for elementary and secondary school students to participate in school - based physical education or sports activities ; and ( 2 ) what challenges schools face in providing physical education and sports opportunities .

see , for example , h.r .

422 , h.r .

1057 , h.r .

1531 , h.r .

2816 , s. 174 , s. 392 , s. 576 , and s. 919. estimates from yrbs used in this report have margins of error at the 95 percent confidence level of plus or minus 4.3 percentage points or less , unless otherwise noted .

we also interviewed officials at the department of education , the department of health and human services , state educational agencies , state high school athletic associations , school districts , and schools about opportunities for and barriers to participation in physical education and sports .

to obtain a more in - depth understanding of issues related to school - based sports and physical education , we conducted site visits to california , illinois , new york , and north carolina .

we selected these states based on geographic dispersion , childhood obesity rate , and variation in state requirements for physical education programs .

within each state , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of districts and schools based on location ( rural , urban , and suburban ) , school level ( elementary , middle , and high ) , and we the percentage of students eligible for free or reduced price lunch.also considered any known innovative practices in selecting schools .

based on our sample selection , we interviewed officials from four state educational agencies , four state high school athletic associations , seven districts , and 13 schools .

in addition , we interviewed others with relevant expertise , including researchers and representatives of professional trade associations to gain additional perspectives on these issues .

we also reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , as well as studies on the benefits of sports and physical education for students .

we conducted our work from march 2011 to february 2012 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product .

according to cdc , approximately 12.5 million children aged 2 to 19 years are obese .

the prevalence of obesity among children and adolescents has nearly tripled since 1980 .

childhood obesity can cause a number of harmful effects on health , including high blood pressure and cholesterol , breathing problems and asthma , and increased risk of type ii diabetes .

this rise in obesity - related health conditions also introduces added economic costs .

the annual direct costs of childhood obesity in the united states are estimated at about $14.3 billion .

moreover , because studies suggest that obese children are likely to become overweight or obese adults — particularly if they are obese during adolescence — the increase in the number of obese children may also contribute to additional health care expenditures when they become adults .

one study estimated the medical costs of obesity to be as high as $147 billion per year in nearly half of all medical spending related to adult obesity is 2008.financed by the public sector , through medicaid and medicare .

research indicates that increased physical activity in general , and physical education ( pe ) and sports participation in particular , yields a number of important benefits for elementary and secondary students , including: health benefits — research has shown that regular physical activity for youth can benefit them in a number of ways , including helping build and maintain healthy bones , muscles , and joints ; helping control weight and reduce fat ; and preventing or delaying the development of high blood pressure .

one study concluded that expanding pe programs in schools may be an effective intervention for combating obesity in the early years , especially among girls .

academic benefits — a growing body of evidence indicates a relationship between pe and sports and academic attainment and attendance .

a 2010 cdc report that examined 50 existing studies found positive associations between academic performance and both pe and school - based sports .

specifically , it concluded there is substantial evidence that physical activity can help improve academic achievement , including grades and standardized test scores .

further , it suggested physical activity can affect cognitive skills , attitudes , and academic behavior , including enhanced concentration , attention , and improved classroom behavior , and concluded that increasing or maintaining time dedicated to physical education might help academic performance .

personal and social benefits — a number of studies provide some support for the premise that physical activity , and sports in particular , can positively affect aspects of personal development among young people , such as self - esteem , goal - setting , and leadership .

however , evidence indicates that the quality of coaching is a key factor in maximizing positive effects .

the federal government supports efforts to increase the amount of time children spend being physically active , including within the school context .

for example: cdc funds 22 states and 1 tribal government to help schools develop a systematic approach to school health , including physical education , through its promotion of a coordinated school health strategy .

it also publishes the physical education curriculum analysis tool , which is designed to help school districts develop or enhance physical education curricula .

the department of education administers the carol m. white physical education program , which awards grants to districts and community - based organizations to initiate or enhance physical education programs .

in fiscal year 2011 , the program had a budget of nearly $79 million , and funded 76 new awards and 152 continuation awards .

the president's council on fitness , sports and nutrition includes the president's challenge program , which assists schools in assessing student fitness levels , motivating and awarding student physical activity participation , and awarding model school pe programs .

in 2010 , the president launched the white house task force on childhood obesity , in conjunction with the first lady's let's move ! .

initiative aimed at increasing physical activity .

the department of agriculture runs the healthierus school challenge , an initiative to recognize schools that have created healthier school environments through the promotion of nutrition and physical activity .

at the state and district levels , various parties may be involved in providing students with opportunities in pe or sports .

for example , many states have requirements regarding schools' provision of pe , according to cdc .

however , policies may vary by state or district , such as the required grades in which pe should be offered , the number of minutes students should be in class , or the specific content and curriculum areas that should be taught .

for extracurricular athletics , the national federation of state high school associations provides leadership for the administration of most high school interscholastic sports — the main form of extracurricular athletic competition in schools , which includes varsity and junior varsity level teams .

in turn , each state has its own state high school athletic association that is a voluntary member of the federation .

the amount of pe instruction time that schools offer to students generally decreased from 2000 to 2006 , according to shpps data , and relatively few schools offered students the opportunity to participate in daily pe or its instructional equivalent , as recommended by naspe ( see fig .

1 ) .

national data show that a higher percentage of middle schools offered daily pe than did elementary or high schools .

schools we visited differed widely in the amount of pe instruction time offered to their students .

for example , only 3 out of 13 schools we visited offered daily pe or its instructional equivalent .

these 3 schools had longer school days , which officials said made it easier to fit pe into the daily schedule .

among the 4 elementary schools we visited , 1 provided all students a daily 60-minute pe class , while another provided students just one 30-minute pe class per week .

at the same time , the estimated percentage of schools that required students to take some pe increased at each grade level from 2000 to 2006 , particularly for grades at the middle and high school levels , according to shpps data ( see fig .

2 ) .

for example , the estimated percentage of schools that required ninth grade students to take pe increased from 13 percent in 2000 to 55 percent in 2006 .

although the amount of pe instruction time has decreased , emphasis on the quality of pe programs appears to have increased , according to shpps data and comments from officials we interviewed .

the percentage of states that required or encouraged districts or schools to follow naspe - based pe standards — such as competency in motor skills and promotion of responsible personal and social behavior — increased from 59 percent in 2000 to 76 percent in 2006 .

in 2006 , an estimated 65 percent of schools adopted such standards .

district and school officials with whom we spoke said pe curricula now focus less on traditional sports in favor of helping students develop lifelong skills .

for instance , three schools we visited offered outdoor adventure - based activities that helped students develop problem solving and teamwork skills .

at one middle school we visited , pe staff members taught students how to measure their body mass index and other indicators of fitness .

in addition , some school and district officials we interviewed said offering students options may increase student participation in pe .

for example , officials at one high school we visited said that each semester students could select two to three different sports or fitness activities from a range of options — such as flag football , tennis , or soccer — to fulfill their pe requirement .

school officials noted that students were more engaged in pe because the options were designed to motivate students across a range of athletic abilities and interests .

moreover , several school officials we interviewed said they design their pe curriculum to encourage students to move as much as possible during pe class .

these yrbs estimates have a margin of error at the 95 percent confidence level of plus or minus 9.6 percentage points or less .

officials told us the pe curriculum is designed to engage as many students as possible .

as previously stated , national data show that many schools have pe requirements .

however , some schools allow exemptions for a range of reasons .

according to 2006 shpps data , state , district , and school policies most commonly allowed student exemptions due to long - term physical or medical disability .

our previous work has shown that students with disabilities generally attend pe class about the same amount of time as students without disabilities .

in addition , according to 2006 shpps data , most states required schools to implement measures to meet the pe needs of students with long - term disabilities .

officials from most schools and districts we interviewed said that exemptions from pe requirements are rare , and schools generally offer students with long - term disabilities the opportunity to participate in adapted pe or general pe classes .

school sports programs offer another opportunity for students to engage in school - based physical activity .

according to 2006 shpps data , an estimated 77 percent of middle schools and 91 percent of high schools offered students opportunities to participate in interscholastic sports most programs such as basketball , soccer , or softball ( see app .

i ) .national , state , district , and school officials we interviewed said that opportunities to participate in school sports have generally increased , in part because many schools have added new interscholastic sports teams over the last few years .

for example , several schools we visited have added lacrosse and badminton programs as student interest in these sports has increased .

furthermore , officials from each of the four states we visited said they had added new sports programs to their statewide interscholastic competition schedules in response to increased demand .

in particular , many officials we interviewed said opportunities for girls to participate in school sports have increased over time , due primarily to the addition of new interscholastic sports teams for girls .

for example , one state official we interviewed noted that while only 49 high schools in the state offered girls' soccer in 1986 , about 300 high schools offered it in 2010 .

in addition to interscholastic sports , shpps data show that an estimated 50 percent of elementary schools , 49 percent of middle schools , and 45 percent of high schools offered intramural or physical activity clubs in 2006 .

however , several officials said that such programs , which are relatively small compared to interscholastic programs , have decreased in middle and high schools .

moreover , only a few schools we visited offered intramural programs .

no - cut policies — in which schools do not limit the number of students who can participate on a sports team — have also contributed to increased opportunities for students to participate in school sports programs , according to many officials we interviewed .

for example , in one district we visited , the middle school interscholastic teams adopted no - cut policies , which officials said provided interested students ample opportunities to participate in sports programs and gain exposure to new sports .

similarly , an official at another high school we visited said the school offers at least one no - cut interscholastic team per season so that students who want to participate in school sports always have at least one option .

national data show that high school students' participation in at least one school or community sports team remained about the same from 2005 to 2009 .

over one - half of high school students reported participating in at least one school or community sports team in 2009 , according to yrbs data .

several middle school and high school officials we interviewed reported similar student participation rates .

the overall number of students who participate in school sports programs has generally increased over the years , according to most officials we interviewed .

high school boys reported a higher rate of participation in school or community sports teams than high school girls in both 2005 and 2009 , according to yrbs data .

however , according to the officials we interviewed , the number of female athletes has increased over the years , in part due to the addition of new sports programs for girls .

while participation did not vary significantly overall by race for white , black , and hispanic high school students , white high school girls were more likely to report that they participate in at least one sports team than their black or hispanic counterparts .

most officials we spoke with cited budget cuts and inadequate facilities as major challenges for schools to provide physical education opportunities for students .

specifically , officials from several of the districts and schools we visited said budget cuts have affected their ability to hire pe teachers , maintain appropriate class sizes , and purchase sufficient equipment .

in one district we visited , officials told us that many pe teachers have been laid off , and some schools in the district have been forced to share a part - time pe instructor .

as a result , elementary school pe instruction in the district has been reduced to as little as 30 minutes every 2-3 weeks , and a district official told us most elementary and middle schools in the district are not meeting state requirements for pe instruction .

at two elementary schools we visited , pe instructors expressed a desire to conduct pe instruction on a daily basis , but cited limited funding as a barrier .

some schools have also seen increased class sizes as a result of budget cuts .

in some cases , budget cuts have affected the availability and quality of equipment as well .

a pe teacher at one school has stopped including several sports , such as golf , in her pe classes because the supply of equipment no longer matches the class size .

in the context of limited funding , some state , district , and school officials expressed the belief that the greater emphasis on assessments for reading and math , as required has shifted priorities away under the no child left behind act of 2001,from pe .

in one district we visited , an official said this focus on academic assessments had led his district to reduce the amount of pe it offers students .

officials at 9 of the 13 schools we visited told us that a lack of adequate facilities is also a major challenge in providing physical education .

for example , because some schools do not have adequate indoor space , they may conduct several pe classes in the gymnasium simultaneously , or use alternative space for their activities .

according to shpps data , an estimated 54.9 percent of elementary schools , 37.8 percent of middle schools , and 25.3 percent of high schools used a cafeteria , auditorium , or other multipurpose room for indoor physical education in 2006 .

during our site visits , we observed several pe classes sharing space and saw multipurpose facilities being used as gymnasiums .

for example , at one school we visited , the gymnasium also served as the cafeteria .

the time it takes to prepare for , serve , and clean up from lunch limits the school's ability to schedule pe classes .

several school officials told us they have worked hard to stretch the limited funding they receive for pe instruction .

some schools partially rely on federal grant money to help maintain and augment pe opportunities .

for example , two school districts we visited were able to purchase equipment , such as fitness center equipment and kick balls , for their pe programs as a result of carol m. white grants from the department of education .

although sports opportunities have generally increased , most officials we spoke with cited budget constraints as a key challenge to providing opportunities .

in particular , budget cuts have affected transportation and facilities .

some schools have also struggled to find coaches for their school sports teams .

because interscholastic sports games may involve travel and some teams practice off - site , schools often need to provide transportation for athletes .

many school and district officials we spoke with stated that , because of budget constraints , they had a difficult time providing transportation to facilitate student participation in after - school sports activities .

according to shpps data , an estimated 29 percent of the schools that offered interscholastic sports in 2006 also provided transportation home for participating students , up from 21 percent in 2000 .

for schools that offered intramural activities , an estimated 31 percent of middle schools and 28 percent of high schools provided transportation home for students .

some school officials told us that transportation costs , including costs associated with maintenance and fuel , are a large part of their school's athletic budget .

to help reduce transportation costs , some schools charge students a fee for transportation , enlisting parents to provide carpools , or sharing buses with other athletic teams to transport students to and from athletic events .

several school officials we spoke with stated that budget cuts and space constraints have affected their ability to provide adequate facilities and equipment for sports opportunities .

some smaller schools do not have access to baseball or football fields or other facilities for team sports .

in addition , some schools use off - site locations for practices and events due to the lack of space or adequate facilities .

furthermore , some schools , particularly schools in densely populated communities , lack the necessary space to expand their facilities .

moreover , officials at one school we visited said they were prohibited from building new athletic fields or expanding because of land use restrictions .

to mitigate some of these challenges , several schools we visited have developed partnerships with local businesses , colleges , nonprofits , or community recreational centers to use their facilities for various sports programs .

for example , several schools have agreements to use community athletic fields and other facilities for baseball , football , soccer , and swimming programs .

in addition to space constraints , some school officials cited aging or insufficient equipment as a challenge to providing sports opportunities .

for example , an official from one school told us the school had to implement a selection policy for the football program , in which some students were cut from the team , because demand exceeded the number of uniforms and helmets available for players .

school officials also cited the upkeep and maintenance of fields as a challenge given budget constraints .

some state , district , and other officials cited finding quality coaches as a challenge to providing sports opportunities .

specifically , some officials told us that fewer faculty members have been coaching sports teams in recent years .

officials attribute this decline to the low pay and increased time commitments that are often required to coach a sport .

in one state we visited , an official said over 60 percent of the coaches in the state were considered “walk - on coaches” who were not otherwise a part of the school community .

some officials said that non - faculty coaches may be less accessible to students .

in addition , some schools may have a difficult time finding coaches for specific sports .

for example , one school official reported difficulty finding cheerleading coaches given the specialized training needed to coach a cheerleading squad .

schools have mitigated some of the budgetary challenges related to providing sports opportunities by relying heavily on outside funding sources or charging fees for certain sports activities .

some school officials we interviewed said their athletics funding depended primarily on community support or the tax base of their district , both of which fluctuate with the economy .

for example , one district we visited had strong community support and a high economic tax base .

during our site visit , we observed that schools in this district had numerous and high - quality facilities and one official mentioned that even the district's middle schools had swimming pools .

the official added that the tax base has remained steady , and the district has not experienced some of the challenges that other school districts face in providing pe and sports opportunities for its students .

however , other schools we visited reported relying heavily on booster clubs , gate receipts , private donations , and fundraising to fund their local sports programs .

for example , one school official told us that the school relies heavily on ticket sales from sporting events that may total as much as $60,000 a year to maintain and fund its sports programs .

also , some schools with very strong community support benefit from community fundraising efforts .

in addition , some school districts have implemented “pay - to - play” arrangements , in which students are charged a fee to participate in school sports activities .

specifically , according to shpps data , the percentage of schools that require students to pay an activity fee to participate in interscholastic sports was an estimated 33 percent in 2006 , which did not differ significantly from the 2000 estimate of 29 percent.addition , the percentage of schools with intramural activities or physical activity clubs that required students to pay a fee for these activities increased from an estimated 23 percent in 2000 to 35 percent in 2006 .

however , in two states we visited , officials told us that pay - to - play arrangements are prohibited in their states .

some officials expressed concern that pay - to - play arrangements may negatively impact student participation by serving as a barrier to lower - income students .

however , according to 2006 shpps data , an estimated 86 percent of schools that charge a fee to participate in sports activities waived the fee for students who could not afford to pay .

the federal government has an interest in seeing that school - aged children benefit from the positive effects regular physical activity can have on health and overall well - being .

as the primary social institution where children learn and spend their time , schools can play a pivotal role in increasing students' physical activity , in part through offering pe classes and opportunities to participate in sports programs .

although it appears schools increasingly acknowledge the benefits of pe by requiring students to take classes , they have reduced the amount of time spent on pe instruction .

opportunities to play school sports , however , appear to be on the rise .

while such a trend is encouraging , school - based sports should augment , rather than replace , the experiences and skills acquired in pe , which reaches beyond student athletes to the general student population .

a number of challenges inhibit further expansion of school - based pe and sports .

at a time when states and districts are operating under severe fiscal constraints , acquiring resources to provide additional opportunities is difficult .

although some districts and schools have developed approaches to partially offset the challenges associated with providing sports opportunities , challenges associated with providing pe remain unresolved .

identifying practical ways to increase students' physical activity may be difficult , but the need to address childhood obesity — and the opportunity to shore up such efforts in the school context — serves as a compelling starting point for addressing obesity - related health issues and their associated costs .

we provided a draft of the report to the departments of education and health and human services for review and comment .

both agencies provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to relevant congressional committees , the secretary of education , the secretary of health and human services , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 206 ) 287-4809 or calboml@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

debra prescott ( assistant director ) and rebecca woiwode ( analyst - in - charge ) managed this assignment .

vernette shaw and michelle wong made significant contributions in all facets of the work .

in addition , dana hopings helped with site visits ; jean mcsween and dae park provided methodological support ; alex galuten provided legal assistance ; david chrisinger provided writing assistance ; and james bennett provided graphics for the report .

