since 2001 the united states has made a commitment to building afghanistan's security and governance structure in order to counter terrorist threats and create sustainable security and stability in afghanistan .

developing independently capable afghan national defense and security forces ( andsf ) is a key component of u.s. and coalition efforts .

in support of those efforts , the department of defense ( dod ) relies heavily on the afghanistan security forces fund ( asff ) to provide assistance to the andsf , which comprises all afghan forces under the ministry of defense and ministry of interior .

the asff was established in 2005 to build , equip , train , and sustain the andsf , and since then congress has appropriated more than $78.8 billion in asff funding .

over that period , about two - thirds of the funds provided to the asff have been executed through the defense security cooperation agency , including about $4.3 billion to support the training and operations of the afghan national army .

most of the remaining asff funding was provided directly to the government of the islamic republic of afghanistan , primarily to fund pay and operational support to the andsf , such as facilities sustainment contracts and information technology system management support .

concerns have been raised in congress about the high costs of some training contracts funded by the asff .

the joint explanatory statement accompanying the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , included a provision for us to examine the asff training contracts .

this report describes dod's processes to ( 1 ) identify afghan national army training needs and associated funding requirements ; ( 2 ) develop and execute asff training contracts ; and ( 3 ) provide visibility over asff training contracts .

for our first objective , we focused on the process used to determine training needs and funding requirements for the afghan national army and the afghan air force ( which is part of the afghan national army ) , managed by the u.s. army , because this training accounts for about 90 percent of the total asff training offerings for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 .

we reviewed and analyzed guidance on the processes for identifying and requesting funding for training needs .

we interviewed dod officials involved in the process , including those from combined security transition command - afghanistan ; train advise assist command – air , program executive office for simulation , training , and instrumentation ; and army contracting command .

for our second objective , we reviewed guidance on the process for developing and executing asff training contracts , as well as the contracting process .

we also reviewed documentation associated with task orders issued against an indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract for training completed in fiscal years 2017 through 2019 for the afghan national army .

we conducted a more detailed review of documentation associated with fixed - and rotary - wing pilot training that had been completed at the time of our review .

to more fully understand the contracting process and the costs associated with the training , we performed a more detailed but non - generalizable review of documents associated with a task order covering fixed - wing pilot training and we interviewed u.s. army contracting command officials .

for our third objective , we reviewed dod's budget and contracting processes related to asff training requirements to determine how they provide dod officials with visibility over key asff contract information , from budgeting information to contract execution .

we interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for policy ( ousd - policy ) , defense security cooperation agency , combined security transition command - afghanistan ( cstc - a ) , u.s. army security assistance command , u.s. army materiel command , u.s. army contracting command , and program executive office for simulation , training , and instrumentation .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2018 to november 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the united states currently has two primary missions in afghanistan: the u.s - led counterterrorism mission and the nato - led resolute support mission to train , advise , and assist the andsf .

for u.s. purposes , both of these missions are a part of operation freedom's sentinel , commanded by u.s. forces - afghanistan .

combined security transition command - afghanistan is the command under nato's resolute support mission that conducts the train , advise , and assist mission in afghanistan .

these efforts are carried out via the regional train advise assist commands ( taacs ) that collectively cover all of afghanistan .

specifically , train advise assist command – air ( taac - air ) focuses on developing and advising the afghan air force .

the asff is generally a 2-year appropriation that is used to provide assistance , with the concurrence of the secretary of state , to the security forces of afghanistan , including the provision of equipment , supplies , services , training , facility and infrastructure repair , renovation , construction , and funding .

the asff presently comprises four budget activity groups: afghan national army , afghan national police , afghan air force , and afghan special security forces .

each budget activity group includes four sub - activity groups: sustainment , infrastructure , equipment and transportation , and training and operations .

according to officials , the training and operations sub - activity group encompasses most of cstc - a's efforts to train the andsf , including the afghan national army .

cstc - a has established processes to identify capability gaps within the andsf , develop and select training needed to address those gaps , and identify associated funding requirements .

to do so , cstc - a works with various requiring activities — partner organizations , such as the train advise assist commands — to identify andsf training needs .

cstc - a then incorporates these needs and associated funding requirements into the asff budget request , typically a year or more before the training is initiated .

cstc - a has established processes to identify capability gaps within the andsf , develop and select training needed to address those gaps , and identify associated funding requirements for inclusion in asff budget justification documentation .

to help execute these processes , cstc - a has developed standard operating procedures and other guidance for planning , resourcing , and executing the asff .

these procedures and other guidance include information on processes to validate training requirements and associated resources .

cstc - a works with various partner organizations — referred to as “requiring activities” — to identify capability gaps and training needs for the andsf .

requiring activities are the organizations that request the resourcing of andsf capability needs through asff .

they include cstc - a , the taacs , and other u.s. or nato organizations partnered with the andsf .

according to dod officials , a partner organization can identify capability gaps in a number of ways .

for example , train advise assist command – air , which develops and advises the afghan air force , works with subject matter experts from the relevant u.s. military services and other organizations to identify potential afghan air force capability gaps .

additionally , according to dod officials , in 2015 dod tasked the mitre corporation to conduct a study of afghan air force capabilities .

according to dod officials , mitre's november 2015 study highlighted capability gaps within the cadre of afghan air force fixed - and rotary - wing pilots and maintenance personnel .

further , officials stated that the study concluded that the training of additional pilots constituted a critical need for the afghan air force .

once a capability gap has been identified , the requiring activity develops potential courses of action to address it , such as proposals to train the andsf to develop needed capabilities .

through cstc - a's procedures these proposals are validated , along with associated resources .

the validation process is intended to ensure that a transparent and accountable process is followed when allocating asff resources to emerging requirements .

for example , as part of the fiscal year 2018 budget process , taac - air identified a capability gap within the afghan air force and then worked with various subject matter experts to develop courses of action to address the gap .

specifically , taac - air worked with personnel from the program executive office for simulation , training , and instrumentation ( peo - stri ) , which provides simulation , training , and testing solutions for the army and joint community .

subject matter experts from peo - stri provided details regarding various options for addressing the capability gap .

peo - stri officials noted that they also provided cost estimates for delivering the solution based on historical data .

according to peo - stri officials , this was a highly interactive process entailing frequent formal and informal discussions among multiple organizations to develop the most effective solution for pilot training for the afghan air force .

once details and cost estimates were solidified , the requirement owner presented them to a council of colonels , an officer group responsible for requirement validation for training needs , among other capability needs .

the requirement was then taken to the general officer steering committee , which votes to validate the requirement and approve the proposed solution .

cstc - a's process incorporates validated training needs and their associated funding requirements as part of dod's annual budget process .

dod's planning , programming , budgeting , and execution ( ppbe ) process , which is governed in part by dod directive 7045.14 , along with other dod guidance , is conducted under four phases ( see figure 1 ) .

specifically , dod uses the ppbe process to determine and prioritize requirements and allocate resources to provide capabilities necessary to accomplish the department's missions .

according to officials , as part of this process , cstc - a provides inputs , including training requirements and associated funding needs , and later works with various contracting commands to execute appropriated funds .

in the case of asff , cstc - a's guidance indicates that a proposed activity ( for example , fixed - wing pilot training classes ) should generally be included in the asff budget justification book in order to later use asff funds for that activity .

to do so , cstc - a's program and analysis division develops and incorporates the requests from requirement owners for funding for the operations , sustainment , and development of the andsf into the asff budget request and associated budget justification materials .

the program and analysis division works with the requirement owners to write a narrative describing their proposed activity and associated cost estimate for delivering the activity .

the division then works with the ousd - comptroller to consolidate requirements for all budget activities and sub - activity groups into a single draft budget justification book .

one significant aspect of this process is that many of the key decisions , and associated cost assumptions , on how cstc - a and taac - air ( in the case of afghan pilot training ) intend to carry out asff training efforts are proposed 18-24 months before the training will occur .

for example , as shown in figure 2 , preparation of the asff budget justification book for fiscal year 2019 began in the summer of 2017 .

in turn , the budget justification book was subsequently submitted to the ousd - comptroller in december 2017 , and funds were not available for use until the start of the new fiscal year , in october 2018 .

these time frames can present a challenge in developing accurate cost estimates for cstc - a , given that situations in afghanistan can change significantly in the time between cstc - a's developing a proposed capability requirement and associated cost estimate for inclusion in the asff budget justification book and the execution of that requirement , according to officials .

if conditions change , officials noted , the proposed actions and associated cost estimates for a given requirement may no longer be appropriate or accurate .

for example , the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction reported in january 2019 that ctsc - a may have overestimated the cost for uh - 60 blackhawk rotary - wing pilot training by as much as $1 billion over a 7-year period — attributing the overestimation mainly to unrealistic assumptions regarding student or pilot attrition and the english language program .

in the case of initial entry fixed - wing pilot training classes , cstc - a's original proposal , as reflected in its budget justification book was to have classes of 25 students .

however , during the implementation of this training , the class size fell to 12 students because not all 25 students achieved the required english language proficiency , and one student had dropped out of the program .

consequently , the resulting class was half the projected size underlying the estimated funding requirement , which resulted in funds being excess to cstc - a's actual need .

cstc - a officials acknowledged the challenges they faced in filling classes with the expected number of students , adding that they had purposely built in significant flexibility in the training approach to be able to adjust to the realities of the andsf's ability to generate qualified students .

according to cstc - a officials , the number of english - proficient afghan student candidates varies from year to year .

for cases like these , where cstc - a requested more funding than it ultimately obligated , in some circumstances dod may reprogram the unobligated amounts within the same appropriation account , or may transfer it to other appropriation accounts , if there is authority to do so .

otherwise , time - limited appropriations , such as the asff , expire after their period of availability and are unavailable for new obligations .

according to cstc - a officials , in cases where they have unobligated funding due to changing conditions such as smaller - than - expected class sizes , they try to reprogram that money for related needs within the same sub - activity group in the asff budget prior to expiration .

for example , if certain afghan air force training costs are lower than expected , the money could be reprogrammed for other efforts within the afghan air force training and operations sub - activity group .

asff - funded training contracts for the andsf are developed and executed through a process that is modeled on the u.s. government's foreign military sales process .

until april 2019 , asff - funded orders to train the afghan national army were generally filled under a contract with a single provider .

at that point , dod began to transition to an approach using several contracts , including one with multiple providers .

asff - funded training contracts are developed and executed under a process modeled on the u.s. government's foreign military sales ( fms ) program , referred to as “pseudo - fms.” as indicated by cstc - a guidance , these pseudo - fms procurements are fms - like cases and use u.s. funds to purchase items , services , and training for andsf capability requirements .

the process is outlined in the security assistance management manual , which provides dod - wide guidance to dod components engaged in the management or implementation of dod security assistance and security cooperation programs over which the defense security cooperation agency has responsibility .

we have previously reported that while the many steps of the process used for fms and pseudo - fms cases can be grouped in different ways , they fall into five general phases: assistance request , agreement development , acquisition , delivery , and case closure .

first , cstc - a works with the resource coordinator , requirement owner , and other elements to develop a memorandum of request , and it submits that memorandum to the implementing agency and the defense security cooperation agency , requesting assistance to contract for andsf needs using asff funds .

for example , when developing the memorandum of request for initial entry fixed - wing pilot training , cstc - a worked with taac - air , the requirement owner , to identify details regarding the agreed - upon training solution .

officials noted that cstc - a also worked with the subject matter experts from peo - stri to develop the independent government cost estimate .

second , as described by officials , the agreement development phase begins with the defense security cooperation agency's receiving the memorandum of request .

the defense security cooperation agency opens a case and assigns it to an implementing agency — that is , the military department or defense agency responsible for overall management of the actions that will result in the delivery of materials or services .

according to contracting officials , the implementing agency for training foreign military ground and air forces outside of the united states — such as the afghan national army — is the u.s. army security assistance command .

the implementing agency then works with the appropriate program executive office to develop the letter of offer and acceptance — which serves to document the transfer of articles and services to the u.s. government requesting authority .

for example , for the out - of - country fixed - wing pilot training requirement , contractors delivered the training , and the appropriate implementing agency was peo - stri , according to officials .

once the letter of offer and acceptance is completed and signed by the implementing and requesting agencies , it is reviewed and approved by the defense security cooperation agency and department of state , as appropriate .

third , the program executive office works with the appropriate contracting command to acquire the requested defense goods or services as part of the acquisition phase .

according to contracting officials , the contracting command solicits and receives bids from contractors and selects the best value option ( including price plus deliverables ) .

fourth , the contractor delivers the required good or service .

according to officials , the relevant program executive office is responsible for monitoring the contractor's performance by ensuring compliance with applicable contract clauses .

fifth , following contract completion and payment of outstanding obligations , the implementing agency initiates case closure with the defense security cooperation agency .

prior to april 2019 , asff - funded training requirements for the afghan national army , including out - of - country fixed - wing pilot training , were generally executed under a single award indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract known as the warfighter field operations customer support ( wff ) contract .

the wff contract provided integrated training system sustainment and training services world - wide for the u.s. army , marine corps , navy , air force , and special operations command .

according to army contracting officials , wff was the most expedient way to contract for various types of training for the afghan national army due to the contract's broad scope and $11.2 billion ceiling .

these officials said it provided the capacity and flexibility needed to fulfill the afghan national army's requirements and time frames in a streamlined way because the competition and award process had already occurred , enabling officials to move directly to awarding task orders for support .

however , while the single award indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract streamlined the process for contracting andsf training , it limited dod's ability to negotiate some costs .

according to contracting officials , only certain types of costs could be negotiated , such as those associated with housing , travel , and the number of advisors supporting the training .

the officials stated that other costs were established as a per - unit cost at the time of the contract award .

in addition , various administrative fees were established when the wff contract was awarded in 2007 and could not be renegotiated , according to contracting officials .

as a result , any task orders under this contract , including those to train the afghan national army , had to include these administrative fees and established labor wages .

to illustrate the various costs associated with the afghan air force training program , we reviewed documentation associated with training provided under the wff contract .

one training program cost $12.1 million for the delivery of an 86-week fixed - wing pilot training course ( from february 2018 through september 2019 ) for 13 afghan air force students at the fujairah aviation academy in the united arab emirates .

the pilot training was conducted by contractors and comprised aviation english language training , theory of flight , basic and advanced instrument ground school , advanced flight instrumentation , and simulation training for the afghan air force cessna c - 208 caravan aircraft .

the $12.1 million total included amounts paid to the contractor and administrative charges to cover the costs of entities within the u.s. government .

the costs associated with the training are shown in figure 3 below .

the largest cost factor in this task order was the cost of the flight school itself , which accounted for 68.4 percent ( or $8.2 million ) of the total cost , according to contracting officials .

the flight school included ground school , simulation , advanced instruments , and flying hours training , and it represented a cost per each of the 13 students who actually attended the training .

the flight school also included the cost of housing , electronic books / manuals , and campus security , some of which costs were negotiable , according to officials .

other costs , such as the defense security cooperation agency 3.5 percent surcharge and contract administration services 1.2 percent surcharge , were established based upon rates current at the time of the letter of offer and acceptance .

according to officials , the contractor's profit was established at the time of award of the contract in 2007 .

officials stated that the costs that could be negotiated were limited and included costs associated with travel , lodging , and adding more advisors to augment the training .

according to contracting officials , these limitations were not unique to this asff training but applied broadly to all asff training task orders they executed under wff .

in 2018 dod decided to replace wff , which was nearing expiration , with a series of new contracts .

dod has begun to transition work previously performed under wff to these new contracts , the first of which was awarded in 2018 .

according to contracting officials , asff - funded training efforts are expected to be executed primarily under two of the new contracts – the enterprise training services contract and the training , instructor operator support services contract .

the enterprise training services contract is a multiple award indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract with a total contract ceiling of $2.4 billion that was awarded to multiple contractors in june 2018 .

according to officials , the training , instructor operator support services contract is a single award indefinite delivery , indefinite quantity contract with a ceiling of $197.6 million that was awarded in july 2018 .

according to army contracting officials , the contracting process for asff training services will include competition among multiple contractors for each task order under the enterprise training services contract .

army contracting officials stated that under a multiple - award contract , each contract holder is to be provided a fair opportunity to compete for each task order , in part to use competition to ensure that the proposed prices are fair and reasonable .

according to army contracting officials , the enterprise training services contract also affords the opportunity to negotiate more elements than previously under the wff contract , such as labor rates or travel costs associated with training .

the first training task order under the enterprise training services contract in support of afghan forces was issued in april 2019 .

as this task order has only recently been issued , it is too early for us to comment on the efficacy of these contracts .

dod has varying degrees of visibility over asff - funded training contracts .

at the broadest level , ousd - comptroller and contracting officials stated that they have visibility of the overall execution of the asff budget , including funding associated with afghan national army training .

for example , ousd - comptroller tracks and reports asff obligations and disbursements in monthly status - of - funds reports , known as defense financial and accounting services 1002 reports .

in addition , the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction tracks and reports asff obligations and disbursements via its overseas contingency operations quarterly reports to congress .

at the individual contract level , the military services' contracting commands , such as peo - stri and army contracting command , develop and maintain contract files for individual asff - funded contracts and task orders .

however , according to officials , dod does not have a centralized system or reporting mechanism for tracking all asff training contracts , because the systems used by the services for managing funding and those used for contract management do not interface with each other .

according to ousd - comptroller officials , the systems used for financial management were not designed or intended to identify asff funds specifically obligated for training contracts because there is no requirement for them to do so .

officials said that consequently , in the single instance in which they have had to develop a comprehensive list of all asff - funded training contracts , they had to work with the contracting commands at the respective military services to gather this information .

for example , to respond to congressional direction related to contracts funded with asff , ousd - policy contacted all of the military services to request a list of all training contracts funded through the asff under the respective services' responsibilities , according to ousd officials .

in turn , army contracting officials stated that they identified the requested information by using the lines of accounting fields in their contract management systems to identify those training contracts funded with asff .

ousd - policy officials provided us with the resulting list of 40 contracts and task orders , totaling over $483 million in estimated contract value , but they acknowledged that the list was likely incomplete .

ousd - policy officials who compiled the list of training contracts told us that the precision of the list was affected by inconsistent interpretations among the services of what constitutes a training contract .

according to these officials , training for the afghan national army can also occur under procurement or maintenance contracts that have embedded training components .

for example , according to officials , the army's national maintenance strategy contract provides logistic support to the afghan national army and includes a training component .

similarly , the navy's asff - funded scaneagle unmanned aerial vehicle reconnaissance procurement contract includes a training component .

because these contracts are not primarily training - oriented , according to contracting officials , they were not identified under the training and operations subactivity group in the asff budget , and therefore would not be easily identifiable as asff training contracts .

despite these limitations , dod officials stated that , given their existing systems and processes and their ability to reach out to contracting officials to obtain additional data when needed , they believe they have sufficient tools to identify most asff - funded training contracts .

additionally , dod officials stated that the congressional direction associated with asff - funded training was a one - time request , not a recurring task .

we provided a draft of this report to dod , and dod responded that it would not be providing formal comments .

dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and to the secretary of defense .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact cary russell at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or russellc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are listed in the appendix .

in addition to the contact named above , james a. reynolds , assistant director , and jerome brown , william chatlos , alfonso garcia , steve pruitt , michael shaughnessy , mckenna stahl , and cheryl weissman made key contributions to this report .

