i appreciate the opportunity to testify today on progress toward implementing the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) predicts that , by 2025 , the annual number of airline passengers in the united states will increase from about 700 million to about 1 billion per year and that the daily number of flights will increase from about 80,000 to more than 95,000 .

if faa's predictions hold true , today's air transportation system will be strained under such demands , especially on some routes to and from hub airports and major cities .

accordingly , faa , other federal agencies , and aviation industry stakeholders have worked in partnership to develop a plan for nextgen .

nextgen is an enormously complex undertaking that requires acquiring new integrated air traffic control systems ; developing new flight procedures , standards , and regulations ; and creating and maintaining supporting infrastructure to create a modern air transportation system that relies on satellite - based surveillance and navigation and network - centric operations .

nextgen is intended to increase air transportation system efficiency and capacity while maintaining its safety .

vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act , pub .

l. no .

108-176 , §§ 709-710 , 117 stat .

2490 , 2582-2585 ( 2003 ) .

as a means to respond to industry skepticism about faa's ability to implement nextgen , build support for long - term nextgen investments , and more immediately address inefficiencies and delays in the current air traffic control system .

in past reports , we have made a number of recommendations to faa to address delays in nextgen's development and acquisitions , improve faa's processes , and focus on accountability and performance .

over the last 2 years , faa has taken several steps and instituted a number of changes to address these issues .

my statement highlights five key challenges that we and others have previously identified that affect nextgen's implementation , as well as steps faa has taken to address these challenges .

these challenges are delivering and demonstrating nextgen's near - term benefits ; developing a cost - effective mechanism to encourage operators to equip with nextgen technologies ; maintaining timely delivery of acquisitions ; clearly defining nextgen leadership roles and responsibilities ; and balancing the needs of the current radar - based system as well as the nextgen system through the transition .

this statement is based primarily on our previous reports and testimonies and on ongoing work for this subcommittee that includes challenges associated with near - term nextgen implementation and faa's efforts to transition from the current air traffic control system to the nextgen system .

we updated information on faa's responses to the five challenges that we discuss through a review of faa documents and interviews with faa officials .

the gao reports cited in this statement contain more detailed explanations of the methods used to conduct our work .

we conducted all of our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

faa must deliver systems , procedures , and capabilities that provide operators with a return on their investments in nextgen avionics in order to convince operators to continue making such equipment investments .

for example , a large percentage of the current fleet is equipped to fly more precise performance - based navigation ( pbn ) procedures , such as following precise routes that use the global positioning system or glide descent paths , which can save the operators money through reduced fuel burn and flight time .

however , aircraft operators have expressed concerns that faa has not produced the most useful or beneficial pbn routes and procedures to date .

as a means to leverage existing technology , provide immediate benefit to the industry , and in response to the rtca midterm implementation task force's ( task force ) recommendations , faa began an initiative to better use pbn procedures to resolve airspace problems in and provide benefits to areas around busy airports , known as “metroplexes.” this initiative , the optimization of airspace and procedures in the metroplex ( metroplex ) , is under way in eight metropolitan areas across the country and planning is under way for other areas ( see fig .

1 ) .

faa is working to design its metroplex and other pbn initiatives to avoid some of the challenges that have limited the use and , in turn , potential benefits of existing pbn procedures .

for example , faa has found that some pbn procedures developed without air traffic controllers' involvement have been used infrequently , if at all , because of problems with the procedure design or other challenges .

in response , faa has worked to include stakeholders , such as air traffic controllers and airlines , in the study and design of new pbn procedures .

for example , faa included airlines and local air traffic controllers in the design of pbn procedures under the metroplex and greener skies over seattle initiatives .

this inclusion , according to stakeholders involved , should help to ensure that the new pbn procedures can be used by local controllers and produce quantifiable benefits to aircraft operators .

greener skies also formally involved local airports in the pbn procedure development process to help avoid adverse environmental — largely noise - related — community impacts .

as we have previously reported , effective outreach to affected stakeholders can help anticipate and address potential community concerns — particularly with regard to noise .

if not addressed , these concerns can delay efforts to use airspace more efficiently .

many of faa's near - term improvement efforts have focused on developing new pbn procedures rather than on other near - term improvements recommended by the task force , such as airborne or surface traffic - management improvements .

following up on the task force's work , the nextgen advisory committee ( nac ) made recommendations in may 2012 to help faa identify and prioritize improvements — including and in addition to pbn procedures — that could provide near - term benefits .

faa is assessing the extent to which it can make these other improvements in later rounds of the metroplex initiative .

in the meantime , the agency has turned its attention to expanding or developing some of these improvements — including the air - traffic - management tools that allow for the sequencing of planes — at some of the facilities that are the focus of ongoing metroplex efforts .

generally , these efforts are still in the planning phase .

figure 2 shows the complexity of merging or sequencing traffic that is approaching an airport using pbn procedures , such as precision required navigation performance ( rnp ) turns and optimized profile descents ( opd ) .

this complexity can be mitigated with the use of new airborne traffic management tools .

given the integrated nature of near - term nextgen improvements , it will be important for faa to determine how its metroplex initiative and airborne and surface traffic management improvements — as well as other improvements prioritized by the nac — will be implemented and will work together so that the full benefits of these improvements can be realized .

in addition , although faa has made progress in developing new pbn procedures with its metroplex and other pbn initiatives , much work remains to be done to improve the overall process for amending and implementing pbn procedures .

according to faa , the current process for implementing or amending flight procedures consists of a bundle of interconnected , overlapping , and sometimes competing processes , which , on occasion , results in the implementation of low or no - benefit flight procedures that have to be reworked or amended .

likewise , rtca has recommended that faa address problems with what it has termed faa's inefficient processes for validating and certifying new technologies , which are critical steps in the process for allowing the use of new procedures .

we have also expressed concerns about the time and human resources required for the validation and certification processes and have identified these processes as a significant risk to the timely and cost - effective implementation of nextgen .

to address these challenges , faa has undertaken a navigation lean ( nav lean ) project to streamline the implementation process for flight procedures .

the agency anticipates this project will be mostly in place by the end of 2015.work for this committee that further explores issues and challenges associated with near - term nextgen implementation .

as we have previously reported , faa should regularly provide stakeholders , interested parties , congress , and the american people with a clear picture of where nextgen's implementation stands , and whether the capabilities being implemented are resulting in positive outcomes and improved performance for operators and passengers .

we have recommended that faa develop a timeline and action plan to work with industry and federal partner agencies to develop an agreed - upon list of outcome - based performance metrics , as well as goals for nextgen broadly and specific nextgen improvement areas .

in addition , the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 requires faa to report on measures of the agency's progress in implementing nextgen capabilities and operational results .

in 2011 , the nac recommended that faa adopt a set of performance metrics to address operational changes affecting capacity , efficiency , predictability , and access .

in addition , the nac has continued to work on outcome - based metrics to inform the public about the overall status of nextgen implementation and the program's contribution to national aviation policy goals .

to date , faa has established metrics for five of its key performance areas — capacity , efficiency , predictability , environment , and safety — but metrics for the three other key performance areas — access , equity , and flexibility — are still preliminary .

faa has also set performance goals for nextgen through 2018 , including goals to improve the throughput of air traffic at key airports by 12 percent over 2009 levels in order to reduce delays by 27 percent from 2009 levels , and achieve a 5 percent reduction in average taxi - time at key airports .

developing metrics and nextgen performance goals are positive steps , but much work remains , including finalizing agency targets for specific improvement areas and making a link between nextgen performance goals and metrics and nextgen improvements .

for example , public information about faa's near - term plans for implementing additional capabilities lacks specifics about the timing and locations of implementation .

according to rtca , a lack of published information with specific implementation dates and locations for nextgen capabilities is an obstacle to incentivizing airlines to equip their aircraft with additional nextgen avionics .

without a clearer picture of the return on investment — and the progress being made — aircraft operators may be hesitant to make business and operational decisions necessary to fully realize nextgen benefits .

measuring performance of near - term nextgen improvements will be critical for faa management and stakeholders to assess various impacts , make investment decisions , and monitor nextgen progress .

we will report on this issue in more detail as part of our ongoing near - term nextgen implementation work for this committee .

while some operational improvements can be made with existing aircraft equipment , realizing more significant nextgen benefits requires a critical mass of properly equipped aircraft .

reaching that critical mass is a significant challenge because the first aircraft operators to purchase and install nextgen - capable technologies will not obtain a return on the investment until many other operators are similarly equipped .

faa estimates that nextgen avionics needed on aircraft to realize significant midterm nextgen capabilities will cost private operators about $5 billion to $7 billion through 2020 .

for example , according to the rtca , it would cost from $150,000 to $650,000 to equip a regional jet with an rnp package , which is one of the technologies that allows for precision approaches .

the faa modernization and reform act authorized the creation of a program to facilitate public - private financing , such as loan guarantees and other credit assistance tools , for equipping general aviation and commercial aircraft with nextgen technologies .

according to faa , the goal for an equipage program would be to encourage deployment of nextgen - capable aircraft sooner than would have occurred without such funding assistance in place .

faa is soliciting industry input about how to design and implement such a program but has yet to decide on how to incentivize this transition .

although authorized , no funding has been appropriated to establish a public - private financing program .

according to faa , it is working to understand what options exist for establishing a program even if it receives no appropriations toward the program .

nextgen has significantly increased the number , cost , and complexity of faa's acquisition programs , and it is imperative that these programs remain on time and within budget , particularly given current budget constraints and the interdependencies of many nextgen - acquisitions .

in february 2012 , we reported that most of the key nextgen - related acquisition programs were generally proceeding on time and on budget.see appendix i for the current cost and schedule performance of select baselined nextgen and related acquisition programs .

however , delays with the en route automation modernization ( eram ) program — a critical program for nextgen — illustrate how delays can affect overall acquisition and maintenance costs as well as time frames for other programs .

as we previously reported , eram's schedule delays and cost increase of $330 million over 4 years were associated with unanticipated risks associated with operational complexities at the selected sites , insufficient testing to identify software issues before deployment at key sites , insufficient communication between the program office and field sites , and insufficient stakeholder involvement during system development and deployment .

the delays with eram added an estimated $18 million per year to the costs of maintaining the system that eram was meant to replace .

additionally , eram is important to the on - time implementation of two other key nextgen acquisitions — data communications ( data comm ) and system wide information management ( swim ) .

in part because of eram's delay , faa pushed the data comm program's start date from september 2011 to may 2012 , revised the original plan for the first segment of swim to mitigate the impact of eram delays on the swim program , and delayed the start date for segment 2a of swim from 2010 to july 2012 .

looking more broadly , the implementation of nextgen — both in the midterm ( through 2020 ) and in the long term ( beyond 2020 ) — will be affected by how well faa manages program interdependencies .

as we have previously reported , industry stakeholders have expressed concerns about the fragmentation of authority and lack of accountability for nextgen , two factors that could delay its implementation .

we have also found that programs can be implemented most efficiently when managers are empowered to make critical decisions and are held accountable for results .

to ensure accountability for nextgen results , several stakeholders have suggested that an office is needed that would report directly to the faa administrator or the secretary of transportation .

stakeholders have also cited challenges with coordinating implementation of nextgen capabilities across faa lines of business .

with multiple faa lines of business responsible for various nextgen activities , including offices within faa's air traffic organization ( ato ) and outside ato , coordination and integration is vital since delays in actions required from several offices could prevent or delay nextgen benefits .

faa has made organizational changes in the past in an effort to address these concerns .

beginning in 2011 , faa made additional changes to its nextgen organizational structure to address these long - standing issues .

specifically , faa reorganized the structure of the office responsible for carrying out nextgen implementation , moving the office from within the ato to under faa's deputy administrator ( who is currently serving as the acting administrator ) .

according to faa , this change increased nextgen's visibility within and outside the agency and created a direct line of authority and responsibility for nextgen .

however , in february 2012 , the faa modernization and reform act designated that the director of the joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) — who is responsible for nextgen planning and coordination — report directly to the faa administrator and created a new leadership position — the chief nextgen officer — who will also report directly to the administrator .

the chief nextgen officer position has not yet been filled .

faa has not yet made the organizational changes called for by the act or clearly defined the relationships among the deputy administrator , chief nextgen officer , and jpdo director .

according to faa , no organizational changes will be made until the agency has a permanent faa administrator in place .

faa also reorganized its nextgen efforts around its “ideas to in - service management” ( i2i ) process .

according to faa , the i2i will support enterprise - level , cross - program management in bringing capabilities into the national airspace system and will formalize collaboration among nextgen program offices , ato , and other relevant faa organizations such as aviation safety .

within ato , a new program management office has been established to improve oversight of ato's nextgen implementation efforts .

according to faa , by combining acquisition program managers into one organization , ato will ensure more coordinated program management throughout the full life cycle of nextgen acquisitions .

while an increased focus on accountability for nextgen implementation is a positive step , it remains to be seen whether this latest reorganization will produce the desired results without a clarification of nextgen leadership roles and the fulfillment of all the necessary leadership positions .

as we have previously reported , leadership is a critical element of success for large - scale systems integration efforts like nextgen .

particularly in light of constrained budget resources , faa will have to balance its priorities to help ensure that nextgen implementation stays on course .

sustaining the current legacy infrastructure remains critical , as it will continue to be the core of the national airspace system for a number of years , and some of its components will be part of nextgen .

for example , while faa transitions to satellite - based surveillance through the deployment of automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) technology , the agency expects to continue to operate and maintain current radar technology through at least 2020 .

at that time , faa is scheduled to make decisions about which radars the agency will decommission and which will be maintained as the back - up system for ads - b .

if either ads - b's deployment or airlines' efforts to equip with this technology should slip , then faa may have to maintain and operate some of its radars longer than expected .

we have ongoing work for this committee that is further exploring how faa is preparing for the transition to nextgen and balancing the demands of the legacy and nextgen systems , including potential implications for the legacy systems and faa budgets if nextgen implementation is delayed .

in addition , to fully realize nextgen's capabilities , reconfiguring facilities that handle air traffic control will be required .

faa recently approved an initial plan to consolidate en route centers and terminal radar approach - control facilities ( tracons ) into large , integrated facilities over the next two decades .

however , faa has yet to make key decisions , such as where to build the first integrated facility .

these decisions could affect future consolidation plans .

while faa develops its facilities plan , it faces the immediate task of maintaining and repairing existing facilities so that the current air - traffic control system continues to operate safely and reliably during the expected 20-year transition .

according to faa , in 2011 , 65 percent of its terminal facilities and 74 percent of its en route facilities were in either poor or fair condition with a total deferred maintenance backlog of $310 million for these facilities .

once faa develops and implements a facility consolidation plan , it can identify which legacy facilities to continue to repair and maintain and , in doing so , potentially reduce overall facility repair and maintenance costs .

faa has acknowledged the need to keep long - term plans in mind so that it does not invest unnecessarily in facilities that will not be used for nextgen .

moreover , although nextgen is projected to keep delays at many airports from getting worse than would be expected without these improvements , nextgen alone is not likely to sufficiently expand the capacity of the national airspace system .

for example , faa's nextgen modeling indicates that even if all ongoing and planned nextgen technologies are implemented , 14 airports — including some of the 35 busiest — may not be able to meet the projected increases in demand ( fig .

3 ) .

the transformation to nextgen will also depend on the ability of airports to handle greater capacity .

for example , decisions regarding using existing capacity more efficiently include certifying and approving standards for using closely spaced parallel runways .

at some airports , policies may need to be developed to address situations where demand exceeds capacity ( eg , pricing , administrative rules , service priorities , and so forth ) .

planning infrastructure projects to increase capacity , such as building additional runways , can be a lengthy process and will require substantial advance planning and safety and cost analyses .

also , the improved efficiency in runway and airspace use that should result from some nextgen technologies may exacerbate capacity constraints in other areas , such as taxiways , terminal gates , or parking areas .

finally , increasing capacity must be handled within the context of limiting increases in emissions and noise that can affect the communities around airports .

chairman petri , ranking member costello , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact gerald l. dillingham , ph.d. at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov .

in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include heather krause and ed laughlin ( assistant directors ) , jessica bryant - bertail , bert japikse , delwen jones , molly laster , dominic nadarski , and melissa swearingen .

according to faa , this difference is the result of additional work added to the ads - b program baseline in march 2011 and includes congressional earmarks of $9.3 million in fiscal 2008 and $6.8 million in fiscal year 2009 as well as an additional $15 million held in reserve to mitigate potential automation risks .

in addition , the colorado wide area multilateration phase ii was added to the program ( $13.6 million ) .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

