in fiscal year 2012 , the department of defense's ( dod ) military health system offered comprehensive health care coverage — including a pharmacy benefit — to nearly 9.7 million eligible beneficiaries through its tricare program .

dod's pharmacy benefit allows tricare beneficiaries to obtain prescription drugs either from military treatment facility pharmacies operated by dod or from tricare's mail - order and retail pharmacies operated through the private sector .

in its current contract structure , dod contracts with managed care support contractors to provide medical services , and contracts separately with a pharmacy benefit manager , express scripts , inc. , to operate the tricare mail - order pharmacy and provide access to a retail pharmacy network .

dod's current pharmacy services contract is set to expire in the fall of 2014 , and dod has issued a request for proposals ( rfp ) for its next pharmacy services contract , which it estimates will cost a total of $4.4 billion .

dod has been preparing for its upcoming pharmacy services contract through its acquisition planning process , which included identifying any planned changes to contract requirements — the work to be performed by the contractor .

federal regulations require agencies to perform acquisition planning activities for all contracts to ensure that the government meets its needs in the most effective , economical , and timely manner possible .

we have previously reported that inadequate acquisition planning can increase the risk that the government may receive services that cost more than anticipated , are delivered late , and are of unacceptable quality .

federal regulations also allow agencies to make changes to requirements in existing contracts , as needed .

senate report 112-173 , which accompanied the senate armed services committee's version of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2013 , mandated that gao conduct a comprehensive review of dod's health care contracts , which include the pharmacy services contract .

in this report , we review: ( 1 ) how dod identified changes needed , if any , to requirements for its upcoming and current pharmacy services contracts ; and ( 2 ) what , if any , assessment dod has done of the appropriateness of its current pharmacy services contract structure .

to determine the steps dod took to identify changes needed , if any , to contract requirements , we focused on dod's preparation for the upcoming contract and administration of the current contract .

we reviewed documents related to dod's acquisition planning , including market research documentation and the draft and final rfp for the upcoming contract .

we also reviewed relevant federal regulations , including the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) , as they relate to acquisition planning .

we interviewed dod officials about their acquisition planning efforts , including changes to the contract requirements they determined were necessary and the reasons for those changes .

we also interviewed officials from dod's current pharmacy services contractor about the department's efforts to solicit industry feedback in making changes to requirements for the pharmacy services contract .

in addition , we interviewed officials from the pharmaceutical care management association ( the trade group representing the pharmacy benefit manager industry , including express scripts ) and pharmaceutical strategies group ( a pharmacy benefit consulting organization ) to obtain their perspectives on industry trends and dod's process for obtaining industry input .

to determine what , if any , assessment dod has done of the appropriateness of its current pharmacy services contract structure , we reviewed dod documents , including congressional testimony and projected cost estimates related to the initial decision to contract for pharmacy services separately from its managed care support contracts — referred to as a carve - out contract structure .

in addition , we interviewed dod officials about the reasoning behind this decision .

we also reviewed dod documents , including the report from the task force on the future of military health care that made recommendations regarding the structure of the pharmacy services contract , and dod's official response to the report .

we also interviewed dod officials about any efforts to determine whether the current carve - out structure continues to be appropriate .

we analyzed these documents in the context of gao's cost estimating and assessment guide: best practices for developing and managing capital program costs , which provides guidance to the federal government on cost - benefit analysis .

we interviewed officials from dod's three current managed care support contractors to obtain their perspectives on the current pharmacy services contract structure .

we also reviewed health plan research literature and interviewed officials from the two industry groups described above about industry practices .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2013 to september 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

tricare beneficiaries used the program's pharmacy benefit to fill almost 134 million outpatient prescriptions in fiscal year 2012 .

through its acquisition process , dod contracts with a pharmacy benefit manager — currently express scripts — to provide access to a retail pharmacy network and operate a mail order pharmacy for beneficiaries , and to provide administrative services .

under tricare , beneficiaries have three primary health plan options in which they may participate: ( 1 ) a managed care option called tricare prime , ( 2 ) a preferred - provider option called tricare extra , and ( 3 ) a fee - for - service option called tricare standard .

tricare beneficiaries may obtain medical care through a direct - care system of military treatment facilities or a purchased - care system consisting of network and non - network private sector primary and specialty care providers , and hospitals .

in addition , tricare's pharmacy benefit — offered under all tricare health plan options — provides beneficiaries with three options for obtaining prescription drugs: from military treatment facility pharmacies , from network and non - network retail pharmacies , and through the tricare mail - order pharmacy .

tricare's pharmacy benefit has a three - tier copayment structure based on whether a drug is included in dod's formulary and the type of pharmacy where the prescription is filled .

 ( see table 1. ) .

dod's formulary includes a list of drugs that all military treatment facilities must provide , and a list of drugs that military treatment facilities may elect to provide on the basis of the types of services offered at that facility ( eg , cancer drugs at facilities that provide cancer treatment ) .as “non - formulary” on the basis of its evaluation of their cost and clinical effectiveness .

non - formulary drugs are available to beneficiaries at a higher cost , unless the provider can establish medical necessity .

see pub .

l. no .

110-181 , § 703 , 122 stat .

3 , 188 ( codified at 10 u.s.c .

§ 1074g ( f ) ) .

this act provides that with respect to any prescriptions filled on or after january 28 , 2008 , the tricare retail pharmacy program is to be treated as an element of dod for purposes of procurement of drugs by federal agencies under 38 u.s.c .

§ 8126 to ensure that drugs paid for by dod that are dispensed to tricare beneficiaries at retail pharmacies are subject to federal pricing arrangements .

manufacturers are required to refund to dod the difference between the federal pricing arrangements and the retail price paid for prescriptions filled dating back to the ndaa's enactment on january 28 , 2008 .

as of july 31 , 2013 , according to dod , its total estimated savings from fiscal year 2009 through fiscal year 2013 were about $6.53 billion as a result of these refunds .

dod's tricare management activity is responsible for overseeing the tricare program , including the pharmacy benefit .

within this office , the pharmaceutical operations directorate ( hereafter referred to as the program office ) is responsible for managing the pharmacy benefit ( including the contract to provide pharmacy services ) , and the acquisition management and support directorate ( hereafter referred to as the contracting office ) is responsible for managing all acquisitions for the tricare management activity .

the two offices together manage the acquisition process for the pharmacy services contract .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

the program office and the contracting office provide the clinical expertise and acquisition knowledge , respectively , for the acquisition planning , evaluation of proposals , and award of the pharmacy services contract .

the acquisition process for dod's pharmacy services contract includes three main phases: ( 1 ) acquisition planning , ( 2 ) rfp , and ( 3 ) award .

acquisition planning .

in the acquisition planning phase , the program office , led by the program manager , is primarily responsible for defining tricare's contract requirements — the work to be performed by the contractor — and developing a plan to meet those requirements .

the program office also receives guidance and assistance from the contracting office in the development and preparation of key acquisition documents and in the market research process .

the market research process can involve the development and use of several information - gathering tools , including requests for information ( rfi ) , which are publicly released documents that allow the government to obtain feedback from industry on various acquisition elements such as the terms and conditions of the contract .

rfis are also a means by which the government can identify potential offerors and determine whether the industry can meet its needs .

in addition , we have previously reported that sound acquisition planning includes an assessment of lessons learned to identify improvements .

towards the end of this phase , officials in the program and contracting offices work together to revise and refine key acquisition planning documents .

rfp .

in the rfp phase , the contracting officer — the official in the contracting office who has the authority to enter into , administer , modify , and terminate contracts — issues the rfp , the proposals .

award .

in the award phase , the program and contracting offices are responsible for evaluating proposals and awarding a contract to the offeror representing the best value to the government based on a combination of technical and cost factors .

to monitor the contractor's performance under the contract after award , the contracting officer officially designates a program office official as the contracting officer's representative ( cor ) , who acts as the liaison between the contracting officer and the contractor and is responsible for the day - to - day monitoring of contractor activities to ensure that the services are delivered in accordance with the contract's performance standards .

the draft monitoring plan for the upcoming pharmacy services contract includes 30 standards — related to timeliness of claims processing , retail network access , and beneficiary satisfaction , among other things — against which the contractor's performance will be measured .

rfps include a description of the contract requirements , the anticipated terms and conditions that will be contained in the contract , the required information that the prospective offerors must include in their proposal , and the factors that will be used to evaluate proposals .

dod has department - wide acquisition training and experience requirements for all officials who award and administer dod contracts , including the pharmacy services contract , as required by law .

training is primarily provided through the defense acquisition university , and is designed to provide a foundation of acquisition knowledge , but is not targeted to specific contracts or contract types .

in addition , all cors must meet training and experience requirements specified in dod's standard for certification of contracting officer's representatives ( cor ) for service acquisitions issued in march 2010 .

see appendix i for more information on the certification standards for and experience of officials who award and administer the pharmacy services contract .

in september 2010 , dod issued guidance to help improve defense acquisition through its better buying power initiative .

dod's better buying power initiative encompasses a set of acquisition principles designed to achieve greater efficiencies through affordability , cost control , elimination of unproductive processes and bureaucracy , and promotion of competition ; it provides guidance to acquisition officials on how to implement these principles .

the principles are also designed to provide incentives to dod contractors for productivity and innovation in industry and government .

dod used market research to align the requirements for the upcoming pharmacy services contract with industry best practices and promote competition .

dod also identified changes to the requirements for the upcoming and current contracts in response to changes in legislation , efforts to improve service delivery , and contractor performance .

dod solicited information from industry during its acquisition planning for the upcoming pharmacy services contract through the required market research process , including issuing rfis and a draft rfp for industry comment , to identify changes to requirements for its pharmacy services contract .

specifically , dod used market research to align the requirements for the upcoming contract with industry best practices and promote competition .

align contract requirements with industry best practices .

dod issued five rfis from 2010 through 2012 related to the upcoming contract .

rfis are one of several market research although dod is not methods available to federal agencies .

required to use them , rfis are considered a best practice for service acquisitions in the federal government.provided dod with the opportunity to assess the capability of potential offerors to provide services that dod may incorporate in the upcoming pharmacy services contract .

in many of the rfis , the rfis dod asked questions about specific market trends so that it could determine if changes were needed to the upcoming contract requirements to help align them with industry best practices .

for example , dod issued one rfi in november 2010 that asked about establishing a mechanism that would allow for centralized distribution of specialty pharmaceuticals and preserve dod's federal pricing arrangements .

specialty pharmaceuticals — high - cost injectable , infused , oral , or inhaled drugs that are generally more complex to distribute , administer , and monitor than traditional drugs — are becoming a growing cost driver for pharmacy services .

according to dod officials , the rfi responses received from industry generally reinforced their view that the rfp should define any specialty pharmacy owned or sub - contracted by the contractor as a dod specialty mail - order outlet , which would subject it to the same federal pricing arrangements as the mail - order pharmacy .

promote competition .

dod has also used the rfi process to obtain information on promoting competition .

dod recognized that a limited number of potential offerors may have the capability to handle the pharmacy services contract given the recent consolidation in the pharmacy benefit management market and the large size of the tricare beneficiary population .

dod contracting officials told us that , in part because of the department's better buying power initiative to improve acquisition practices , they have a strong focus on maintaining a competitive contracting environment for the pharmacy services contract , thereby increasing the use of market research early in the acquisition planning process .

for example , dod's december 2011 rfi asked for industry perspectives on the length of the contract period .

dod was interested in learning whether a longer contract period would promote competition .

dod officials told us that the responses they received confirmed that potential offerors would prefer a longer contract period because it would allow a non - incumbent more time to recover any capital investment made as part of implementing the contract .

the rfp for the upcoming contract includes a contract period of 1 base year and 7 option years .

dod also used the rfi process to confirm that there were a sufficient number of potential offerors to ensure full and open competition for the pharmacy services contract .

dod officials told us that they found there were at least six potential offerors , which gave them confidence that there would be adequate competition .

since the start of the current pharmacy services contract in 2009 , dod has identified changes to the contract requirements in response to legislative changes to the pharmacy benefit , efforts to improve service delivery to beneficiaries , and improvements identified through monitoring of the current contractor's performance .

in each instance , dod officials needed to determine whether to make the change for the upcoming contract , or whether to make the change via a modification to the current contract .

according to dod officials , there were over 300 modifications to the current pharmacy services contract ; 23 of these were changes to the work to be done by the contractor .

dod officials told us that it is not possible to build a level of flexibility into the contract to accommodate or anticipate all potential changes ( and thus avoid modifications to the contract ) , because doing so would make it difficult for offerors to determine pricing in their proposals .

legislative changes to the pharmacy benefit .

legislative changes have been one key driver of dod's revisions to its pharmacy services contract requirements .

for example , one legislative change required dod to implement the tricare young adult program , which resulted in dod adding a requirement for the contractor to extend pharmacy services to eligible military dependents through the age of 26 .

this change was made as a modification under the current contract .

another legislative change that necessitated changes to the contract requirements was the increase in beneficiary copayments for drugs obtained through mail - order or retail pharmacies , enacted as part of the ndaa for fiscal year 2013 , which dod changed through a modification to the current contract .

a third legislative change to the pharmacy benefit was the mail - order pilot for maintenance drugs for tricare for life beneficiaries .

dod officials incorporated this change in the requirements for the upcoming pharmacy services contract , as outlined in the rfp .

efforts to improve service delivery .

dod has also updated contract requirements to improve service delivery to beneficiaries under the pharmacy services contract .

dod initiated a modification to the current contract to require the contractor to provide online coordination of benefits for beneficiaries with health care coverage from multiple insurers .

specifically , the contractor is required to ensure that pharmacy data systems include information on government and other health insurance coverage to facilitate coverage and payment determinations .

according to dod officials , this change is consistent with the updated national telecommunication standard from the national council for prescription drug programs , which provides a uniform format for electronic claims processing .

according to dod officials , this change to the contract requirements eliminates the need for beneficiaries to file paper claims when tricare is the secondary payer , simplifying the process for beneficiaries and reducing costs for dod .

another modification to the current contract to improve service delivery was to require the contractor to provide vaccines through its network of retail pharmacies .

according to dod officials , this modification was made to allow beneficiaries to access vaccines through every possible venue , driven by the 2010 h1n1 influenza pandemic .

contractor performance .

dod officials told us that improvements identified through the monitoring of contractor performance have also led to changes in contract requirements .

through the cors' monitoring of the contractor's performance against the standards specified in the contract , the cors may determine that a particular standard is not helping to achieve the performance desired or is unnecessarily restrictive .

for example , dod officials told us that in the current contract , they had a three - tiered standard for paper claims processing ( eg , 95 percent of paper claims processed within 10 days , 99 percent within 20 days , and 100 percent within 30 days ) .

through monitoring the contractor's performance , the cors determined that there was a negligible difference between the middle and high tiers , and holding the contractor to this performance standard was not beneficial .

the requirements for the upcoming contract as described in the rfp only include two tiers — 95 percent of claims processed within 14 calendar days , and 100 percent within 28 calendar days .

when making changes to contract requirements , dod officials told us they try to ensure that the requirements are not overly prescriptive , but rather outcome - oriented and performance - based .

for example , dod officials told us that they allowed the pharmacy and managed care support contractors to innovate and apply industry best practices regarding coverage and coordination of home infusion services .

according to dod officials , the contract requirements regarding home infusion are focused on the desired outcome — providing coordination of care for beneficiaries needing these services with the physician as the key decision maker — and dod officials facilitated meetings between the pharmacy contractor and managed care support contractors to determine the details of how to provide the services .

this approach is consistent with dod's better buying power principles that emphasize the importance of well - defined contract requirements and acquisition officials' understanding of cost - performance trade - offs .

this approach also addresses a concern we have previously identified regarding overly prescriptive contract requirements in tricare contracts ; specifically , in our previous work on the managed care support contracts , we reported that dod's prescriptive requirements limited innovation and competition among contractors .

since retail pharmacy services were carved out about 10 years ago , dod has not conducted an assessment of the appropriateness of its current pharmacy services contract structure that includes an evaluation of the costs and benefits of alternative structures .

alternative structures can include a carve - in of all pharmacy services into the managed care support contracts , or a structure that carves in a component of pharmacy services , such as the mail - order pharmacy , while maintaining a carve - out structure for other components .

dod officials told us they believe that dod's current pharmacy services contract structure continues to be appropriate , as it affords more control over pharmacy data and allows for more detailed data analyses and increased transparency about costs .

dod's continued use of a carve - out contract structure for pharmacy services is consistent with findings from research and perspectives we heard from industry group officials — that larger employers are more likely to carve out pharmacy services to better leverage the economies of scale and cost savings a stand - alone pharmacy benefit manager can achieve.these arrangements may also provide more detailed information on drug utilization that can be helpful in managing drug formularies and their associated costs .

in its december 2007 report , the task force on the future of military health care recommended examining an alternative structure for the pharmacy services contract.health care system , the task force reviewed dod's pharmacy benefit program , recommending that dod pilot a carve - in pharmacy contract structure within one of the tricare regions with a goal of achieving better financial and health outcomes as a result of having more integrated pharmacy and medical services .

the managed care support contractors we spoke with expressed similar concerns .

however , dod did not agree with the task force's recommendation .

in its response , dod assessed the in addition to other aspects of dod's benefits of the current structure and affirmed the department's commitment to this structure .

potential cost savings .

in its response to the task force report , dod did not concur with the recommendation to pilot a carve - in pharmacy contract structure , in part because of the cost savings achieved through the carve - out .

specifically , dod stated that the carve - out arrangement is compatible with accessing federal pricing arrangements and other discounts available for direct purchases .

dod stated in its response that , under a carve - in arrangement , even on a pilot basis , it would lose access to discounts available for direct purchases , including some portion of the $400 million in annual discounts available for drugs dispensed at retail pharmacies under the ndaa for fiscal year 2008 .

dod officials told us that this loss would result from the managed care support contractor being the purchaser of the drugs , rather than dod .

dod also stated that it would possibly lose access to the volume discounts obtained for drugs purchased for the mail - order pharmacy and military treatment facility pharmacies under a carve - in structure .

dod officials told us that these disadvantages of a carve - in structure remain the same today .

additionally , during this review , dod noted that dividing the tricare beneficiary population among contractors under a carve - in would dilute the leverage a single pharmacy benefit manager would have in the market .

for example , dod would lose economies of scale for claims processing services provided by the pharmacy contractor , resulting in increased costs .

however , research studies have found , and officials from tricare's managed care support contractors told us , that a contract structure with integrated medical and pharmacy services could result in cost savings for dod .

for example , one recent study found that employers with carve - in health plans had 3.8 percent lower total medical care costs compared to employers with pharmacy services carved out .

the researchers attributed the cost difference , in part , to increased coordination of care for the carve - in plans , leading to fewer adverse events for patients , resulting in fewer inpatient admissions ; they reported that plans with a carve - out arrangement had 7 percent higher inpatient admissions .

similarly , representatives from one managed care support contractor we spoke with stated they thought they could achieve similar cost savings to what dod currently has through its federal pricing arrangements by using integrated medical and pharmacy services as a means of reducing costs in a carve - in arrangement .

being able to analyze integrated , in - house medical and pharmacy data may help health plans to lower costs by identifying high - cost beneficiaries , including those with chronic conditions such as asthma and diabetes , and targeting timely and cost - effective interventions for this population .

potential health benefits from data integration .

in recommending that dod pilot a carve - in pharmacy contract structure , one of the task force's goals was to improve health outcomes as a result of integrated medical and pharmacy services .

dod noted in its task force response that it could achieve this goal under the current carve - out contract structure by including requirements in the pharmacy services contract and managed care support contracts requiring data sharing between the contractors .

while the current contract requires the pharmacy and managed care support contractors to exchange data for care coordination , current tricare managed care support contractors told us there continue to be challenges with data sharing to facilitate disease management .

contractors expressed similar concerns about sharing medical and pharmacy data as part of our previous work related to dod's managed care support contracts .

additionally , during this review , officials from one of the managed care support contractors told us that they continue to find it challenging to generate data that provide a holistic view of beneficiaries when medical and pharmacy data remain separate .

representatives from another managed care support contractor told us that their disease management staff faced challenges in analyzing pharmacy data for groups of patients they were managing .

they also told us that if these staff had more complete and real - time access to pharmacy data , as they would under a carve - in structure , they could be more proactive in assisting dod's efforts to identify patients who should participate in disease management programs .

additionally , researchers have found that disease management interventions may be challenging to conduct in a carve - out arrangement due to the lack of fully integrated medical and pharmacy data .

according to dod officials , any changes to the current contract structure would result in less efficient and inconsistent pharmacy service delivery across the three tricare regions , as officials observed when the retail pharmacy benefit was part of the managed care support contracts .

one of dod's reasons for the initial carve - out was a concern that pharmacy services were not being consistently implemented across the tricare regions .

for example , dod officials told us that two health plans in different tricare regions were able to have different preferred drugs within the same therapeutic class , and while both drugs may be included on dod's formulary , beneficiaries in different parts of the country were not being consistently provided with the same drug .

in addition , according to dod , beneficiaries were dissatisfied with a benefit that was not portable across tricare regions — specifically , retail pharmacy networks differed by region , so beneficiaries who moved from one tricare region to another would have to change retail pharmacy networks .

with one national pharmacy services contract , dod officials said they can ensure that the formulary is implemented consistently and that beneficiaries have access to the same retail pharmacy network across the tricare regions .

since the current pharmacy services contract structure was implemented almost 10 years ago , dod has not incorporated an assessment of the contract structure that includes an evaluation of alternative structures into its acquisition planning activities .

dod officials told us that they consider their task force response to be an assessment of the current contract structure .

while the response included a justification for the current structure , it did not include an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of alternative structures , such as carving in all or part of the pharmacy benefit .

in addition , the acquisition plan for the upcoming contract described two alternative carve - out configurations ( separate contracts for the mail - order and retail pharmacies and a government - owned facility to house drugs for the mail - order pharmacy contract ) .

however , the plan similarly did not include an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of these options , nor did the plan include an evaluation of any carve - in alternatives .

dod officials told us there are no current plans to conduct such an evaluation as part of the department's acquisition planning efforts .

dod officials also told us that they continue to believe the current structure is appropriate because the current carve - out structure provides high beneficiary satisfaction and is achieving dod's original objectives , namely consistent provision of benefits , access to federal pricing arrangements , and transparency of pharmacy utilization and cost data .

further , officials told us that the current carve - out structure is more efficient to administer with one pharmacy services contractor than the previous carve - in structure that involved multiple managed care support contractors .

while dod officials believe the current structure is appropriate , there have been significant changes in the pharmacy benefit management market in the past decade .

these changes include mergers , as well as companies offering new services that may change the services and options available to dod .

for example , representatives from one managed care support contractor we spoke with told us that they can offer different services to dod today than they were able to offer when pharmacy services were part of the managed care support contracts .

while the contractor had previously sub - contracted with a separate pharmacy benefit manager to provide pharmacy services under its managed care support contract , this contractor's parent company now provides in - house pharmacy benefit management services for its commercial clients .

additionally , according to the parent company of another managed care support contractor , its recent decision to bring pharmacy benefit management services in - house will enhance its ability to manage total health care costs and improve health outcomes for clients who carve in pharmacy services .

as we have previously reported , sound acquisition planning includes an assessment of lessons learned to identify improvements .

the time necessary for such activities can vary greatly , depending on the complexity of the contract .

we have also reported that a comparative evaluation of the costs and benefits of alternatives can provide an evidence - based rationale for why an agency has chosen a particular alternative ( such as a decision to maintain or alter the current pharmacy services contract structure ) .

we have reported that such an evaluation would consider possible alternatives and should not be developed solely to support a predetermined solution .

with each new pharmacy services contract , dod officials have the opportunity to conduct acquisition planning activities that help determine whether the contract — and its current structure — continues to meet the department's needs , including providing the best value and services to the government and beneficiaries .

these activities can include changing requirements as necessary , learning about current market trends , and incorporating new information and lessons learned .

acquisition planning can also incorporate an assessment of the pharmacy services contract structure that includes an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of alternative contract structures .

incorporating such an evaluation into the acquisition planning for each new pharmacy services contract can provide dod with an evidence - based rationale for why maintaining or changing the current structure is warranted .

without such an evaluation , dod cannot effectively demonstrate to congress and stakeholders that it has chosen the most appropriate contract structure , in terms of costs to the government and services for beneficiaries .

to provide decision makers with more complete information on the continued appropriateness of the current pharmacy services contract structure , and to ensure the best value and services to the government and beneficiaries , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) to take the following two actions: conduct an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of alternative contract structures for the tricare pharmacy services contract ; and incorporate such an evaluation into acquisition planning .

we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment .

dod generally concurred with our findings and conclusions and concurred with our recommendations .

dod also commented that based on past experience with alternative contract structures , it is confident that the current contract structure is the most cost efficient and beneficial .

in response to our recommendation that dod conduct an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of alternative contract structures for the tricare pharmacy services contract , dod commented that there is a lack of data to support inferences that a carve - in arrangement would result in cost savings to the government , and noted that the full development of two separate rfps would be necessary to provide a valid cost comparison .

while detailed cost estimates can be a useful tool for dod , they are not the only means of evaluating alternative structures for the pharmacy services contract .

for example , as we noted in our report , dod has previously used rfis to obtain information from industry to inform its decisions about the pharmacy services contract , and this process also may be helpful in identifying costs and benefits of alternative contract structures .

in response to our recommendation that dod incorporate such an evaluation into acquisition planning , dod commented that it included an evaluation of its past contract experience into acquisition planning for the upcoming pharmacy services contract .

however , as noted in our report , the acquisition plan for the upcoming contract did not include an evaluation of the potential costs and benefits of alternative contract structures , and dod did not directly address how it would include such an evaluation in its acquisition planning activities .

we continue to emphasize the importance of having an evidence - based rationale for why maintaining or changing the current structure is warranted .

with each new pharmacy services contract , dod officials have the opportunity to determine whether the contract continues to meet the department's needs , including providing the best value to the government and services to beneficiaries .

in addition , dod stated in its comments that our report did not address its direct - care system and noted that carving pharmacy services back into the managed care support contracts would fragment the pharmacy benefit and undermine its goal of integrating all pharmacy points of service .

our review was focused on dod's purchased - care system for providing pharmacy services , although we did provide context about the direct - care system as appropriate .

furthermore , we did not recommend any specific structure for dod's pharmacy services contract , but rather that dod evaluate the costs and benefits of alternative structures such that it can have an evidence - based rationale for its decisions .

dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii .

dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the assistant secretary of defense ( health affairs ) ; and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at draperd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

department of defense ( dod ) officials who award and administer the tricare pharmacy services contract are required to meet relevant certification standards applicable to all dod acquisition officials and , according to dod officials , some of these officials also have pharmacy - specific experience .

the training and related education and experience requirements are tailored to different levels of authority and , due to the size and complexity of the pharmacy services contract , the contracting officer and program manager for the pharmacy services contract are required to be certified at the highest levels , which require the most training and experience .

in addition , all contracting officer's representatives ( cor ) must meet specific training and experience requirements based on the complexity and risk of the contracts they will be working with , and the two cors for the pharmacy services contract are also required to meet the highest cor certification level .

for example , the cors for the pharmacy services contract must complete at least 16 hours of cor - specific continuing education every 3 years , which is twice the amount required for low - risk , fixed - price contracts .

dod's department - wide acquisition training is primarily provided through the training is designed to provide a defense acquisition university.foundation of acquisition knowledge but is not targeted to specific contracts or contract types .

beyond dod's required training , the contracting officer , program manager , and cors also have specialized experience in pharmacy and related issues .

see table 2 for the specific certification standards for and pharmacy - specific experience of the officials responsible for awarding or administering the pharmacy services contract .

in addition to the contact named above , janina austin , assistant director ; lisa motley ; laurie pachter ; julie t. stewart ; malissa g. winograd ; and william t. woods made key contributions to this report .

