the national archives and records administration ( nara ) operates presidential libraries for all of the former u.s. presidents since herbert hoover .

these libraries received over 2.4 million visits in 2009 , including researchers , public program attendees , and museum visitors .

each library is associated with a private foundation and some of these library – foundation relationships involve sharing of staff and facilities .

libraries are generally funded by appropriated funds , donations , museum store revenue , admission and other fees , endowments , and foundation funds .

some libraries are located on university campuses and also receive some support from the university .

in some cases , state or local governments also contributed to library construction and provide ongoing support for some libraries .

nara manages its federal employees' activities and determines the appropriate use of federal facilities and federal funds at the presidential libraries based on an understanding of the applicable laws , regulations , and policies .

on the basis of your request and subsequent discussions with your staff , this report describes the principal laws , regulations , and nara policies that govern library – foundation relationships and the appropriate use of library facilities and staff .

we reviewed applicable laws and regulations governing activities held on government property and acceptable activities of federal employees .

we also reviewed specific laws governing presidential libraries , and nara regulations and policies .

we interviewed nara officials in the office of presidential libraries , general counsel , and inspector general .

to identify the principal laws , regulations , and nara policies that govern library – foundation relationships , we reviewed 29 policy documents , laws , and regulations that related to presidential libraries .

we identified 17 that were relevant to the library – foundation relationship for facilities use , staff , and political activities .

we also reviewed an additional 30 documents that nara described as agreements establishing the relationship between presidential libraries and private foundations .

we conducted our work from may 2010 through february 2011 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objective .

the framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for the findings and conclusions in this product .

prior to 1940 , u.s. presidents or their descendents typically retained ownership of papers documenting their terms of office .

the fate of these papers was up to the former president or his descendents , and some were lost forever .

in 1940 , franklin d. roosevelt was the first president to arrange to have a library built using privately raised funds and to then transfer both the facility and his papers to the federal government .

through its office of presidential libraries , nara operates presidential libraries housing the papers of all subsequent presidents through george w. bush , as well as president roosevelt's predecessor in the white house , herbert hoover .

at the end of a president's term , nara staff begin working with the president's official records and other materials .

this work goes on during library construction and during the period between the dedication of the library facility and its transfer to the federal government .

table 1 provides facts about the 13 presidential libraries and museums operated by nara .

for most of the libraries , as the president's term was coming to a close or after it ended , friends and supporters of the president created a private charitable foundation to collect donations to construct a library .

under current law , nara collaborates with each presidential library foundation on the construction of the library facility , and when the facility construction is complete , the foundation deeds or gives the right to use the library facility or a portion of the facility to nara .

the presidential libraries act of 1986 also requires that the national archives trust fund receive an operating endowment for each library before nara can accept the transfer of the library .

these endowments fund some of the federal government's costs for the operation and maintenance of the presidential libraries .

figure 1 captures key steps of the current process of establishing a presidential library .

some variations from this process may exist .

each library is operated by a director who is a nara employee , and other library staff who are also nara employees .

the staffs typically include an administrative officer , facility manager , education and exhibits specialists , archivists , archives technicians , and clerks , among other staff .

the director of a presidential library is appointed by the archivist of the united states , the head of nara , who consults with the former president in selecting a candidate .

the office of presidential libraries is headed by the assistant archivist for presidential libraries .

the office of presidential libraries is responsible for overseeing the management of records at the libraries , the development of policies and procedures for the management and operation of presidential libraries , and the development and coordination of plans , programs , and resource allocations at presidential libraries .

the office of presidential libraries is also involved in the creation of new presidential libraries .

funds appropriated by congress support nara's staffing , administration , security , maintenance , and renovation projects at the library .

in fiscal year 2009 , nara spent more than $68 million in appropriations to operate the presidential libraries .

in addition , for fiscal year 2009 nara received $41.5 million in special appropriations for repairs and restoration to the john f. kennedy presidential library and museum ( $22 million ) , the franklin d. roosevelt presidential library and museum ( $17.5 million ) , and the lyndon baines johnson library & museum ( $2 million ) .

each private foundation is operated by a director , president , or ceo and other staff that may include a chief financial officer and director of communications , among other positions .

foundation support enables the libraries to expand their research and archival functions , as well as undertake additional projects such as public outreach efforts .

the foundations' level of involvement in the activities at their associated library , such as collaboration on public and educational programs , varies from library to library .

foundations may also sponsor their own programs and activities , such as hosting a lecture series or academic discussion or producing a newsletter .

nara officials told us that , in most cases , these kinds of programs and activities are offered in conjunction with and supported by library staff .

for example , a foundation may pay for a lecture series that is held in nara - controlled space .

the foundations may also generally support their associated libraries with additional funding for new facilities and equipment and for updating permanent exhibits , adding program space , and giving the library the use of foundation staff time for library activities .

foundations provide these resources directly to their associated library .

this process generally is handled at the library level based on the relationship between the library and the foundation .

each presidential library also has a trust fund that receives revenue from the sale of publications , museum shop sales , document reproductions , audio - visual reproductions , library admissions , public space rentals , educational conferences , and interest income .

trust - fund money helps the library cover the cost of museum shop inventory , personnel , operational and financial systems , equipment , and supplies .

these funds may also support exhibit - related and public - programming expenses .

in fiscal year 2009 , the trust funds for presidential libraries had a total end - of - year balance of approximately $15 million .

in addition to trust funds , presidential libraries also maintain funds from gifts donated to a library for general library support or for specific projects or programs .

the federal laws specific to presidential libraries focus primarily on the design and construction of library facilities and , once constructed , the deeding of the library facilities , or the rights to use the facilities , to the federal government .

congress has enacted three primary statutes that provide the legal rules for the design , construction , and transfer of library facilities .

nara's building - use regulations outline the permissible and prohibited uses of the presidential library facilities by other groups .

according to the regulations , other groups may request the use of presidential library facilities when the activity is sponsored , cosponsored , or authorized by the library ; conducted to further the library's interests ; and does not interfere with the normal operation of the library .

the regulations prohibit the use of the facilities for profit - making , commercial advertisement or sales , partisan political activities , or sectarian activities .

when nara considers it to be in the public interest , nara may allow for the occasional , nonofficial use of rooms and spaces in a presidential library and charge a reasonable fee for such use .

additionally , the regulations require outside organizations to apply for the use of library space by writing to the library director and submitting an application for use of space in presidential libraries .

applying organizations must agree to review their event plans with library staff and that the plans will conform to library rules and procedures .

the application also confirms that the organization will not charge admission fees , make indirect assessment fees for admission , or take collections for their events .

further , the application prohibits the organization from suggesting that the library endorses or sponsors the organization .

federal laws and regulations specify for all federal employees — including federal employees working at presidential libraries — what they may and may not do in their official capacity .

for example , federal employees may not engage in commercial or political activity associated with their federal positions .

according to nara's general counsel , there are no special laws or regulations that apply only to how library employees interact with the foundation or , if applicable , university associated with their library , but the laws and regulations that apply throughout the federal government also apply to library employees .

the hatch act provides the rules for the activities of library employees at events such as candidate debates or speeches by candidates that sometimes take place at the libraries .

the hatch act , which is enforced by the u.s. office of special counsel ( osc ) , prohibits certain political activities for federal employees .

at an event such as these ( or at any other time ) a library employee may not use official authority to interfere with an election ; solicit , accept , or receive political contributions from any person ; run for nomination or as a candidate for election to a partisan political office ; or solicit or discourage the political activity of any person connected to the business of the employee's office .

nara employees must also follow the standards of ethical conduct for employees of the executive branch issued by the office of government ethics .

the standards emphasize that employees have a responsibility to the u.s. government and its citizens to place loyalty to the constitution , laws , and ethical principles above private gain , and set forth 14 general principles .

among other things , the standards describe limitations on actions an employee may take while seeking other employment , and require that employees use the time they are serving in an official capacity in an honest effort to perform official duties .

nara's office of presidential libraries oversees the 13 presidential libraries .

that office has developed systemwide policies , including the presidential libraries manual , which discusses museum activities and records topics , and the nara / office of presidential libraries architecture and design standards for presidential libraries .

the office of presidential libraries also works with the nara general counsel on the development of policies governing the library – foundation relationship .

the nara general counsel has issued legal opinions on foundations' use of library facilities , when and how library staff can support foundation activities , and if library staff can fundraise for the foundations .

additionally , nara officials explained that the nara general counsel and the office of presidential libraries negotiate with the foundations on the agreements establishing the relationship between a new library and its associated foundation .

according to nara officials , library directors at the individual libraries consult with the nara general counsel about activities that could have political undertones before allowing a program or event .

for example , library directors have contacted nara general counsel to inquire about using libraries as polling places .

nara approved the use of libraries as polling places as long as certain requirements were met such as that no political solicitation occurs on library - controlled property .

in another example , a local political party requested but was not allowed to hold a political forum at the library .

nara officials told us that nara does not have internal directives specifically regarding the supervision of library and foundation staff .

they said that when library staff are concerned about supervision or other issues while working on a collaborative project with the foundations , they are expected to seek advice from the nara general counsel's ethics program staff .

table 3 provides a summary of nara policies and nara general counsel opinions concerning library – foundation activities and other outside uses of the libraries .

each presidential library has a written agreement with its associated foundation and , if applicable , the associated university that governs aspects of the relationship between the entities .

these agreements differ in format ; content ; and the extent to which they address use of facilities , library and foundation staff relationships , and political activities .

these agreements must be consistent with the applicable statutes and nara regulations .

at some libraries , the library – foundation relationship is addressed by more than one agreement due to the updating or supplementing of original documents , or to the changing format of the agreements over time .

some of the oldest agreements are primarily a series of letters of offer and acceptance between the foundation and the general services administration ( gsa ) , with later agreements taking the form of a mutually signed agreement between the foundation and nara .

for example , the ford museum and the hoover , truman , eisenhower , and kennedy library agreements ( from 1957 to 1980 ) include one or more letters of offer and acceptance between the foundation and the gsa .

later agreements from more - recently established libraries , as well as earlier libraries that updated their agreements , include mutually signed agreements between the foundation and nara .

of these later agreements , some focus on a specific project or aspect of the library – foundation relationship , while some focus broadly on the library – foundation relationship .

we reviewed the library – foundation agreements and found that , over time , the agreements have become increasingly more detailed , especially regarding staff , each entity's use and control of the different parts of the facilities , and political activities .

earlier agreements are largely focused on the transfer of property from the foundation to the united states , while later agreements address additional aspects of the library – foundation relationship .

for example , later agreements address which entity controls specific parts of the facilities , including details related to one entity's use of the other's space ( such as the permitted purposes for using the other's space , and reimbursing the other entity for costs associated with using its space ) .

later agreements are also more likely to clarify the different roles and responsibilities of library and foundation staff , and address activities or tasks that library staff are not allowed to perform .

some of the later agreements also address potential conflicts of interest between the library and the foundation .

for example , two of the later agreements state that foundation staff are to act in the best interests of the foundation , and nara staff are to act in the best interests of nara and the united states .

regarding political activities , two of the later agreements state that library space is not allowed to be used for partisan political activities .

also , nara regulations give library directors the authority to establish supplemental policies .

according to nara officials , these supplemental policies may provide further detail on the library – foundation relationship regarding facilities , staff , and political activities .

our review was limited to nara - wide policies and library – foundation agreements and we did not review any local library supplemental policies .

nara officials explained that the written agreements between individual libraries and the foundations are important , but that they also do not fully prescribe the relationships between the entities .

they said that the relationships are shaped over time and by factors such as the particular foundation's interest in collaborating with the library or doing charitable work elsewhere .

for example , the harry s. truman library and museum and its associated foundation , the truman library institute , are colocated and often collaborate on educational programs .

the foundation describes itself as working with the library to “fulfill the truman library's commitment to research and education.” in contrast , the mission of the foundation associated with the jimmy carter library and museum , the carter center , does not directly focus on the library , but rather “to advance peace and health worldwide.” nara officials said that interaction between individual libraries and their foundations vary , but they also stressed that no one foundation's emphasis is more correct than another .

these are examples of differences among foundations and how those differences shape the level of involvement by a foundation with a library .

we provided a draft of this report to nara .

nara had no substantive comments and provided technical comments by e - mail , which we incorporated as appropriate .

nara's letter is reprinted in appendix i .

we will send a copy of this report to the archivist of the united states .

this report will also be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .

in addition to the contact named above , david lewis , assistant director ; sonya phillips ; juliann gorse ; brianna benner ; sabrina streagle ; lois hanshaw ; susan christiansen ; lindsay read ; and jessica thomsen made key contributions to this report .

