i am pleased to be here today to discuss gao's body of work on u.s. government activities related to screening and vetting nonimmigrant visa ( niv ) applicants , and identification and interdiction of international air travelers who are potential security threats to the united states .

foreign nationals who wish to come to the united states on a temporary basis must generally obtain a niv authorizing their travel to the united states .

in particular , from fiscal years 2010 through 2015 , the department of state ( state ) issued more than 52 million visas for business travel , pleasure , or for foreign student and cultural exchange programs , among other things .

previous attempted and successful terrorist attacks against the united states have raised questions about the security of the u.s. government's screening and vetting processes for nivs .

for example , the december 2015 shootings in san bernardino , california , led to concerns about niv screening and vetting processes because one of the attackers was admitted into the united states under a niv .

beginning in calendar year 2017 , the president issued executive actions aimed at improving the screening and vetting protocols and procedures associated with the visa issuance process , including the imposition of visa entry restrictions for certain categories of foreign nationals from designated countries .

specifically , the president issued two executive orders and a presidential proclamation that required , among other actions , visa entry restrictions for nationals of certain countries of concern , a review of information needed for visa adjudication , and changes to visa ( including niv ) screening and vetting protocols and procedures .

state is responsible for visa adjudication and issuance for foreign nationals and is responsible for managing the consular officer corps and its functions at over 220 visa - issuing posts overseas .

the process for determining who will be issued or refused a visa contains several steps , including completing an online visa application and appearing for an in - person interview at a u.s. embassy or consulate , as shown in figure 1 .

the various security checks niv applicants undergo generally screen the applicant's information ( biographic and biometric ) against multiple u.s. government databases to identify potential matches with records of individuals who are known threats to the united states or other derogatory information that could make the applicant ineligible .

in addition , biometric checks include running an applicant's fingerprints and full - face photograph against multiple government systems .

further , at some locations overseas , department of homeland security's ( dhs ) visa security program uses the pre - adjudicated threat recognition and intelligence operations team check to identify national security , public safety , and other eligibility concerns related to visa applicants .

prior to adjudicating the visa application , consular officers must review all such security check results .

dhs also vets individuals with nivs on a recurrent basis , which has resulted in state revoking visas after they have been issued when information was later discovered that rendered the individual inadmissible to the united states or otherwise ineligible for the visa .

in addition , dhs seeks to identify and interdict travelers who are potential security threats to the united states , such as foreign fighters and potential terrorists , human traffickers , drug smugglers , and otherwise inadmissible persons , at the earliest possible point in the travel lifecycle .

in particular , dhs's u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is tasked with , among other duties , processing all travelers on u.s. - bound flights and inspecting all people entering or applying for admission to the united states .

cbp's national targeting center ( ntc ) conducts traveler data matching , which assesses whether travelers are high - risk by matching their information against u.s. government databases and lists , and rules - based targeting , which enables cbp to identify unknown high - risk individuals .

cbp operates multiple predeparture programs that use the results of ntc's analyses to help identify and interdict high - risk travelers before they board u.s. - bound flights .

my testimony discusses: ( 1 ) data and information on niv adjudications and ( 2 ) cbp air predeparture programs .

this testimony is based on our prior reports , in particular , those published in january 2017 and august 2018 .

for these reports , we reviewed agency policies and procedures for niv screening and predeparture programs ; conducted site visits to selected locations to observe niv operations and the predeparture targeting process ; and collected and analyzed data .

additional details on the scope and methodology are available in our published reports .

in addition , this statement contains updates to selected information from these reports .

for the updates , we collected information from dhs on actions it has taken to address findings and recommendations made in prior reports on which this statement is based .

all of our work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we reported in august 2018 that the total number of niv applications that consular officers adjudicated ( niv adjudications ) annually peaked at about 13.4 million in fiscal year 2016 , which was an increase of approximately 30 percent since fiscal year 2012 .

in fiscal year 2017 ( the most recent data available at the time of our report ) , niv adjudications decreased by about 880,000 adjudications , or about 7 percent .

figure 2 shows the number of applications adjudicated each year from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 .

as shown in figure 2 , the percentage of nivs refused — known as the refusal rate — increased from fiscal years 2012 through 2016 , and was about the same in fiscal year 2017 as the previous year .

the niv refusal rate rose from about 14 percent in fiscal year 2012 to about 22 percent in fiscal year 2016 , and remained about the same in fiscal year 2017 ; averaging about 18 percent over the time period .

the total number of nivs issued peaked in fiscal year 2015 at about 10.89 million , before falling in fiscal years 2016 and 2017 to 10.38 million and 9.68 million , respectively .

according to state data , while the majority of niv refusals from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 were a result of consular officers finding the applicants ineligible , a relatively small number of refusals were due to terrorism and other security - related concerns .

state data indicate that more than 90 percent of nivs refused each year from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 were based on the consular officers' determination that the applicants were ineligible nonimmigrants — in other words , the consular officers believed that the applicant was an intending immigrant seeking to stay permanently in the united states , which would generally violate niv conditions , or that the applicant otherwise failed to demonstrate eligibility for the particular visa he or she was seeking .

for example , an applicant applying for a student visa could be refused as an ineligible nonimmigrant for failure to demonstrate possession of sufficient funds to cover his or her educational expenses , as required .

as we reported in august 2018 , our analysis of state data indicates that relatively few applicants — approximately 0.05 percent — were refused for terrorism and other security - related reasons from fiscal years 2012 through 2017 .

as shown in figure 3 , in fiscal year 2017 , state data indicate that 1,256 refusals ( or 0.05 percent ) were based on terrorism and other security - related concerns , of which 357 refusals were specifically for terrorism - related reasons .

the president issued executive order 13769 , protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states ( eo - 1 ) , in january 2017 .

in march 2017 , the president revoked and replaced eo - 1 with the issuance of executive order 13780 ( eo - 2 ) , which had the same title as eo - 1 .

among other things , eo - 2 suspended entry of certain foreign nationals for a 90-day period , subject to exceptions and waivers .

in september 2017 , as a result of the reviews undertaken pursuant to eo - 2 , the president issued presidential proclamation 9645 , enhancing vetting capabilities and processes for detecting attempted entry into the united states by terrorists or other public - safety threats ( proclamation ) , which imposes certain conditional restrictions and limitations on the entry of nationals of eight countries — chad , iran , libya , north korea , somalia , syria , venezuela and yemen — into the united states for an indefinite period .

these restrictions , identified in table 1 , are to remain in effect until the secretaries of homeland security and state determine that a country provides sufficient information for the united states to assess adequately whether its nationals pose a security or safety threat .

challenges to both eos and the proclamation affected their implementation and , while eo - 2's entry restrictions have expired , the indefinite visa entry restrictions outlined in the proclamation continued to be fully implemented as of our august 2018 report .

we reported in august 2018 that our analysis of state data indicates that out of the nearly 2.8 million niv applications refused in fiscal year 2017 , 1,338 were refused due to visa entry restrictions implemented in accordance with the executive actions .

to implement the entry restrictions , in march 2017 , state directed its consular officers to continue to accept all niv applications and determine whether the applicant was otherwise eligible for a visa without regard to the applicable eo or proclamation .

if the applicant was ineligible for the visa on grounds unrelated to the executive action , such as having prior immigration violations , the applicant was to be refused on those grounds .

if the applicant was otherwise eligible for the visa , but fell within the scope of the nationality - specific visa restrictions implemented pursuant to the applicable eo or proclamation and was not eligible for a waiver or exception , the consular officer was to refuse the visa and enter a refusal code into state's niv database indicating that the applicant was refused solely due to the executive actions .

more than 90 percent of the niv applications refused in fiscal year 2017 pursuant to an executive action were for tourist and business visitor visas , and more than 5 percent were for students and exchange visitors .

as we reported in january 2017 , cbp electronically vets all travelers before they board u.s. - bound flights , and continues to do so until they land at a u.s. port of entry .

through these vetting efforts , cbp seeks to identify high - risk travelers from the millions of individuals who travel to the united states each year .

as we reported in january 2017 , cbp's vetting and targeting efforts are primarily conducted by its ntc and entail ( 1 ) traveler data matching and analysis , ( 2 ) rules - based targeting , and ( 3 ) recurrent vetting .

specifically: cbp's primary method of identifying high - risk individuals is through the comparison of travelers' information ( such as name , date of birth , and gender ) against records extracted from u.s. government databases , including the terrorist screening database ( tsdb ) — the u.s. government's consolidated terrorist watch list .

traveler data matching focuses on identifying known high - risk individuals — that is , individuals who may be inadmissible to the united states under u.s. immigration law or who may otherwise pose a threat to homeland or national security .

cbp's primary tool for vetting and targeting travelers is the automated targeting system ( ats ) , which is a computer - based enforcement and support system that compares traveler information against intelligence and law enforcement data to identify high - risk travelers .

traveler data matching occurs throughout the travel process and , upon a positive or possible match , cbp officers can select these individuals for further vetting , interviewing , and inspection .

cbp's rules - based targeting efforts seek to identify unknown high - risk travelers — that is , travelers for whom u.s. government entities do not have available derogatory information directly linking them to terrorist activities or any other actions that would make them potentially inadmissible to the united states but who may present a threat and thus warrant additional scrutiny .

cbp identifies unknown high - risk individuals by comparing their information against a set of targeting rules based on intelligence , law enforcement , and other information .

ntc officials stated that these rules have identified potential high - risk travelers , including potential foreign fighters .

rules - based targeting evaluates travelers during the travel process and , in some cases , in advance of the travel process .

if a traveler is a rule “hit,” this individual can be selected for further vetting , interviewing , and inspection .

cbp supports its traveler data matching and rules - based targeting efforts through the use of recurrent vetting .

ntc's vetting , targeting , and traveler data matching activities in ats run 24 hours a day and 7 days a week and automatically scan updated traveler information , when available .

this process is to ensure that new information that affects a traveler's admissibility is identified in near real time .

recurrent vetting occurs throughout the travel process and continues until a traveler arrives at a domestic port of entry .

for example , after checking into a foreign airport , a traveler may have his or her visa revoked for a security or immigration - related violation .

due to recurrent vetting , cbp would be alerted to this through ats and could take action , as appropriate .

as we reported in january 2017 , throughout the travel process , cbp's predeparture programs use the results of ntc's efforts to identify and interdict high - risk individuals destined for the united states while they are still overseas ; however , we found that cbp had not evaluated the effectiveness of its predeparture programs as a whole , including implementing a system of performance measures and baselines to assess whether the programs are achieving their stated goals .

cbp operates three air predeparture programs that are responsible for all u.s. - bound air travelers — ( 1 ) preclearance ; ( 2 ) the immigration advisory program ( iap ) and joint security program ( jsp ) ; and ( 3 ) the regional carrier liaison groups ( rclg ) .

as we reported in january 2017 , cbp data indicated that these programs identified and ultimately interdicted approximately 22,000 high - risk air travelers in fiscal year 2015 , the most recent data available at the time of our review .

information on individuals who the ntc identifies through traveler data matching or rules - based targeting , including recurrent vetting , is compiled automatically through ats into a daily high - priority list ( or , traveler referral list ) .

cbp officers at the ntc review the traveler referral list for accuracy and to remove , if possible , any automatically generated matches determined to not be potential high - risk individuals .

after this review , cbp officers at the ntc use ats to send the traveler referral list to officers at each preclearance , iap , jsp , and rclg location , as shown in figure 4 .

preclearance .

preclearance locations operate at foreign airports and serve as u.s. ports of entry .

preclearance operations began in 1952 in toronto to facilitate trade and travel between the united states and canada .

as of march 2018 , cbp operated 15 air preclearance locations in six countries .

through the preclearance program , uniformed cbp officers at a foreign airport exercise u.s. legal authorities to inspect travelers and luggage and make admissibility determinations prior to an individual boarding a plane to the united states .

according to cbp officials , an inspection at a preclearance location is the same inspection as an individual would undergo at a domestic port of entry , and officers conducting preclearance inspections exercise the same authority as officers at domestic ports of entry to approve or deny admission into the united states .

as a result , travelers arriving at domestic air ports of entry from preclearance locations do not have to be re - inspected upon entry .

according to cbp data , in fiscal year 2015 , cbp officers at preclearance locations determined that 10,648 air travelers were inadmissible out of the approximately 16 million air travelers seeking admission to the united states through a preclearance location .

in addition to requiring that all travelers undergo a primary inspection , cbp officers in these locations also referred almost 290,000 individuals for secondary inspection .

immigration advisory program ( iap ) and joint security program ( jsp ) .

iap and jsp operated at nine and two foreign airports , respectively , as of january 2017 .

according to cbp officials , under this program , unarmed , plainclothes cbp officers posted at foreign airports partner with air carriers and host country government officials to help prevent terrorists and other high - risk individuals from boarding u.s. - bound flights by vetting and interviewing them before travel .

according to cbp program documentation , cbp established iap in 2004 to prevent terrorists , high - risk travelers , and improperly documented travelers from boarding airlines destined to the united states .

building on the iap concept , cbp established jsp in 2009 to partner with host country law enforcement officials to identify high - risk travelers .

cbp officers at iap and jsp locations have the ability to question travelers and review their travel documents .

they are to act in an advisory manner to the air carriers and host governments and do not have authority to deny boarding to individuals on u.s. - bound flights or fully inspect travelers or their belongings .

iap and jsp officers are authorized by cbp to make recommendations to airlines as to whether to board or deny boarding ( known as a no - board recommendation ) to selected travelers based on their likely admissibility status upon arrival to the united states .

the final decision to board travelers , however , lies with the carriers .

according to cbp data , cbp officers at iap and jsp locations made 3,925 no - board recommendations in fiscal year 2015 for the approximately 29 million air travelers bound for the united states from such locations .

during this same time period , cbp data indicated 1,154 confirmed encounters with individuals in the tsdb , including 106 on the no fly list .

regional carrier liaison groups ( rclg ) .

rclgs are located and operate at three domestic airports — miami international airport , john f. kennedy international airport , and honolulu international airport .

cbp established rclgs in 2006 to assist air carriers with questions regarding u.s. admissibility requirements and travel document authenticity .

according to cbp officials , rclgs are responsible for coordinating with air carriers on all actionable referrals from ntc on u.s. - bound travelers departing from an airport without an iap , jsp , or preclearance presence .

each rclg is assigned responsibility for travelers departing out of a specific geographic location .

similar to iap and jsp , cbp officers in rclgs also make no - board recommendations , as appropriate , to air carriers .

cbp officers at rclgs do not have authority to make admissibility determinations about u.s. - bound air travelers , and the final decision to board or not board a traveler lies with the carrier .

we reported in january 2017 that cbp officers working at the three rclgs made 7,664 no - board recommendations in fiscal year 2015 for the approximately 59 million travelers bound for the united states from locations within the rclgs' spheres of responsibility .

during this time period , cbp data indicated that rclgs also reported 1,634 confirmed encounters with individuals in the tsdb , including 119 on the no fly list .

in january 2017 , we reported that cbp had not evaluated the effectiveness of its predeparture programs as a whole , including implementing a system of performance measures and baselines to assess whether the programs were achieving their stated goals .

we reported that cbp had taken some initial steps to measure the performance of these programs .

specifically , cbp officials told us that they had collected a large quantity of data and statistics regarding the actions of their predeparture programs and had done so since program inception for all programs .

however , due to changes in operational focus , technology updates , and the use of separate data systems at program locations , cbp had not collected consistent data across all of its predeparture programs .

as a result , cbp did not have baseline data on which to measure program performance .

therefore , we recommended that cbp develop and implement a system of performance measures and baselines for each program to help ensure that these programs achieve their intended goals .

in response , as of march 2018 , cbp has developed three performance measures for its predeparture programs .

on the basis of our review of cbp documentation , as of december 2018 , cbp has collected the fiscal year 2018 data relevant to these measures , used those data to set preliminary targets for fiscal year 2019 , and plans to analyze the fiscal year 2019 results and set targets for future fiscal years by october 31 , 2019 .

we will review documentation of cbp's analysis of the fiscal year 2019 results and future targets , when available , to determine if cbp's actions address our recommendation .

chairwoman rice , chairman rose , ranking members higgins and walker , and members of the subcommittees , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact rebecca gambler at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov .

in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are kathryn h. bernet , assistant director ; eric hauswirth ; thomas lombardi ; sasan j .

“jon” najmi ; erin o'brien ; and natalie swabb .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

