i am pleased to be here today as you discuss issues related to the current difficulties in the recruitment and retention of nurses and concerns about their future supply .

the health and long - term care systems in the united states rely heavily on the services of nurses , the largest group of health care workers .

nursing shortages have been reported around the country , and providers and provider associations have been studying the issue .

in addition , both state legislators and members of the congress have proposed legislation to address the problem .

to assist the congress as it considers the impact of nurse recruitment and retention issues on federally funded health programs , including medicare and medicaid , my remarks will focus on ( 1 ) what is known about the current supply of nurses , ( 2 ) factors contributing to current recruitment and retention difficulties , ( 3 ) and factors that will affect the supply of and demand for nurses in the future .

while comprehensive data are lacking on the nature and extent of current difficulties recruiting and retaining nurses , current evidence suggests an emerging shortage .

several factors , including nurses' decreased levels of job satisfaction , are combining to constrain the current supply of nurses .

furthermore , like the general population , the nurse workforce is aging , and the average age of a registered nurse ( rn ) increased from 37 years in 1983 to 42 in 1998 .

additionally , enrollments in registered nursing programs have declined over the past 5 years , shrinking the pool of new workers to replace those who are leaving or retiring .

the problem is expected to become more serious in the future as the aging of the population substantially increases the demand for nurses .

registered nurses are responsible for a large portion of the health care provided in this country .

rns make up the largest group of health care providers , and are 77 percent of the nurse workforce .

historically , rns have worked predominantly in hospitals ; in 2000 , 59.1 percent of rns worked in hospitals .

a smaller number of rns work in other settings , such as ambulatory care , home health care , and nursing homes .

their responsibilities may include providing direct patient care in a hospital or home health care setting , managing and directing complex nursing care in an intensive care unit , or supervising the provision of long - term care in a nursing home .

in 1999 licensed practical nurses ( lpn ) composed 23 percent of the nurse workforce .

lpns provide patient care under the direction of physicians and registered nurses , with 32 percent working in hospitals , 28 percent working in nursing homes , and the rest working for doctors' offices , home health agencies , residential care facilities , schools , temporary help agencies , and government agencies .

individuals usually select one of three ways to become an rn — through a 2-year associate degree , 3-year diploma , or 4-year baccalaureate degree program .

as of 2000 , 40.3 percent of nurses had received their training through an associate program , while 29.6 percent and 29.3 percent had received their training in a diploma or baccalaureate degree program , respectively .

lpn programs are 12 to 18 months in length and generally focus on basic nursing skills such as monitoring patient or resident condition and administering treatments and medications .

once they have completed their education , rns and lpns must meet the licensing requirements of their state to be allowed to practice .

the u.s. health care system has changed significantly over the past two decades , affecting the environment in which nurses provide patient care .

advances in technology and greater emphasis on cost effectiveness have led to changes in the structure , organization , and delivery of health care services .

while hospitals traditionally were the primary providers of acute care , advances in technology , along with cost controls , shifted some care from traditional inpatient settings to ambulatory , community - based , nursing facility , or home health care settings .

the transfer of less acute patients to nursing homes and community - based care settings created additional job opportunities and increased demand for nurses in these settings .

this change in service settings has also resulted in decreased lengths of patient stay in hospitals and a decline in the numbers of beds staffed .

at the same time , the acuity of patients increased as those patients remaining in hospitals were those too medically complex to be cared for in another setting .

in an additional effort to contain costs in the early 1990s , acute care facilities restructured and redesigned staffing patterns , introducing more non - rn caregivers and reducing the number of rns on staff .

recent studies have identified a relationship between the level of nurse staffing and the quality of patient care .

a recent health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) study found a relationship between higher rn staffing levels and the reduction of certain negative hospital inpatient outcomes , such as urinary tract infection and pneumonia.furthermore , a health care financing administration ( hcfa ) report to the congress last year found a direct relationship between nurse staffing levels in nursing homes and the quality of resident care .

current evidence suggests emerging shortages of nurses available or willing to fill some vacant positions in hospital , nursing home , and home health care settings .

national data are not adequate to describe the full nature and extent of nurse workforce shortages , nor are data sufficiently sensitive or current to allow a comparison of the degree of nurse workforce shortages across states , specialties , or provider types .

the nationwide unemployment rate for rns , which has been low for many years , has recently declined further from 1.5 percent in 1997 to 1.0 percent in 2000 , the lowest level in more than a decade .

rising vacancy rates reported by providers provide another indicator of possible excess demand .

a survey recently conducted by the association of maryland hospitals and health systems reported a statewide average rn vacancy rate for hospitals of 14.7 percent in 2000 , up from 3.3 percent in 1997 .

the association reported that the last time vacancy rates were at this level was during the late 1980s , during the last reported nurse shortage .

as of a june 2001 american hospital association survey , 17 state hospital associations reported statewide rn vacancy rate data for 2000 or 2001 , and 11 of these states reported vacancy rates of 10 percent or higher .

for 2000 , california reported an average rn vacancy rate of 20 percent , while in 2001 florida and delaware reported nearly 16 percent , and alabama and nevada reported an average rate of 13 percent .

other surveys indicate that the difficulty recruiting rns appears to be affecting a variety of provider types .

california reported an rn vacancy rate of 8.5 percent for all employers in 1997 , with hospitals reporting a rate of 9.6 percent , nursing homes 6.9 percent , and home health care 6.4 percent .

a 2000 survey of providers in vermont found that nursing homes and home health care agencies had rn vacancy rates of 15.9 percent and 9.8 percent , respectively , while hospitals had an rn vacancy rate of 4.8 percent ( up from 1.2 percent in 1996 ) .

job dissatisfaction is reported to be high among nurses .

nurses report unhappiness with a variety of issues , including staffing , respect and recognition , and wages , and this dissatisfaction is affecting their decision to work in nursing .

furthermore , the nurse workforce is aging and fewer new nurses are entering the profession to replace those who are retiring or leaving .

job dissatisfaction may play a significant role in both current and future recruitment and retention problems .

a recent federation of nurses and health professionals ( fnhp ) survey found that half of the currently employed rns who were surveyed had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement over the past 2 years .

over one - fourth ( 28 percent ) of rns in a 1999 study by the nursing executive center described themselves as somewhat or very dissatisfied with their job , and about half ( 51 percent ) were much less satisfied with their job than they were 2 years ago .

in that same survey , 32 percent of general medical / surgical rns , who constitute the bulk of hospital rns , indicated that they were dissatisfied with their current job .

according to a survey conducted by the american nurses association ( ana ) , 54.8 percent of rns and lpns responding would not recommend the nursing profession as a career for their children or friends , while 23 percent would actively discourage someone close to them from entering the profession .

almost half ( 49 percent ) of current rns surveyed in another study said that if they were younger and just starting out , they would pursue a different career , rather than becoming a registered nurse .

inadequate staffing , heavy workloads , and the use of overtime to address staffing shortages are frequently cited as key areas of job dissatisfaction among nurses .

seventy - nine percent of nurses responding to the fhnp survey said they had seen a rise in acuity of patients .

when adjusted to reflect the rise in acuity levels , the number of hospital employees on staff for each patient discharged , including nurses , declined by more than 13 percent between 1990 and 1999 .

this increases the work intensity for individual nurses .

according to one survey , of those rns responding who had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement , 56 percent indicated that they wanted a less stressful and physically demanding job and 22 percent said they were concerned about schedules and hours .

the same survey found that 55 percent of current rns were either just somewhat or not satisfied by their facility's staffing levels , while 43 percent of current rns surveyed indicated that increased staffing would do the most to improve their job .

another survey found that 36 percent of rns in their current job more than one year were very or somewhat dissatisfied with the intensity of their work .

officials of unions representing nurses told us the issues of staffing and overtime have been important for their nursing members during recent negotiations .

state legislators have also indicated concern — in the first half of 2001 alone , legislation designed to limit mandatory overtime or protect nurses who refuse to work additional hours has been introduced in 10 states .

registered nurses have also cited the lack of respect and recognition given them , along with their perceived lack of authority , as areas of dissatisfaction .

in a survey conducted by the nursing executive center , 48 percent of rns surveyed who had held their current job more than one year indicated that they were very or somewhat dissatisfied with the recognition they receive , while 35 percent were dissatisfied with their level of participation in decision - making .

over half ( 53 percent ) of rns responding to a survey from the fnhp were either just somewhat or not satisfied by the degree to which they had a voice in decisions , while 47 percent were either just somewhat or not satisfied by the support and respect they received from management .

while surveys indicate that increased wages might encourage registered nurses to stay at their jobs , money is not always cited as the primary reason for job dissatisfaction .

according to the fnhp survey , of those rns responding who had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement , 18 percent wanted more money , versus 56 percent who were concerned about the stress and physical demands of the job.however , the same study reported that 27 percent of current rns responding cited higher wages or better health care benefits as a way of improving their job .

another study indicated that 39 percent of rns who had been in their current job for more than 1 year were dissatisfied with their total compensation , but 48 percent were dissatisfied with the level of recognition they received from their employer .

the american hospital association ( aha ) recently reported on a survey that found that 57 percent of responding rns said their salaries were adequate , compared to 33.4 percent who thought their facility was adequately staffed and 29.1 percent who said that their hospital administration listened and responded to their concerns .

nurses have also expressed dissatisfaction with a decrease in the amount of support staff available to them over the past few years .

fewer than half the rns responding to the recent study by the aha agreed that their hospital provided adequate support services .

nurses responding to a survey by the ana also pointed to a decrease of needed support services .

current nurse workforce issues are part of a larger health care workforce shortage that includes a shortage of nurse aides .

nurse aides support nurses and assist patients with activities of daily living such as dressing , feeding , and bathing .

several state and local - level studies cite nurse aide recruitment and retention as a problem for many providers .

the shortage among nurse aides may be linked to difficult work conditions as well as dissatisfaction with wages and benefits .

studies have cited low wages and few benefits as factors contributing to nurse aide turnover .

our recent analysis of national data from the bureau of labor statistics indicated that , on average , nurse aides receive lower wages and fewer benefits than workers generally ; this is particularly true for those working in nursing homes and home health care .

in 1999 , the national average hourly wage for nurse aides working in nursing homes was $8.29 , compared to $9.22 for service workers and $15.29 for all workers .

for nurse aides working in home health care agencies , the average hourly wage was $8.67 , and for nurse aides working in hospitals , $8.94 .

our analysis indicated that many nurse aides have sufficiently low earnings and family incomes to qualify for public benefits such as food stamps and medicaid .

studies have also identified the physical demands of nurse aide work and other aspects of the workplace environment as contributing to retention problems .

nurse aide jobs are physically demanding , and have one of the highest rates of workplace injury , 13 per 100 employees in 1999 , compared to the construction industry rate of 8 per 100 employees .

additional factors that affect turnover include workloads and staffing levels , respect from administrators , organizational recognition , and participation in decision - making — all very similar to areas of dissatisfaction identified by nurses .

while job dissatisfaction is a primary reason cited for nurse retention problems , demographic changes are also a contributing factor .

as shown in figure 1 , there has been a dramatic shift upward in the age distribution of registered nurses in the past 10 years .

the average age of the rn population in 2000 was 45 , almost 1 year older than the average in 1996 .

over half ( 52 percent ) of all rns were reported to be under the age of 40 in 1980 ; by 2000 fewer than 1 in 3 were younger than 40 .

while the current nurse population continues to age , fewer young people are choosing nursing as a profession .

over the past 25 years , career opportunities available to women have expanded significantly , and there has been a corresponding decline of interest by women in nursing as a career .

a recent study reported that women graduating from high school in the 1990s were 35 percent less likely to become rns than women who graduated in the 1970s .

the decline in nursing program enrollments in recent years reflects this development .

according to a 1999 nursing executive center report , enrollment in diploma programs dropped 42 percent between 1993 and 1996 , and enrollment in associate degree programs declined 11 percent .

furthermore , between 1995 and 1998 , enrollment in both baccalaureate and master's programs also dropped .

in addition to the reduced number of students entering nursing programs , there is concern about a pending shortage of nurse educators .

the average age of professors in nursing programs is 52 years old , and 49 years old for associate professors .

the average age of new doctoral recipients in nursing is 45 , compared with 34 in all fields .

from 1995 to 1999 , enrollments in doctoral nursing programs were relatively stagnant .

both arkansas and california have reported that qualified applicants have been turned away from basic rn education because of a lack of institutional resources , including faculty and facilities .

growth in the number of new rns has slowed in recent years .

the number of new rns passing the licensing examination declined steadily from 1996 to 2000 ; in 2000 it was 23 percent lower than in 1996 , falling from 96,679 to 74,787 .

although the total number of licensed rns increased 5.4 percent between 1996 and 2000 , to a total of 2,696,540 — this was the lowest increase ever reported in hrsa's periodic survey of rns .

in contrast , the highest increase in the rn population occurred between 1992 and 1996 , when the total number of rns increased by an estimated 14.2 percent , from 2,239,816 to 2,558,874 .

a serious nurse shortage is expected in the future , as pressures are exerted on both demand and supply .

the future demand for nurses is expected to increase dramatically when the baby boomers reach their 60s , 70s , and beyond .

the population age 65 years and older will double from 2000 to 2030 .

during that same time period the number of women between 25 and 54 years of age , who have traditionally formed the core of the nursing workforce , is expected to remain relatively unchanged .

this potential mismatch between future supply and demand for caregivers is illustrated by the change in the expected ratio of potential care providers to potential care recipients .

as shown in figure 2 , the ratio of the working age population , age 18 to 64 , to the population over age 85 will decline from 39.5 workers for each person 85 and older in 2000 , to 22.1 in 2030 , and 14.8 in 2040 .

the ratio of women age 20 to 54 to the population age 85 and older will decline even more dramatically , from 16.1 in 2000 , to 8.5 in 2030 , and 5.7 in 2040 .

