military families with special medical or educational needs face a unique set of challenges due to their frequent moves within the united states and to overseas installations .

with each move , a family with special needs often must find new specialized medical care providers or a new school that can provide appropriate special education services .

recent executive branch , congressional , and advocacy group initiatives have focused on increasing support for these families , which the white house deemed a top national security policy priority in 2011 .

as of february 2018 , the services' exceptional family member programs ( efmp ) collectively serve more than 132,500 enrolled military family members with special needs .

the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 included a provision for gao to assess the effectiveness of the services' efmps , including the department of defense's ( dod ) role in providing guidance for these programs .

these programs include , among other things , family support services , such as referrals to military or community resources for families with special needs ; and a process for considering the medical or educational needs of these families before they are relocated ( known as assignment coordination. ) .

this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which each service has provided family support as required by dod and ( 2 ) the extent to which the services monitor and dod evaluates assignment coordination and family support .

to address the first objective , we obtained and reviewed documentation to assess how the air force , army , marine corps , and navy provide family support services in the continental united states ( conus ) .

in addition , we visited seven installations in five states to learn more about how service - specific guidance for the efmp is implemented .

we selected these installations because they serve a large segment of the total population of families with special needs enrolled in the services' efmps , including high concentrations of military - connected children attending local schools and children attending u.s. dod schools .

at each installation we visited , we conducted group interviews with a self - selected group of military family members and caregivers enrolled in the efmp that have used family support services ( see app .

iii for more information about these interviews , which provide illustrative examples of issues raised by families with special needs regarding the efmp ) .

we also obtained program data from the air force , army , marine corps , and navy and interviewed representatives from each service about the data to determine that the selected data variables from each service are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing summary results about family support for fiscal year 2016 .

finally , we spoke with representatives from advocacy groups at the national level selected for their expertise on military families with special needs and the efmp .

to address the second objective , we reviewed each service's procedures for monitoring assignment coordination and family support , as well as dod's efforts to monitor these efmp components across the services .

specifically , we reviewed policies and procedures included in service - specific guidance related to monitoring , including dod - required certifications for family support services and related quality assurance activities for assignment coordination , such as site - visits from each service's headquarters .

in addition , we discussed required monitoring activities with personnel from each service's headquarters and efmp managers at each installation we visited .

finally , we assessed these monitoring activities against dod's monitoring requirements ; standards for internal control in the federal government ; and gao's body of work on leading practices in performance measurement , which help federal agencies determine if their goals are being achieved .

for both objectives , we interviewed agency officials and reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations .

a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2017 to may 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the efmp provides support to families with special needs at their current and proposed locations .

servicemembers relocate frequently , generally moving every 3 years if in the army , marine corps , and navy , and every 4 years if in the air force .

in fiscal year 2016 , the military services relocated approximately 39,000 servicemembers enrolled in the efmp to conus installations .

to implement dod's policy on support for families with special needs , dod requires each service to establish its own efmp for active duty servicemembers .

efmps are to have three components — identification and enrollment , assignment coordination , and family support .

identification and enrollment: medical and educational personnel at each installation are responsible for identifying eligible family members with special medical or educational needs to enroll in the efmp .

once identified by a qualified medical provider , active duty servicemembers are required to enroll in their service's efmp .

servicemembers are also required to self - identify when they learn a family member has a qualifying condition .

assignment coordination: before finalizing a servicemember's assignment to a new location , dod requires each military service to consider any family member's special needs during this process , including the availability of required medical and special educational services at a new location .

family support: dod requires each military service's efmp to include a family support component through which it helps families with special needs identify and gain access to programs and services at their current , as well as proposed , locations .

servicemembers assigned to a joint base would receive family support from the service that is responsible for leading that installation .

for example , an airman assigned to a joint base where the army is the lead would receive family support from the army installation's efmp .

as required by the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 , dod established the office of community support for military families with special needs ( office of special needs or osn ) to develop , implement , and oversee a policy to support these families .

among other things , this policy must ( 1 ) address assignment coordination and family support services for families with special needs ; ( 2 ) incorporate requirements for resources and staffing to ensure appropriate numbers of case managers are available to develop and maintain services plans that support these families ; and ( 3 ) include requirements regarding the development and continuous updating of a services plan for each military family with special needs .

osn is also responsible for collaborating with the services to standardize efmp components as appropriate and for monitoring the services' efmps .

osn has been delegated the responsibility of implementing dod's policy for families with special needs by the undersecretary of defense for personnel and readiness through the assistant secretary for manpower and reserve affairs according to dod officials .

currently , osn is administered under the direction of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for military community and family policy through the office of military family readiness policy .

in addition , each military service has designated a program manager for its efmp who is also responsible for working with osn to implement its efmp ( see fig .

1 ) .

dod's guidance for the efmp ( 1 ) identifies procedures for assignment coordination and family support services ; ( 2 ) designates the assistant secretary of defense for manpower and reserve affairs as being responsible for monitoring overall efmp effectiveness ; ( 3 ) assigns the osn oversight responsibility for the efmp , including data review and monitoring ; and ( 4 ) directs each service to develop guidance for overseeing compliance with dod requirements for their efmp .

table 1 provides an overview of the procedures each service must establish for the assignment coordination and family support components of the efmp .

as a part of its guidance for monitoring military family readiness programs , dod also requires each military service to certify or accredit its family readiness services , including family support services provided through the efmp .

in addition , dod states that each service must balance the need for overarching consistency across efmps with the need for each service to provide family support that is consistent with their specific mission .

to accomplish this , each service is required to jointly work with dod to develop a performance strategy , which is a plan that assesses the elements of cost , quality , effectiveness , utilization , accessibility , and customer satisfaction for family readiness services .

in addition , each military service is required to evaluate their family readiness services using performance goals that are linked to valid and reliable measures such as customer satisfaction and cost .

dod also requires each service to use the results of these evaluations to inform their assessments of the effectiveness of their family readiness services for families with special needs .

according to dod officials , each military service provides family support services in accordance with dod guidance as well as service - specific guidance .

however , we found wide variation in each service's requirements for family support personnel as well as the practices and expectations of efmp staff .

as a result the type , amount , and frequency of assistance enrolled families receive varies from service to service and when a servicemember from one service is assigned to a joint base led by another service ( see table 2 ) .

for example , in terms of a minimum level of contact for families with special needs enrolled in the efmp , the services vary in the frequency with which they require family support providers to contact families with special needs: the marine corps specifies a frequency ( quarterly ) with which families with special needs should be contacted by their family support providers .

the air force has each installation obtain a roster of families with special needs enrolled in the efmp on a monthly basis , but it does not require family support providers to , for example , use this information to regularly contact these families .

the navy assigns one of three service levels to each family member enrolled in the efmp .

these service levels are based on the needs of each family with special needs ; family support providers are responsible for assigning a “service level” that directs the frequency with which the family must be contacted .

the army has no requirements for how often families with special needs should be contacted .

the services also vary as to whether they offer legal assistance to families with special needs as follows: the marine corps employs two attorneys who can represent families with special needs who fail to receive special education services from local school districts , as specified in their children's individualized education programs ( iep ) .

they can also advise efmp - enrolled families on their rights and options if a family believes their child needs special education services from a local school district ( eg , an iep ) .

the air force , army , and navy choose not to employ special education attorneys .

officials with whom we spoke said families with special needs in these services can receive other types of assistance that may help them resolve special education legal issues .

for example , air force officials said servicemembers and their families can receive support from attorneys that provide general legal assistance on an installation , army officials said installation efmp managers can refer families with special needs to other organizations that provide legal support , and navy officials said families can find support through working with their installation's school liaison officers .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 requires dod's policy to include requirements regarding the development and continuous updating of a services plan ( sp ) for each family with special needs , and dod has specifically required these plans as part of the provision of family support services .

these plans describe the necessary services and support for a family with special needs and document and track progress toward meeting related goals .

according to dod guidance , these plans should also document the support provided to the family , including case notes .

in addition , the dod reference guide for family support providers emphasizes that timely , up - to - date documentation is especially important each time a family relocates , as military families regularly do .

therefore , sps are an important part of providing family support during the relocation process , and provide a record for the gaining installation .

requiring timely and up - to - date documentation is consistent with federal internal control standards , which state that agencies should periodically review policies , procedures , and related control activities for continued relevance and effectiveness in achieving their objectives .

sps follow families with special needs each time they relocate and without timely and up - to - date documentation , dod cannot ensure that all families continue to receive required medical and / or special educational services once they relocate to another installation .

for every service the number of sps was relatively few when compared to the number of servicemembers ( known as sponsors ) or the number of family members enrolled in the efmp ( see table 3 ) .

the services and osn provided a range of reasons as to why the services do not develop and maintain a sp for each family with special needs .

for example , air force officials said their family support providers consider the needs of each family with special needs before determining whether a sp will help them receive the required services .

in addition , army and marine corps officials said they may not develop these plans if families do not request them .

further , according to a navy official , some families lack the required sps because installations may not have the staff needed to develop them — even though dod requires the services to maintain sufficient staff and certify their efmps .

osn officials with whom we spoke also said that the services may not have developed many sps during fiscal year 2016 because dod had not yet approved a standardized form that could be used to meet this requirement .

finally , osn officials also said that each family with special needs enrolled in the efmp may not need a sp because their condition does not require this type of family support .

to meet requirements of the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 , in april 2017 , dod issued to the services guidance that directed them to “rogram , budget , and allocate sufficient funds and other resources , including staffing,” to meet dod's policy objectives for the efmp .

according to osn officials , dod relies on each service to determine what level of funds and resources is sufficient and what constitutes an appropriate number of family support personnel .

to determine family support providers and related personnel staffing levels , the service officials with whom we spoke said they consider a number of factors , including the number of families with special needs enrolled in the efmp at any given installation ( see app .

ii for more information about the efmp data by installation ) .

see table 4 for a summary of efmp family support providers and other key personnel at conus installations .

as required by dod , all of the services employ family support providers to assist families with special needs .

in addition , some services employ additional personnel to support implementation of the efmp ( see sidebar ) .

for example , the air force employs family support coordinators to administer its efmp and no other personnel are dedicated to assisting these coordinators or enrolled families .

the army employs “system navigators” who provide individualized support to families with special needs at selected installations through its efmp , as well as other personnel to administer the efmp .

workers at most of its conus installations to administer individualized support to families with special needs .

in addition , the marine corps employs program managers , administrative assistants , as well as training and education outreach specialists .

the navy contracts regional case liaisons and case liaisons at selected conus installations to administer individualized support to families with special needs .

in addition , the navy employs collateral duty case liaisons who assist with the delivery of family support services at all other conus installations .

senior osn officials said they rely on each service to determine the extent to which its efmp complies with dod's policy for families with special needs because they consider osn to be a policy - making organization that is not primarily responsible for assessing compliance .

in addition , these officials said the services need flexibility to implement dod's policy for families with special needs because they each have unique needs and the number of enrolled families in the efmp is constantly changing .

however , dod has not developed a standard for determining the sufficiency of funding and resources each service allocates for family support .

air force officials at one of the installations we visited said the air force identified the lack of staff and funding to provide individualized support to most families with special needs as an issue .

in addition , officials from the army and navy said they have not received any guidance from osn officials about their service - specific guidance , including requirements for resources and services plans .

further , the services may not know the extent to which their service - specific guidance complies with dod's policy for families with special needs .

the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 requires dod to identify and report annually to the congressional defense committees on gaps in services for military families with special needs and to develop plans to address these gaps .

however , dod's most recent reports to the congressional defense committees did not address the relatively few sps being created for families with special needs , or whether the services are providing sufficient resources to ensure an appropriate number of family support providers .

federal internal control standards require that agencies establish control activities , such as developing clear policies , in order to accomplish agency objectives such as those of the services' efmps .

without fully identifying and addressing potential gaps in family support across these programs , some families with special needs may not get the assistance they require , particularly when they relocate .

each service monitors efmp assignment coordination and family support using a variety of mechanisms , such as regularly produced internal data reports .

however , dod has not yet established common performance measures to track the services' progress in implementing its standard procedures over time or developed a process to evaluate the overall effectiveness of each service's assignment coordination and family support procedures .

dod requires each service to monitor implementation of their efmp , including their procedures for assignment coordination and family support .

to comply with this requirement , each service has developed guidance that establishes monitoring protocols and assigns oversight responsibilities .

officials from each service told us they use internal data reports from each installation to monitor assignment coordination and family support .

to monitor assignment coordination , officials from each service told us their headquarters reviews proposed assignment locations for families with special needs enrolled in the efmp .

these officials said monitoring proposed assignment locations helps ensure that enrolled families will be able to access required services at their new installations .

in addition , army officials said each army unit commander is responsible for tracking the number of families with special needs that have expired enrollment paperwork because it affects assignment coordination worldwide .

several years ago , the army determined that 25 percent of soldiers ( over 13,000 ) enrolled in the efmp had expired enrollment paperwork , complicating the task of considering each enrolled family's special medical or educational needs as part of proposed relocations .

in response , in august 2011 , the army revised its policies and procedures for updating enrollment paperwork which would help ensure a family member's special needs are considered during the assignment coordination process .

to monitor family support provided by installations worldwide , each military service told us they use a variety of mechanisms ( see table 5 ) .

the marine corps pays particular attention to customer satisfaction .

marine corps officials told us that every three years marine corps headquarters administers a survey of family members enrolled in the efmp .

we previously reported that organizations may be able to increase customer satisfaction by better understanding customer needs and organizing services around those needs .

this survey is one of the primary ways marine corps headquarters measures customer satisfaction with family support services at installations worldwide .

marine corps officials also said this survey helps ensure its efmp is based on the current needs of families with special needs .

to improve its oversight of the efmp and implement its policy for families with special needs , dod , through osn , has several efforts under way to standardize the services' procedures for assignment coordination and family support .

however , dod has not developed common performance measures to monitor its progress toward these efforts and has not developed a process for assessing the services' related monitoring activities .

federal internal control standards emphasize the importance of assessing performance over time and evaluating the results of monitoring activities .

to help improve family member satisfaction by addressing gaps in support that may exist between services , osn has begun to standardize procedures for assignment coordination and family support .

to date , osn's efforts have focused on ensuring each service's efmp considers the needs of family members during the assignment process and helps family members identify and gain access to community resources .

according to osn's april 2017 report to congress , the long - term goal of these efforts is to help ensure that all families with special needs enrolled in the efmp receive the same level of service regardless of their military service affiliation or geographic location .

in addition , osn officials told us its standardized procedures will also help dod perform required oversight by improving its access to service - level data and its ability to validate each service's monitoring activities .

to date , efforts to standardize assignment coordination and family support have included efforts such as developing new family member travel screening forms which will be the official documents used during the assignment coordination process and completing a dod - wide customer service satisfaction survey on efmp family support ( see table 6 ) .

despite its efforts to begin standardizing assignment coordination and family support services , dod is unable to measure its progress in standardizing assignment coordination and family support procedures for families with special needs and assessing the services' performance of these processes because it has not yet developed common metrics for doing so .

federal internal control standards emphasize the importance of agencies assessing performance over time .

we have also reported on the importance of federal agencies engaging in large projects using performance metrics to determine how well they are achieving their goals and to identify any areas for improvement .

by using performance metrics , decision makers can obtain feedback for improving both policy and operational effectiveness .

additionally , by tracking and developing a baseline for all measures , agencies can better evaluate progress made and whether or not goals are being achieved — thus providing valuable information for oversight by identifying areas of program risk and causes of risks or deficiencies to decision makers .

through our body of work on leading performance management practices , we have identified several attributes of effective performance metrics relevant to osn's work ( see table 7 ) .

osn officials said each service is currently responsible for assessing the performance of its own efmp , including the development of service - specific goals and performance measures .

osn officials said that they recognize the need to continually measure the department's progress overall in implementing its policy for families with special needs , and are considering ways to do so .

they also said they have encountered challenges to developing common performance measures .

in addition , osn officials said its efforts to reach consensus among the services about performance measures for the overall efmp are still ongoing because each service wants to maintain its own measures , and dod has not required them to reach a consensus .

absent common performance measures , dod is unlikely to fully determine whether its long - standing efforts to improve support for families with special needs are being implemented as intended .

dod requires each service to monitor its own family readiness programs , including procedures for assignment coordination and family support through the efmp , but lacks a systematic process to evaluate the results of these monitoring activities .

to monitor family readiness services , as required by dod , each service must accredit or certify its family support services , including the efmp , using standards developed by a national accrediting body not less than once every 4 years .

in addition , personnel from each service's headquarters are required to periodically visit installations as a part of their monitoring activities for assignment coordination , among other things .

the services initially had the council on accreditation accredit family support services provided through their installations' efmps using national standards developed for military and family readiness programs , according to the officials with whom we spoke .

however , by 2016 , each service was certifying installations' family support services using standards that meet those of a national accrediting body , service - specific standards , and best practices .

according to officials from each service with whom we spoke , this occurred due to changes in the funding levels allocated to this activity .

table 8 provides an overview of the certification process currently being used by each service .

osn officials said they do not have an ongoing process to systematically review the results of the services' activities , including the certification of efmps because they choose to rely on the services to develop their own monitoring activities and ensure they provide the desired outcomes .

in doing so , dod allows each service to develop its own processes for certifying installations' family support services , including the selection of standards .

in addition , osn officials told us that efforts to standardize certification of efmps are ongoing because the military services have not been able to reach consensus on a set of standards that can be used across dod for installations' family support services .

further , osn has not established a process to assess the results of the services' processes for certifying installations' family support services .

federal standards for internal control state that management should evaluate the results of monitoring efforts — such as those the services are conducting on their own — to help ensure they meet their strategic goals .

the lack of such a process hampers osn's ability to monitor the services' efmps and determine the adequacy of such programs as required by the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 .

osn's job of developing a policy for families with special needs that will work across dod's four services is challenging given the size , complexity , and mission of the u.s. military .

it has had to consider , among other things , the services' mission requirements , resource constraints , and the myriad demands on servicemembers and their families during their frequent relocations .

anything that further complicates a relocation — such as not receiving the required family support services for family members with special needs — potentially affects readiness or , at a minimum , makes an already stressful situation worse .

by providing little direction on how the services should provide family support or what the scope of family support services should be , some servicemembers get more — or less — from the efmp each time they relocate , including when a servicemember from one service is assigned to a joint base led by another service .

by largely deferring to the services to design , implement , and monitor their efmps' performance , dod cannot , as required by the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 , fully determine the adequacy of the services' efmps in serving families with special needs , including any gaps in services these families receive , because it has not built a systematic process to do so .

instead , it relies on the services to self - monitor and address , within each service , the results of monitoring activities .

however , because servicemembers relocate frequently and often depend on the efmp of a service other than their own , a view of efmp performance across all of the services is essential to ensuring , for example , that relocating servicemembers get consistent efmp service delivery no matter where they are stationed .

evaluating and developing program improvements based on the results of the services' monitoring would help dod ensure the services' efmps achieve the desired outcomes and improve its ability to assess the overall effectiveness of the program .

we are making the following three recommendations to dod: we recommend the secretary of defense direct the office of special needs ( osn ) to assess the extent to which each service is ( 1 ) providing sufficient resources for an appropriate number of family support providers , and ( 2 ) developing services plans for each family with special needs , and to include these results as part of osn's analysis of any gaps in services for military families with special needs in each annual report issued by the department to the congressional defense committees .

 ( recommendation 1 ) we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the office of special needs ( osn ) to develop common performance metrics for assignment coordination and family support , in accordance with leading practices for performance measurement .

 ( recommendation 2 ) we recommend that the secretary of defense implement a systematic process for evaluating the results of monitoring activities conducted by each service's efmp .

 ( recommendation 3 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of defense ( dod ) for comment .

dod provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iv .

dod also provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

dod agreed with all three of our recommendations .

in its written comments , dod stated that additional performance metrics need to be developed for assignment coordination and that it is in the process of measuring families' satisfaction with family support provided through the efmp .

dod also stated that it is developing plans for evaluating the results of each service's monitoring activities for the efmp .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretaries of defense and education , and other interested parties .

the report also is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 617 ) 788-0580 or nowickij@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v .

the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 includes a provision for gao to assess the effectiveness of the department of defense's ( dod ) exceptional family member programs ( efmp ) .

this report focuses on the assignment coordination and family support components of the efmp for dependents with special needs and examines: ( 1 ) the extent to which each service has provided family support as required by dod , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the services monitor and dod evaluates assignment coordination and family support .

to address these objectives , we used a variety of data collection methods .

key methods are described in greater detail below .

for both objectives , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and dod guidance and documentation that pertain to the efmp , including the following: the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 , which established the office of special needs and defined program requirements for assisting families with special needs , including assignment coordination and family support .

dod's guidance for administering the efmp .

we assessed how dod implements the requirements in the ndaa for fiscal year 2010 ; how each service implements assignment coordination and family support ; and how the services and dod monitor assignment coordination and family support using performance measures .

specially , we reviewed dod instruction 1315.19 - exceptional family member program ; service - specific guidance and related documents from the air force , army , marine corps , and navy ; and dod instruction 1342.22 - military family readiness .

standards for internal control in the federal government related to the documentation of responsibilities through policies , performance measures , and evaluating the results of monitoring activities .

we compared each service's procedures for monitoring assignment coordination and family support to these standards .

to determine the extent of the services' efmp family support , we obtained and analyzed fiscal year 2016 efmp data ( the most recent available ) for each service .

we reviewed dod policy to identify data variables that each service maintains related to its efmp .

we used these data to summarize key characteristics of each service's efmp .

the selected variables provided service - wide and installation - specific efmp information on , the number of continental united states ( conus ) and outside the continental united states ( oconus ) installations ; the number of servicemembers ( sponsors ) enrolled in the efmp ; the number of family members with special needs enrolled in the efmp ; the number of efmp family support personnel ; and the number of services plans created for families with special needs enrolled in the efmp .

we determined that the selected data variables from each service are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of providing summary results about family support for fiscal year 2016 .

to learn more about how the services implement their efmps , we visited seven installations in five states .

we selected the seven installations based on their location in states with the largest number of military - connected students in school year 2012-2013 ( the most recent available and reliable data ) or in states with the largest percentage of students enrolled in u.s. dod schools as of may 2017 , as well as their status as a joint base .

at each installation , we interviewed installation officials , efmp managers , selected family support personnel , and family members and caregivers enrolled in the program .

in states we visited that had the largest number of military - connected students , the efmp personnel we interviewed collectively served 66 percent of students who attend local public schools and 42 percent of the students attending u.s. dod schools .

to obtain illustrative examples about how the efmp serves families with special needs , we conducted seven group interviews with efmp - enrolled family members and caregivers ( one at each of the seven installations we visited ) .

using a prepared script , we asked participants to describe how they were identified and enrolled in the efmp , how they were assigned to new installations , and the types of family support services they received .

we also asked about how these services aligned with their family member's efmp - eligible condition , the benefits and challenges they experienced , as well as their overall satisfaction .

a total of 38 self - selected volunteers participated in the seven group discussions .

while the participants in these groups included a variety of family members and caregivers , the number of participants and groups were very small relative to the total number of family members enrolled in the efmp .

their comments are not intended to represent all efmp - enrolled family members or caregivers .

other efmp - enrolled family members and caregivers may have had other experiences with the program during the same period .

finally , for both objectives , we conducted interviews with a variety of dod , service - level , and nonfederal officials .

we spoke with dod officials from the office of the assistant secretary of defense – offices of manpower and reserve affairs , military community and family policy , military family readiness policy , and special needs .

we also spoke with efmp managers from air force , army , marine corps , and navy headquarters .

we also met with officials from selected national military family advocacy organizations including the national military family association ; the military family advisory network ; and the military officers association of america to discuss the efmp .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2017 to may 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

each service has an exceptional family member program ( efmp ) that provides support to military families with special needs .

the tables below present the following information on selected efmp and family support categories for each service's program at continental united states ( conus ) and outside the continental united states ( oconus ) installations in fiscal year 2016: city , state or country ; number of exceptional family members ; number of family support providers ( by full - time equivalent ) ; number of family support provider vacancies ; number of services plans ; number of indirect contacts ; and number of direct contacts .

the information below is listed sequentially in alphabetical order by service .

we held small group discussions with exceptional family member program ( efmp ) participants at the seven military installations we visited .

family members and caregivers who attended each session reported they had children or spouses with efmp - eligible conditions .

the discussion group participants were self - selected ; and their comments are not intended to represent all efmp - enrolled family members or caregivers in fiscal year 2016 .

in addition , other efmp - enrolled family members and caregivers may have had different experiences with the program during the same period .

there were a total of 38 participants representing all the services .

the following issues were discussed by one or more participants during the small group discussions at the installations we visited .

the issues that emerged relate to the current and future overall effectiveness of the efmp .

overall satisfaction with efmp ( discussed by 30 of 38 participants ) : measure of participants' approval of the family support services offered and experience with the efmp .

many participants expressed overall satisfaction with the efmp .

several participants expressed dissatisfaction with the efmp .

a participant expressed dissatisfaction with the lack of consistency in the provision of family support services ( i.e. , special education advocacy ) across installations .

school liaison officers ( discussed by 20 of 38 participants ) : serve as the primary point of contact for school - related matters as well as assist military families with school issues .

several participants noted that they received no response to their request for assistance from their school liaison officer or they only received general information .

several participants said school liaison officers were not helpful .

some participants found school liaison officers were helpful .

some participants were unaware of school liaison officers being available at their installation and the service ( s ) they provide .

a few participants said school liaison officers did not follow up on requests for information .

a participant noted there seems to be a disconnect between family support services provided through the efmp and services provided by school liaison officers .

family support personnel ( discussed by 12 of 38 participants ) : provide information and referral to military families with special needs .

some participants at one installation noted that the efmp was understaffed .

some participants at one installation noted high turnover of family support personnel .

some participants noted family support personnel did not provide support for their family with special needs .

stigma ( discussed by 12 of 38 participants ) : a perception that participating in the efmp may limit a soldier's assignment opportunities and / or compromise career advancement .

several participants believe there is still stigma associated with participating in the efmp .

some participants said participating in the efmp has not affected career advancement .

assignment coordination ( discussed by 10 of 38 participants ) : the assignment of military personnel in a manner consistent with the needs of armed forces that considers locations where care and support for family members with special needs are available .

some participants found the assignment coordination process challenging .

some participants described limitations with the assignment coordination process .

a few participants noted there is a lack of information among families with special needs regarding how to express the need for stabilization and / or continuity of care .

a few participants cited the challenges of assignment coordination as contributing to their decision to retire .

one participant commented that the opinion of a medical professional was not reflected in the assignment coordination process .

special education services ( discussed by 10 of 38 participants ) : the provision of staff capable of assisting families with special needs with special education and disability law advice and / or assistance and attendance at individualized education program ( iep ) meetings where appropriate .

several participants who had a family support provider assist them with preparing for or attending a school - based meeting , including iep meetings , spoke positively of their experience ( s ) .

some participants at one installation agreed that assistance from family support providers during meetings with school officials regarding special education services is helpful .

a few participants who were unable to get assistance with special education services from the efmp sought the services of private attorneys at their own expense .

family support services ( discussed by 9 of 38 participants ) : the non - clinical case management delivery of information and referral for families with special needs , including the development and maintenance of a services plan .

some participants found that family support providers were helpful .

some participants could not identify needed resources or were unaware of the resources or services available to them .

one participant noted that the family support provider had minimal contact .

one participant said navigating the system can be challenging .

surveys ( discussed by 8 of 38 participants ) : the process of collecting data from a respondent using a structured instrument and survey method to ensure the accurate collection of data .

several participants noted that they had not or rarely had the opportunity to evaluate the family support services provided through the efmp .

one participant noted that comment cards used by each service are not effective for evaluating the efmp .

warm hand - off ( discussed by 6 of 38 participants ) : assistance to identify needed supports or services and facilitating the initial contact or meeting with the next program .

many participants at one installation agreed that the warm hand - off process worked well for them .

several participants said they found the warm hand - off process helpful when moving from one installation to the next .

outreach ( discussed by 5 of 38 participants ) : developing partnerships with military and civilian agencies and offices ( local , state , and national ) , improving program awareness , providing information updates to families , and hosting and participating in efmp family events .

some participants found it difficult to obtain information regarding the types of family support services that are available .

a few participants noted that communications regarding the efmp were not targeted to address their needs .

a few participants noted communications regarding the efmp are untimely , ( eg , newsletters not issued periodically ) .

joint base family support services ( discussed by 1 of 38 participants ) : family support services provided by the lead service of the joint base that is different from that of the servicemember enrolled in the efmp .

one participant said that using family support services on joint bases may pose a challenge as each service has different rules and procedures and as a result provides different types of family support services .

in addition to the contact named above , bill macblane ( assistant director ) , brian egger ( analyst - in - charge ) , patricia donahue , holly dye , robin marion , james rebbe , shelia thorpe , and walter vance made significant contributions to this report .

also contributing to this report were lucas alvarez , bonnie anderson , connor kincaid , brian lepore , daniel meyer , and mimi nguyen .

