i am pleased to join you today as you address a number of tax issues .

you asked that i cover two areas of taxation: ( 1 ) how payroll taxes fund social security and the medicare hospital insurance programs and ( 2 ) noncompliance associated with the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and efforts to deal with that noncompliance .

my testimony is based primarily on work we have done in the past .

i will summarize my main points and then cover the two tax issues in greater detail .

payroll taxes are so named because they represent taxes imposed on wages .

they provide the funding for the social security program — including both old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) and disability insurance ( di ) — and for the hospital insurance ( hi ) portion of medicare — referred to as part a .

these taxes are paid in equal portions by employees and their employers — and have on occasion been called “contributions” since they are to be used to fund these social insurance programs .

once workers have paid taxes and worked sufficient time in covered employment , they and their families are considered to have earned the right to future benefits .

social security benefit payments are calculated based on a formula that replaces a larger portion of wages for low wage earners than for higher wage earners .

hospital insurance benefits do not vary on the basis of individuals' wage histories ; any benefits paid depend on the health situation of covered workers .

as we have reported in the past , demographic trends indicate that these programs will impose an increasing burden on the federal budget and the overall economy in the future .

is not yet available with which to determine whether those steps have been effective in reducing the overall rate of noncompliance associated with the credit .

irs has also not reported any data on the extent to which eitc overclaims were due to taxpayer errors , which may flow at least in part from the complex provisions of the credit , or from fraud .

payroll taxes are the main source of financing for social security — which includes oasi and di — and for the hi program in medicare — also referred to as medicare part a .

the payroll taxes for these programs are levied on wages and on the net self - employment income of workers under the federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) and the self - employment contributions act ( seca ) .

although social security is often discussed as a retirement program , social security ( oasdi ) is a social insurance program that provides cash payments to persons or families to replace income lost through retirement , death , or disability .

workers make “contributions” in the form of payroll taxes that are then credited by the treasury to the social security trust funds .

once individuals have worked a sufficient time to qualify , they become eligible for benefits under the program .

enrollees ( about 25 percent of total annual funding ) and appropriations of general funds ( about 75 percent of total funding ) .

while both the social security oasdi and medicare hi are overwhelmingly financed by payroll taxes , those trust funds receive some general revenues in the form of income taxes paid on a portion of the social security benefits of upper - income retirees .

collection of the payroll taxes that fund oasdi and medicare hi is administered by irs .

however , because these payroll taxes are earmarked to fund specific retirement , disability , and medical benefits for which workers become eligible through their qualified employment , they are fundamentally different from income taxes , which are imposed on certain segments of the population and which are not earmarked for any specific purpose .

hi tax is 2.9 percent , divided evenly between the employee and the employer .

until 1994 , the wage base for hi was identical to that for oasdi .

since 1994 , however , the hi tax has been imposed on all of a worker's wages and self - employment earnings .

figure 1 illustrates the flow of payroll taxes into the social security and medicare trust funds .

income wage earners replace a larger portion of their earnings than do the payments to higher wage earners .

as with retirement benefits , a number of rules apply in determining who is eligible for disability benefits .

generally , a disability is defined as the inability to engage in “substantial gainful activity” by reason of physical or mental impairment .

workers who have become fully qualified for oasi benefits and who become disabled are also generally qualified for disability benefits .

workers who become disabled before becoming fully qualified for oasi benefits may nevertheless qualify for disability benefits under certain circumstances .

payments to disabled individuals , like those to retirees , take into account personal work histories and wages earned .

as with retirement benefits , lower wage earners have a larger portion of their wages replaced than do higher wage earners .

individual .

for certain types of medical services , patients may be required to pay deductibles or additional charges .

under current law , employers withhold oasdi and hi payroll taxes from employees' pay along with federal and state income taxes , if any .

both the employees' and the employers' shares of fica taxes are deposited — along with other federal taxes — to a designated federal reserve bank or other authorized depository .

all federal taxes are then deposited in the treasury .

treasury credits the social security and hi trust funds for the applicable amounts .

neither eligibility for benefits nor the amount of benefits is based on the amount of taxes paid by an individual , and neither irs nor the social security administration ( ssa ) directly credits to the individual the annual and cumulative fica taxes paid by or on behalf of each individual .

cumulatively , the oasdi and hi taxes collected represent dedicated receipts .

they are accounted for in earmarked funds: the social security oasi trust fund , social security di trust fund , and medicare hi trust fund .

these trust funds hold funds in the form of special nonmarketable u.s. treasury securities that are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government .

they are an asset to the trust fund and a legal claim on — or an obligation of — the general fund of the treasury .

when benefits are to be paid , securities sufficient to fund those benefits are redeemed , and benefits are paid by the treasury .

trust funds earn interest on the funds lent to the treasury .

this interest is paid in the form of additional treasury securities .

until 1983 , program revenues and expenses were closely matched , and the reserves were modest .

after the 1983 social security commission recommendations were enacted , balances grew .

as a result , interest credits have become a more important source of revenue for the oasdi trust funds .

as we have reported , both social security and medicare face serious financing challenges .

today , taxes paid into the trust funds exceed benefits paid out .

however , as more and more of the “baby boom” generation enters retirement , this will change .

the combination of a larger elderly population , increased longevity , and rising health care costs will drive significant increases in health and retirement spending when the “baby boom” generation begins to retire .

over the long term , the trust funds are not solvent .

ssa projections show that , absent a change in the structure of the program , the oasdi trust funds will only be able to pay full benefits through 2037 .

however , as we have reported , because a trust fund's accumulated balance does not necessarily reflect the full future cost of existing government commitments , it is not an adequate measure of the fund's solvency or the program's sustainability .

the cash flows for these programs will create pressure on the federal budget long before these so - called trust fund exhaustion dates .

securities and pay benefits , the government would have to raise taxes , cut spending for other programs , increase borrowing from the public , or retire less debt ( if there is a surplus ) — or some combination of these .

as the comptroller general testified last month , our long - term simulations show that , absent a change in the design of social security and medicare , ultimately the government would do little more than mail checks to the elderly and their healthcare providers .

the eitc is a refundable tax credit established by congress in 1975 .

the credit offsets the impact of social security taxes paid by low - income workers and encourages low - income persons to seek work rather than welfare .

the eitc is available to taxpayers with and without children and depends on the nature and amount of qualifying income and on the number of children who meet age , relationship , and residency tests .

the amount of eitc allowed to an individual is first applied as a payment against any income tax liability of that individual .

any remaining amount is refunded to the individual .

workers can receive the credit as a lump sum payment after filing an income tax return or in advance as part of their paycheck .

table 2 shows , for the past 3 years , the number of eitc recipients , the relatively small number of those who reported receiving an advance eitc , and the total eitc amount .

in december 1998 , the council of economic advisers concluded that “the eitc is one of our most successful programs for fighting poverty and encouraging work.” among other things , the report said that the eitc had lifted 4.3 million americans out of poverty in 1997 , had reduced the number of children living in poverty that year by 2.2 million , and had increased the labor force participation of single mothers .

for many eitc recipients , the credit is more than enough to fully offset social security taxes .

most eitc recipients earn credits that exceed their income tax liabilities .

the joint committee on taxation has estimated that 87 percent of the credit earned in 2000 will be refunded as direct payments to taxpayers .

for many of the recipients these refunds will be more than enough to offset their payroll tax burdens .

for example , a head - of - household filer who has two children and earns $15,000 in wages would have earned an eitc of $3,396 in 2000 .

this amount would have exceeded her precredit income tax liability of $24 plus her $1,148 portion of payroll tax liability .

it would also have been more than enough to offset her employer's $1,148 share of the payroll tax , which most economists believe to be borne by the employee .

however , many low - income individuals and couples , especially those without children , do not earn the eitc .

looking at all low - income taxpayers together , the congressional budget office estimated that in 1999 households with cash incomes between zero and $10,000 , on average , received eitc refunds equal to 4.1 percent of their incomes .

this average refunded credit was enough to offset the average payroll tax liability of these households , but it would not have completely offset the burden of the employer's portion of the payroll tax .

the average refunded credit for households with cash incomes between $10,000 and $20,000 typically would not have been sufficient to offset any of the employer's share of the payroll tax and only a portion of the employee's share for those households .

since 1995 , we have identified eitc noncompliance as one of the high - risk areas within irs because such noncompliance exposes the federal government to billions of dollars of risk through overpayments of the eitc .

although irs has estimated that billions of dollars have been overpaid to eitc recipients , it has not reported on the portions of noncompliance that may be due to unintentional errors , perhaps attributable at least in part to the complexity of the eitc , or to fraudulent efforts to obtain the credit .

in april 1997 and september 2000 , respectively , irs reported on the results of two eitc compliance studies — the first involving tax year 1994 eitc claims accepted by irs between january 15 and april 21 , 1995 , and the second involving tax year 1997 claims processed by irs between january 20 and may 29 , 1998 .

although changes in irs' study methodology as well as legislative changes between 1994 and 1997 made the results of the two studies noncomparable , both studies documented a significant amount of eitc noncompliance .

of $17.2 billion in eitc claimed during the first study period , irs estimated that $4.4 billion ( about 26 percent ) was overclaimed .

of $30.3 billion in eitc claimed during the second study period , irs estimated that $9.3 billion ( about 31 percent ) was overclaimed .

the largest source of taxpayer error identified by irs in both studies related to eitc requirements that are difficult for irs to verify — principally those related to eligibility of qualifying children .

currently , to be a qualifying child , a child must ( 1 ) be the taxpayer's son , daughter , adopted child , grandchild , stepchild , or eligible foster child ( i.e. , meet a relationship test ) ; ( 2 ) be under age 19 , under age 24 and a full - time student , or any age and permanently and totally disabled ( i.e. , meet an age test ) ; and ( 3 ) have lived with the taxpayer in the united states for more than half the year or for the entire year if an eligible foster child ( i.e. , meet a residency test ) .

failure to meet the residency test was the most common qualifying child error identified in both studies .

irs' studies identified the following as other sources of eitc errors .

complicated living arrangements - - when a child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one person , the person with the higher modified adjusted gross income ( agi ) is the only one who can claim the eitc using that child .

the person with the lower modified agi cannot use that child to claim the eitc even if the other person does not claim the eitc .

this rule does not apply if the other person is the taxpayer's spouse and they file a joint return .

misreporting of filing status — these errors involved married taxpayers filing as single or head of household when they should have filed as married filing separately .

persons who file as married filing separately are not eligible to claim the eitc .

income misreporting — these errors included misreporting of earned income and underreporting of investment income .

eitc “noncompliance” as identified in irs' studies and as referred to in this testimony includes errors caused by mistakes — possibly due to the complexity of the eitc — or an intent to defraud .

both of these potential sources of error have been of concern to irs and others .

some analysts consider the eitc to be a complex tax provision that challenges those applying for it to properly understand and follow the qualifying rules .

on the other hand , the credit's possible susceptibility to fraud has also been a concern to congress and irs for many years .

although being able to differentiate between these different causes may be important in identifying appropriate corrective measures , irs' primary goal in conducting its compliance studies was to identify the level of overall eitc noncompliance .

determining the causes of overpayments is more challenging and costly , especially determining whether an eitc claim is fraudulent , which requires knowing the difficult - to - prove intent behind the taxpayer's actions .

irs' reports on its two compliance studies did not discuss the extent to which eitc overclaims were due to mistakes versus fraud .

however , as we discussed in a july 1998 report on irs' first study , irs examiners and case reviewers did make a determination of intent for almost every case involving an overclaim .

based on those determinations , about one - half of the returns with an eitc overclaim and two - thirds of the total amount overclaimed were considered to be the result of intentional errors .

because these assessments were judgmental and made without any specific criteria , they were considered too imprecise to be included in irs' report .

however , as we said in 1998 , the results did indicate that irs' compliance efforts should include activities aimed at taxpayers who intentionally misclaim the eitc .

concerned about the level of eitc noncompliance , congress and irs have taken various steps to reduce it .

after the 1994 compliance study , congress took the following steps: according to law , an eitc is not to be allowed unless the tax return contains the eitc - qualifying - child's social security number ( ssn ) as well as the ssns of the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse , if any .

before 1997 , if irs identified a return with an invalid ssn , it had to resolve that issue through its normal audit procedures .

because those procedures are resource intensive , irs was not able to follow up on most of the invalid ssns identified .

in 1995 , for example , irs stopped the refunds on about 3 million returns with invalid ssns .

however , irs was only able to follow up with taxpayers on about 700,000 of those returns .

for the other 2.3 million returns , irs released the refunds without any follow - up .

in 1996 , congress authorized irs to treat invalid ssns as “math errors,” similar to the way that irs had historically handled computational mistakes .

with that authority , irs has been able to ( 1 ) automatically disallow any eitc claim associated with an invalid ssn and ( 2 ) make appropriate adjustments to any refund that the taxpayer might be claiming .

collect ssns of birth parents and provide irs with information linking the parents' and child's ssns .

congress began providing irs with appropriated funds ( about $143 million a year ) for a 5-year eitc compliance initiative beginning in fiscal year 1998 .

as part of the 5-year compliance initiative and using the tools provided by congress , irs implemented a plan that calls for reducing eitc noncompliance through expanded customer service and public outreach , strengthened enforcement , and enhanced research .

in implementing its plan , irs has taken several actions , with some significant results .

for example: in 1999 and 2000 , irs identified a total of about 3.4 million “math errors” related to the eitc , about 24 percent of which involved invalid ssns.according to irs , it denied about $675 million in erroneous eitc claims during fiscal years 1999 and 2000 because of eitc - related “math errors.” other types of eitc noncompliance are not as easy to identify as invalid ssns .

these types of noncompliance can be detected only through an in - depth review .

for the past few years , irs has targeted for in - depth review certain types of eitc claims , such as those involving the use of a child's ssn on multiple returns for the same year , that irs had identified as important sources of noncompliance .

returns identified by irs were to be audited to determine if the eitc claims were valid .

during fiscal years 1999 and 2000 , according to irs , it completed more than 500,000 of these audits and identified about $800 million in overclaims .

about $435,000 for 143 of those preparers .

we do not know how , if at all , irs' visits resulted in improved due diligence by preparers .

that question may be addressed in irs' report on the results of its visits , which , according to irs , will be issued about may 1 .

irs implemented a program to enforce the recertification requirements of the taxpayer relief act of 1997 .

according to irs data , ( 1 ) about 312,000 taxpayers were required to recertify after being denied the eitc for tax year 1997 and ( 2 ) about 193,000 of those taxpayer did not claim the eitc on their tax year 1998 returns .

irs sees these results as an indication that recertification has reduced the number of improper claims .

irs expanded its eitc outreach and educational efforts .

for example , it developed partnerships with groups that are advocates for low - income taxpayers and with businesses and large employers who include eitc information in monthly billings or employees' pay statements .

irs also refocused its media campaign and publications toward educating the public about eitc eligibility requirements .

irs developed a database that can be used to help verify the accuracy of taxpayers' claimed dependents and eic - qualifying children .

it incorporates data from an assortment of sources including the hhs and ssa information provided for in the 1997 act .

according to irs , the database is used to screen returns during processing for potential compliance issues and to select for pre - refund audits those with the highest potential .

also , according to irs , the returns being selected are primarily ones filed by eitc claimants .

despite these initiatives , it remains to be seen how , if at all , congress' and irs' efforts have succeeded in reducing the 31- percent eitc overclaim rate identified by irs' tax year 1997 eitc compliance study .

irs is doing a study of tax year 1999 returns and plans to study tax year 2001 returns .

the results of those studies , when compared to the results of the tax year 1997 study , should provide a basis for assessing the impact on overall eitc noncompliance .

although well - designed and effectively - implemented processes should help reduce eitc noncompliance , certain features of the eitc represent a trade - off between compliance and other desired goals .

unlike income transfer programs , such as temporary assistance for needy families and food stamps , the eitc was designed to be administered through the tax system .

accordingly , while other income transfer programs have staff who review documents and other evidence before judging applicants to be qualified to receive assistance , the eitc relies more directly on the self - reported qualifications of individuals .

this approach generally should result in lower administrative costs and possibly higher participation rates for the eitc than the other assistance programs .

however , eitc noncompliance may also be higher .

this is especially true when eligibility depends on information that cannot be readily and rapidly verified by irs as it processes tax returns .

eitc eligibility , particularly related to qualifying children , is difficult for irs to verify through its traditional enforcement procedures , such as matching return data to third - party information reports .

correctly applying the residency test , for example , often involves understanding complex living arrangements and child custody issues .

thoroughly verifying qualifying child eligibility basically requires irs to audit individual tax returns , as was done in the tax year 1994 compliance study — a costly , time - consuming , and intrusive proposition .

 - - - - - i appreciate this opportunity to appear today to provide a basic description of the payroll taxes funding social security and medicare hospital insurance and to discuss what is known about eitc noncompliance .

mr. chairman , that concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee might have .

contributions to this testimony included david attianese , kenneth bombara , christine bonham , barbara bovbjerg , carol henn , susan irving , deborah junod , and john lesser .

long - term budget issues: moving from balancing the budget to balancing fiscal risk ( gao - 01-385t , feb. 6 , 2001 ) .

federal trust and other earmarked funds: answers to frequently asked questions ( gao - 01-199sp , january 2001 ) .

medicare reform: issues associated with general revenue financing ( gao / t - aimd - 00-126 , mar .

27 , 2000 ) .

medicare reform: leading proposals lay groundwork , while design decisions lie ahead ( gao / t - hehs / aimd - 00-103 , feb. 24 , 2000 ) .

social security: evaluating reform proposals ( gao / aimd / hehs - 00-29 , nov. 4 , 1999 ) .

social security reform: implementation issues for individual accounts ( gao / hehs - 99-122 , june 18 , 1999 ) .

social security: different approaches for addressing program solvency ( gao / hehs - 98-33 , july 22 , 1998 ) .

tax administration: assessment of irs' 2000 tax filing season ( gao - 01-158 , dec. 22 , 2000 ) .

earned income credit: irs' tax year 1994 compliance study and recent efforts to reduce noncompliance ( gao / ggd - 98-150 , july 28 , 1998 ) .

tax administration: earned income credit noncompliance ( gao / t - ggd - 97-105 , may 8 , 1997 ) .

