suspensions and debarments are tools that agencies may use to protect the government's interests by excluding individuals , contractors , and grantees from receiving federal contracts , grants , and other forms of financial assistance based on various types of misconduct .

in 2011 , we reviewed suspension and debarment efforts at selected agencies and found that the agencies with the most procurement - related suspensions and debarments shared common characteristics , including a suspension and debarment program with dedicated staff , detailed policies and procedures , and practices that encourage an active referral process .

we made recommendations to the departments of commerce , health and human services ( hhs ) , justice , state , the treasury , and the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) federal emergency management agency ( fema ) — six agencies with billions of dollars in annual contracting obligations that lacked these characteristics and had virtually no procurement - related suspensions and debarments for fiscal year 2009 .

we also recommended that the office of management and budget ( omb ) issue guidance to improve suspension and debarment programs at all agencies and enhance government - wide oversight .

you asked us to review the status of the six agencies' suspension and debarment programs and government - wide efforts in this area .

for this report , we analyzed ( 1 ) actions taken by the six agencies to incorporate characteristics associated with active suspension and debarment programs ; ( 2 ) changes in the six agencies' level of suspension and debarment activity ; and ( 3 ) actions taken to improve oversight and government - wide suspension and debarment efforts .

to identify the actions the six agencies have taken to incorporate the characteristics associated with active suspension and debarment programs , we reviewed the agencies' suspension and debarment programs including staffing levels , training , guidance , and the case referral process .

we reviewed relevant agency documents and interviewed suspension and debarment and inspector general officials .

we also used information we obtained from the agencies since 2011 through our annual recommendation follow - up efforts .

to provide information on changes in the level of suspension and debarment activity at the six agencies , we reviewed data on the number of suspensions , proposed debarments , and debarments reported in the interagency suspension and debarment committee's ( isdc ) annual reports to congress for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 .

for the purposes of this report , we reviewed both procurement and nonprocurement - related actions .

to assess data reliability , we asked the agencies to verify the data reported to isdc and identify steps taken to ensure data consistency and accuracy .

we found the data sufficiently reliable for the purposes of summarizing changes over time in the agencies' level of suspension and debarment activity .

we were not able to use data from the official government system used to track suspension and debarment data as we did in our 2011 report because the general services administration ( gsa ) could not provide the data in time to meet the timeframes of this review due to system upgrades .

further , numerous data fields were changed in the new system and extensive manipulation would be required to ensure consistency over time .

as a result , we were not able to aggregate related actions such as those involving affiliates and related parties to identify the number of cases as we did in our 2011 report .

as such , the number of actions we report is not comparable to the number of cases we reported in 2011 .

to identify actions taken to improve oversight and government - wide suspension and debarment efforts , we reviewed guidance issued by omb in 2011 , and reports issued by the isdc for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 .

we interviewed officials from omb's office of federal procurement policy , the isdc , and the six agencies to obtain their views on federal agencies' suspension and debarment activity , as well as ongoing management steps taken by the isdc to support government - wide efforts and the results of those efforts .

to gain insight into how government - wide guidance and actions may have affected suspension and debarment efforts at an agency not included in gao's 2011 review , we selected the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , an agency with high contract dollar obligations and relatively few suspensions and debarments for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 .

for va , we reviewed their suspension and debarment policy , guidance , procedures , and data .

we also interviewed va officials to determine actions taken to improve va's suspension and debarment program .

we conducted this performance audit from march 2014 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) establishes the policies and procedures governing suspension and debarment actions related to federal contracts .

the nonprocurement common rule ( ncr ) establishes the policies and procedures governing suspension and debarment for discretionary nonprocurement awards ( i.e. , grants , cooperative agreements , scholarships , or other assistance ) .

the far and the ncr specify numerous causes for suspensions and debarments , including fraud , false statements , theft , bribery , tax evasion , and any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity .

a suspension is a temporary exclusion pending the completion of an investigation or legal proceeding which generally may not last longer than 18 months , while a debarment is an exclusion for a reasonable , specified period depending on the seriousness of the cause , but generally should not exceed 3 years .

a suspension or debarment under either the far or ncr has government - wide effect for all purposes , so that a party precluded from participating in federal contracts is also precluded from receiving grants , loans , and other assistance , and vice versa .

omb has the authority to issue guidelines for nonprocurement suspensions and debarments and the office of federal procurement policy within omb provides overall direction for government - wide procurement policies , including those on suspensions and debarments under the far .

isdc , established in 1986 , monitors the government - wide system of suspension and debarment .

the isdc consists of representatives from 24 federal agencies , as well as 18 independent agencies and government corporations .

the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 augmented and clarified certain isdc functions to include providing assistance to help agencies achieve operational efficiencies in their suspension and debarment programs .

the isdc was also made responsible for coordinating lead - agency responsibility when multiple agencies have a potential interest in pursuing suspension and debarment of the same entity .

in 2011 , we made recommendations to improve agency and government - wide suspension and debarment efforts .

we reviewed 10 agencies and found that the four agencies with the most procurement - related suspension and debarment cases shared common characteristics: a suspension and debarment program with dedicated staff , detailed policies and procedures , and practices that encourage an active referral process .

agencies are required to establish procedures for referring appropriate matters to their suspension and debarment official for consideration .

the six agencies with few or no procurement - related suspensions or debarments for the period we reviewed — commerce , hhs , justice , state , treasury , and dhs's fema — did not have these characteristics regardless of each agency's volume of contracting activity .

to improve their suspension and debarment programs , we recommended these agencies take action to incorporate the characteristics associated with active programs .

we also reported that government - wide efforts to oversee and coordinate suspensions and debarments faced a number of challenges .

for example , we reported that the isdc relies on agencies' participation and resources to fulfill its missions .

to improve suspension and debarment programs at all agencies and enhance government - wide oversight , we recommended that omb issue government - wide guidance that ( 1 ) describes the elements of an active suspension and debarment program , and ( 2 ) emphasizes the importance of coordinating with the isdc .

we found that the departments of commerce , hhs , justice , state , the treasury , and dhs's fema all took action since we made recommendations in 2011 to incorporate characteristics associated with active suspension and debarment programs.agencies have addressed staffing issues through actions such as defining roles and responsibilities , adding positions , and consolidating the suspension and debarment function into one office .

the six agencies also have taken actions such as issuing formal policy and promulgating detailed guidance .

finally , the six agencies have engaged in practices that encourage an active referral process , including establishing positions to ensure cases are referred , developing case management tools that since 2011 , all six allow for referral tracking and case reporting , and establishing training programs .

table 1 summarizes the actions that agencies have taken since 2011 .

we found that all six agencies reported an increase in the number of suspension and debarment actions from fiscal year 2009 to 2013 as shown in table 2 .

the agencies generally experienced a notable increase starting in fiscal year 2011 when they began to take action to incorporate the characteristics associated with active suspension and debarment programs .

agency officials told us that the actions taken since 2011 to incorporate the characteristics associated with active suspension and debarments programs have resulted in an increased level of suspension and debarment activity at their respective agencies , though officials emphasized different factors .

for example , officials from the departments of commerce , state , and the treasury stated that improved coordination between the office of the inspector general and the suspension and debarment official coupled with increased training and awareness resulted in more referrals and the processing of more actions .

while the number of actions treasury reported for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 has been modest , officials told us that 62 actions have been processed in the first 5 months of fiscal year 2014 and they expect continued increases in the number of referrals .

justice officials stated that one factor that may have contributed to an increased number of referrals and actions is the attorney general's january 2012 memorandum to all litigating authorities and the director of the federal bureau of investigation , reminding them to consider whether the facts of a case could be used as a basis for an exclusion or debarment and to coordinate with agency suspension and debarment authorities .

hhs officials noted that an increased number of actions have resulted in part from the office of inspector general providing additional resources for training investigators and auditors on how to make suspension and debarment referrals involving procurement and nonprocurement matters .

officials from dhs attributed an increase in the number of actions at fema and across dhs to having a centralized suspension and debarment office , a directive establishing common standards , increased staffing , and training .

the number of suspension and debarment actions government - wide has increased in recent years , more than doubling from 1,836 in fiscal year 2009 to 4,812 in fiscal year 2013 , as shown in figure 1 .

isdc officials do not consider the overall number of suspensions and debarments as the only measure of success , and emphasized that increased suspension and debarment activity has been coupled with agencies' increased capability to use suspension and debarment appropriately and adhere to the principles of fairness and due process as laid out in the governing regulations .

according to isdc officials , the programmatic improvements made by many agencies are due in part to increased management attention within individual agencies , guidance from omb , and support from the isdc .

omb and isdc have taken a number of actions to strengthen government - wide suspension and debarment efforts .

in response to gao's recommendations , on november 15 , 2011 , omb directed agencies to take a number of actions to address program weaknesses and reinforce best practices in their suspension and debarment programs , including the following: appoint a senior accountable official , if one has not already been designated , to be responsible for assessing the agency's suspension and debarment program and the adequacy of available resources , ensuring that the agency maintains effective internal controls and tracking capabilities , and ensuring that the agency participates regularly on the isdc .

review internal policies , procedures , and guidance to ensure that suspension and debarment are being considered and used effectively .

isdc reported in september 2012 that each of the 24 agencies said it had an accountable official in place responsible for suspension and debarment activities , including assessing the adequacy of available training and resources ; taken steps to address resources , policies , or both — in some cases by dedicating greater staff resources to handle referrals and manage cases and in others by entering into agreements to be mentored by the managers of successful programs ; and procedures to forward possible actions to the suspending and debarring official .

the isdc also has increased its efforts to coordinate government - wide suspension and debarment efforts by promoting best practices and coordinating mentoring and training activities .

for example , the isdc maintains an online library of documents aimed at promoting standardization and has efforts to help agencies develop their suspension and debarment programs to ensure appropriate attention to administrative due process in accordance with the governing regulations .

isdc officials cite robust participation in the isdc , including agencies with mature suspension and debarment programs , which has enabled the isdc to assist agencies in making program improvements and , in some cases , standing up programs where none existed before .

the isdc also conducts training for member agencies , including cosponsoring with the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency an annual debarment workshop .

also , isdc members provide instructors for the debarment training courses offered by the federal law enforcement training centers.understanding of suspension and debarment and holds monthly meetings to discuss topics , including specific suspension and debarment actions and selected agencies' suspension and debarment procedures and tracking tools .

finally , the isdc undertakes outreach to promote the six agencies we reviewed reported that they highly value the functions performed by the isdc as a focal point for government - wide suspension and debarment efforts .

for example , treasury officials told us that they designed their suspension and debarment program around the best practices identified by the isdc , taking advantage of templates , guidance , and mentoring available through the committee .

officials from several agencies noted that the isdc is instrumental in managing an informal process to help agencies coordinate lead agency responsibility when multiple agencies have a potential interest in pursuing suspension and debarment of the same entity .

according to officials from the agencies we reviewed , the isdc regularly distributes information on new potential cases reported by the agencies .

the agencies take into consideration factors such as financial , regulatory , and investigative interests in determining which agency should take the lead in the case .

several of the agencies we reviewed reported that this process helps identify the most appropriate lead , while also involving other agencies that may have a stake in a particular action .

officials from several agencies also reported that isdc monthly meetings provide an important forum through which suspension and debarment officials can seek advice from agency counterparts on a range of issues .

in addition to speaking with officials from the six agencies we reviewed in 2011 , we also reviewed the va's suspension and debarment program to determine if government - wide efforts had affected the program .

based on our review , we found that the va currently has the characteristics associated with active suspension debarment programs .

for example , va has a debarment and suspension committee with a staff of about 10 positions that review all referrals for procurement - related suspension and debarment actions , conduct fact - finding , and present facts and recommendations to the suspension and debarring official .

officials reported that va has taken action to improve its suspension and debarment program in part in response to government - wide efforts .

for example , va's suspension and debarment committee is currently drafting standard operating procedures to reflect leading practices .

va officials reported that the number of procurement - related suspension and debarment actions at va has increased from 34 in fiscal year 2011 to 73 in fiscal year 2013 .

we provided a draft of this report to omb and the departments of commerce , health and human services , justice , homeland security , state , the treasury , and veterans affairs for review and comment .

in an email response , the associate administrator of the office of federal procurement policy commented that omb is pleased with the progress agencies have been making to strengthen their capabilities to consider the use of suspension and debarment when necessary .

further , omb credits the work of the interagency suspension and debarment committee in helping to make many of the achievements possible .

none of the seven agencies we reviewed provided substantive comments , but the departments of commerce , health and human services , and homeland security provided technical comments which we incorporated , as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the director of the office of management and budget ; the attorney general and the secretaries of commerce , health and human services , homeland security , state , the treasury , and veterans affairs .

the report also will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or woodsw@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

individuals who made key contributions to this report were marie mak , director ; tatiana winger , assistant director ; kristine r. hassinger ; angie nichols - friedman ; and russ reiter .

