in the most significant change to the medicare program since its inception , the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ) established an outpatient prescription drug benefit in medicare , known as the part d benefit .

coverage for this new benefit began on january 1 , 2006 .

until this time , medicare , the federal program that finances health care benefits for about 42 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries , had not generally provided coverage for outpatient prescription drugs .

beneficiaries may choose a part d plan from multiple plans offered by private sponsors under contract to the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency that is responsible for administering the medicare program , including the part d benefit .

these plans differ in the drugs they cover and the pharmacies they use .

in addition , the costs to the enrollee for the monthly premium , the annual deductible , and co - payments for covered drugs vary by plan .

as of april 20 , 2006 , more than 30 million of medicare's 42 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a part d plan or had other outpatient prescription drug coverage .

beneficiaries have until may 15 , 2006 , to select a plan without the risk of penalties in the form of higher premiums .

given the newness and complexity of the part d benefit , it is critical that beneficiaries and their advisers , including members of their families , understand the available options so that beneficiaries can make informed decisions on whether to enroll in part d , and if so , which drug plan to choose .

beneficiaries need to compare drug plans in light of their anticipated prescription drug needs and existing arrangements for paying for these drugs .

in addition to comparing costs and drug coverage , beneficiaries need to consider whether the plans they are comparing have contracted with a local or mail - order pharmacy that will provide a convenient means of filling their prescriptions .

as part of its responsibilities , cms has undertaken outreach and education efforts to provide beneficiaries and their advisers with the information they need about part d through various media , including written documents , the 1-800-medicare help line , and the medicare web site .

as of december 2005 , cms has produced more than 70 written documents to explain part d to beneficiaries .

medicare & you — the beneficiary handbook — is the most widely available of these documents and was sent directly to beneficiaries in october 2005 .

other cms documents are targeted to specific groups of beneficiaries , such as dual - eligible beneficiaries and beneficiaries with medicare advantage or medigap policies .

since march 1999 , cms has administered its nationwide 1-800-medicare help line to answer beneficiaries' questions about the medicare program .

as of december 2005 , about 7,500 customer service representatives ( csr ) were handling calls on the help line , which operates 24 hours a day , 7 days a week , and is run by two cms contractors .

calls are answered by an automated system and are routed to a csr for specific questions , including those about part d. cms provides csrs with detailed scripts to use in answering the questions .

csrs type in related keywords to generate a list of suggested scripts for a given question , select the script they consider best suited to the question , and read excerpts or the entire script .

call center contractors write the scripts , and cms checks them for accuracy and completeness .

csrs can also consult other information sources , such as the medicare web site .

cms does not allow csrs to offer individualized guidance to callers , including advice in choosing a drug plan .

cms's medicare web site provides information about all aspects of the medicare program .

the web site contains basic information about the part d benefit ; suggests factors for beneficiaries to consider when choosing a plan ; describes situations common to beneficiaries with guidance on next steps to take in deciding whether to enroll and what plan to choose ; lists frequently asked questions ; and allows users to view , print , or order publications .

in addition , the site contains information on cost , coverage , and convenience of individual plans .

there is also a tool that allows beneficiaries to enroll directly in the plan they have chosen .

cms has also arranged for state health insurance assistance programs ( ship ) to provide part d information on request to medicare beneficiaries and their advisers .

currently , cms provides grants to the 54 ships — one in each state , the district of columbia , the virgin islands , puerto rico , and guam .

state ships provide subgrants to over 1,300 local organizations to assist ships in their efforts .

in total , ships rely on over 12,000 trained counselors , most of whom are volunteers , to provide free counseling and assistance via telephone and face - to - face sessions , public education presentations and programs , and media activities .

widespread confusion among beneficiaries about the costs and coverage under the new benefit has been reported by the media and others .

for example , according to an october 2005 survey by a research organization , some beneficiaries are unaware of the penalties for late enrollment and others did not realize that beneficiaries had to sign up for the benefit .

in light of your interest in ensuring that medicare beneficiaries receive the information they need to make informed decisions , you asked us to examine the quality of the information being provided on the part d benefit .

in this report , we examined the extent to which cms's written documents describe the part d benefit in a clear , complete , and accurate manner ; the effectiveness of cms's 1-800-medicare help line in providing accurate , complete , and prompt responses to callers inquiring about the part d benefit ; whether cms's medicare web site presents information on the part d benefit in a usable manner ; and how cms has used ships to respond to the needs of medicare beneficiaries for information on the part d benefit .

we briefed your staff regarding the results of our review on april 19 , 2006 .

appendix i contains information we provided during our briefing to your staff .

to evaluate cms's written documents describing the part d benefit , we examined 70 relevant cms publications and selected a sample of six documents for in - depth review .

these documents represent a variety of document types , content , and target audiences and include section 6 of the medicare & you beneficiary handbook , which discusses part d. to assess the clarity of the sample documents , we contracted with the american institutes for research ( air ) , a firm with experience in evaluating written documents .

air evaluated the texts by using three standard readability tests ; 60 commonly recognized good communications practices ; and user testing with 11 medicare beneficiaries and 5 advisers to beneficiaries , all of whom were asked to perform 18 specified tasks related to enrollment , coverage , costs , penalty , and informational resources and provide feedback about their experiences .

to evaluate completeness , we reviewed the sample documents to determine if they included sufficient information for the beneficiaries to identify ( 1 ) their next steps in deciding whether to enroll and what plan to choose and ( 2 ) important factors , such as penalty provisions , that could affect their coverage decisions .

to evaluate accuracy , we reviewed the sample documents for consistency with mma , regulations , and cms guidance .

to assess the accuracy , completeness , and promptness of the help line responses , we made 500 calls to 1-800-medicare , posing one of five questions about part d in each call so that each question was asked 100 times .

to develop the questions , we considered topics listed on the medicare web site and topics addressed in scripts frequently accessed by csrs .

to develop our criteria for evaluating the accuracy and completeness of csrs' responses , we used three resources: ( 1 ) the prescription drug finder tool on the medicare web site , ( 2 ) the 1-800- medicare scripts , and ( 3 ) input from cms officials .

we also recorded the length of each call , including wait times , and the time it took to be connected to a csr .

to assess whether the medicare web site presents information on the part d benefit in a usable manner , we contracted with the nielsen norman group ( nn / g ) , a firm with expertise in web design .

nn / g conducted three evaluations: ( 1 ) it calculated an overall usability score for the site — considering factors such as site navigation , customer support , and presentation of online forms — to reflect the ease of finding necessary information and performing various tasks ; ( 2 ) it determined the usability of 137 detailed aspects of the web site , including aspects of web design , online tools , and writing style ; and ( 3 ) it tested the ability of seven participants ( five beneficiaries and two advisers to beneficiaries ) to complete a total of 34 user tests to determine the ease of performing a variety of web - related tasks , such as browsing the site and determining how to join a plan .

we also reviewed the results of cms's analysis of its web site's compliance with requirements that federal government web sites be accessible to people with disabilities .

finally , to examine how cms has used ships to meet the information needs of beneficiaries regarding part d , we obtained information about ships , their funding , changes made in response to the new benefit , and the impact of part d on the demand for ship services .

in addition , we interviewed cms officials who monitor ship activities as well as ship coordinators in the five states with the largest populations of medicare beneficiaries — california , florida , new york , pennsylvania , and texas .

we performed our work from november 2005 through may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

for more information on our methodology , see appendix ii .

within the past 6 months , millions of medicare beneficiaries have been making important decisions about their prescription drug coverage and have needed access to information about the new part d benefit to make appropriate choices .

cms faced a tremendous challenge in responding to this need and , within short time frames , developed a range of outreach and educational materials to inform beneficiaries and their advisers about part d. to disseminate these materials , cms largely added information to existing resources , including written documents , such as medicare & you ; the 1-800-medicare help line ; the medicare web site ; and support for ships .

however , cms has not ensured that its communications to beneficiaries and their advisers are provided in a manner that is consistently clear , complete , accurate , and usable .

six months have passed since these materials were first made available to beneficiaries , and their limitations could result in confusion among those seeking to make coverage decisions .

although the initial enrollment period for part d will end on may 15 , 2006 , cms will continue to play a pivotal role in providing beneficiaries with information about the drug benefit during the year and in subsequent enrollment periods .

cms has an opportunity to enhance its communications on the part d benefit .

this would allow beneficiaries and their advisers to be better prepared when deciding whether to enroll in the benefit , and if enrolling , which drug plan to choose .

in order to improve the part d benefit education and outreach materials that cms provides to medicare beneficiaries , we are recommending that the cms administrator take the following four actions: ensure that cms's written documents describe the part d benefit in a manner that is consistent with commonly recognized communications guidelines and that is responsive to the intended audience's needs .

determine why csrs frequently do not search for available drug plans if the caller does not provide personal identifying information .

monitor the accuracy and completeness of csrs' responses to callers' inquiries and identify tools targeted to improve their performance in responding to questions concerning the part d benefit , such as additional scripts and training .

improve the usability of the part d portion of the medicare web site by refining web - based tools , providing workable site navigation features and links , and making web - based forms easier to use and correct .

we received written comments on a draft of this report from cms ( see app .

iii ) .

cms said that it did not believe our findings presented a complete and accurate picture of its part d communications activities .

cms discussed several concerns regarding our findings on its written documents and the 1-800-medicare help line .

however , cms did not disagree with our findings regarding the medicare web site or the role of ships .

cms also said that it supports the goals of our recommendations and is already taking steps to implement them , such as continually enhancing and refining its web - based tools .

cms discussed concerns regarding the completeness and accuracy of our findings in terms of activities we did not examine , as well as those we did .

cms stated that our findings were not complete because our report did not examine all of the agency's efforts to educate medicare beneficiaries and specifically mentioned that we did not examine the broad array of communication tools it has made available , including the development of its network of grassroots partners throughout the country .

we recognize that cms has taken advantage of many vehicles to communicate with beneficiaries and their advisers .

however , we focused our work on the four specific mechanisms that we believed would have the greatest impact on beneficiaries — written materials , the 1-800-medicare help line , the medicare web site , and the ships .

in addition , cms stated that our report is based on information from january and february 2006 , and that it has undertaken a number of activities since then to address the problems we identified .

although we appreciate cms's efforts to improve its part d communications to beneficiaries on an ongoing basis , we believe it is unlikely that the problems we identified in this report could have been corrected yet given their nature and scope .

cms raised two concerns with our examination of a sample of written materials .

first , it criticized our use of readability tests to assess the clarity of the six sample documents we reviewed .

for example , cms said that common multisyllabic words would inappropriately inflate the reading level .

however , we found that reading levels remained high after adjusting for 26 multisyllabic words a medicare beneficiary would encounter , such as social security administration .

cms also pointed out that some experts find such assessments to be misleading .

because we recognize that there is some controversy surrounding the use of reading levels , we included two additional assessments to supplement this readability analysis — the assessment of design and organization of the sample documents based on 60 commonly recognized communications guidelines and an examination of the usability of six sample documents , involving 11 beneficiaries and 5 advisers .

second , cms expressed concern about our examination of the usability of the six sample documents .

the participating beneficiaries and advisers were called on to perform 18 specified tasks , after reading the selected materials , including a section of the medicare & you handbook .

cms suggested that the task asking beneficiaries and advisers to calculate their out - of - pocket drug costs was inappropriate because there are many other tools that can be used to more effectively compare costs .

we do not disagree with cms that there are a number of ways beneficiaries may complete this calculation ; however , we nonetheless believe that it is important that beneficiaries be able to complete this task on the basis of reading medicare & you , which , as cms points out , is widely disseminated to beneficiaries , reaching all beneficiary households each year .

in addition , cms noted that it was not able to examine our detailed methodology regarding the clarity of written materials — including assessments performed by one of our contractors concerning readability and document design and organization .

we plan to share this information with cms , once our report has become public .

finally , cms took issue with one aspect of our evaluation of the 1-800-medicare help line .

specifically , cms said the 41 percent accuracy rate associated with one of the five questions we asked was misleading , because , according to cms , we failed to analyze 35 of the 100 responses .

however , we disagree .

this question addressed which drug plan would cost the least for a beneficiary with certain specified prescription drug needs .

we analyzed these 35 responses to this question and found the responses to be inappropriate .

the csrs would not provide us with the information we were seeking because we did not supply personal identifying information , such as the beneficiary's medicare number or date of birth .

we considered such responses inappropriate because the csrs could have answered this question without personal identifying information by using cms's web - based prescription drug plan finder tool .

although cms said that it has emphasized to csrs , through training and broadcast messages , that it is permissible to provide the information we requested without requiring information that would personally identify a beneficiary , in these 35 instances , the csr simply told us that our question could not be answered .

cms also said that the bulk of these inappropriate responses were related to our request that the csr use only brand - name drugs .

this is incorrect — none of these 35 responses were considered incorrect or inappropriate because of a request that the csr use only brand - name drugs — as that was not part of our question .

as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days after its date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of the centers for medicare & medicaid services , and other interested parties .

we will also make copies available to others on request .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 312 ) 220-7600 or aronovitzl@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

medicare & you ( section 6: medicare prescription drug coverage ) .

dual - eligible beneficiaries are medicare beneficiaries who receive full medicaid benefits for services not covered by medicare .

medicare advantage replaces the medicare+choice managed care program and expands the availability of private health plan options to medicare beneficiaries .

do you have a medigap policywith prescription drug coverage ? .

sold by private insurers to help pay for medicare cost - sharing requirements , as well as for some services not provided by medicare .

tested the usability of sample documents with 16 participants — 11 medicare beneficiaries , including 1 disabled beneficiary who was under 65 , and 5 advisers to beneficiaries .

everyone was asked to perform 18 specified tasks related to enrollment , coverage , costs , penalty , and informational resources .

they were also asked to provide feedback about their experiences .

although the size of the group was small , research shows that as few as 5 individuals can provide meaningful insights into common problems .

consistency with laws , regulations , and cms guidance .

benefit are written at a reading level that is difficult for many seniors .

reading levels for the sample documents were challenging for at least the 40 percent of seniors , who read at or below the 5th grade level .

reading level estimates for the sample texts1 ranged from 7th grade to postcollege level .

reading levels remain challenging for at least 40 percent of seniors even after adjusting for 26 multisyllabic words , such as medicare , medicare advantage , and social security administration .

after the adjustment , the estimated reading level ranged from 8th to 12th grade .

estimates have a likely margin of error of ± two grades .

documents demonstrated adherence to about half of the 60 commonly recognized written communications guidelines , on average .

desirable features: the documents were written with a respectful and polite tone , were free of clichés and slang , contained useful contact information , included concise and descriptive headings , and generally followed graphic and formatting guidelines .

undesirable features: the documents used too much technical jargon , often did not define difficult terms , included sentences and some paragraphs that were too long , did not use sufficient summaries to assist the reader in identifying key points .

were frustrated by the documents' lack of clarity and often could not complete the 18 assigned tasks .

one of the 18 assigned tasks was completed by all beneficiaries and advisers .

eleven of the 18 assigned tasks were completed by at least half of the beneficiaries and advisers .

four of the 18 assigned tasks were completed by 2 or fewer of the 11 beneficiaries .

nine of the 18 assigned tasks , were completed by 2 or fewer of the 5 advisers .

computing projected total out - of - pocket costs for a plan that provided part d's standard coverage ( successfully completed by none of the 11 beneficiaries and 2 of the 5 advisers ) , evaluating whether it was possible to enroll in medicare part d and keep drug coverage from a retiree health plan ( successfully completed by 2 beneficiaries and 2 advisers ) , and determining the course of action for dual - eligibles who are automatically enrolled in a plan that does not cover all drugs used ( successfully completed by 4 beneficiaries and 1 adviser ) .

to follow .

participants struggled with technical terms , such as “classes of commonly prescribed drugs” and “formulary,” which is a list of drugs covered by a plan .

even when most participants were able to complete the tasks , they expressed confusion and frustration .

relevant contact information , which could aid in identifying next steps for coverage decisions .

all documents reviewed provided the dates of the start of initial program enrollment and coverage .

cumulative effect of the penalty for missing the initial enrollment deadline .

accurate and that the text was consistent with mma , implementing regulations , and agency guidance .

however , we noted a few misleading statements in medicare & you .

the document implied that if a beneficiary's doctor applied for an exception it would be granted , whereas exceptions to the formulary are granted at each plan sponsor's discretion .

the document outlined the minimum requirements for standard coverage by part d plans .

however , it did not indicate that few plans offer this exact coverage and that beneficiaries should be prepared to compare plans with varying premiums , co - payments , and covered drugs to choose plans that best suit them .

our five questions , we used three resources: the prescription drug finder tool on the medicare web site , the 1-800-medicare scripts prepared by cms and contractors for csrs to use in responding to callers' questions , and input from cms officials on the criteria we used to evaluate responses .

to evaluate the promptness of the help line in answering calls , we recorded the length of time it took to connect to a csr for each call .

an accurate and complete response would identify the prescription drug plan that has the lowest estimated annual cost for the drugs the beneficiary uses .

2 .

can a beneficiary who is in a nursing home and not on medicaid sign up for a prescription drug plan ? .

an accurate and complete response would indicate that such a beneficiary can choose whether to enroll in a medicare prescription drug plan .

an accurate and complete response would inform the caller that enrolling for the prescription drug benefit would depend on whether the beneficiary's medigap plan was creditable — that is , whether the coverage it provided was at least as good as medicare's standard prescription drug coverage — or noncreditable .

the csr response would also mention that the beneficiary's medigap plan should have sent him / her information that outlines options .

an accurate and complete response would indicate that a beneficiary has two options: ( 1 ) keep current health plan and join the prescription drug plan later with a penalty ; or ( 2 ) drop current coverage and join a medicare drug plan .

5 .

how do i know if a beneficiary qualifies for extra help ? .

an accurate and complete response would refer the beneficiary to the social security administration .

completeness of responses to our five questions varied significantly , from 41 percent to 90 percent .

csrs accurately and completely answered question 5 ( whether a beneficiary qualifies for extra help ) , which had a specific script , 90 percent of the time .

csrs accurately and completely answered question 2 ( whether a beneficiary in a nursing home , who was not on medicaid , could sign up for the drug benefit ) 79 percent of the time — even though there was no specific script for the question .

csrs' responses for question 3 ( whether a beneficiary with a medigap policy could enroll in the drug benefit ) were accurate and complete 66 percent of the time .

many of the responses were inaccurate because they did not provide adequate information about creditable and noncreditable coverage .

the accuracy and completeness rate for question 4 ( about retiree health insurance ) was 58 percent .

many of the responses were inaccurate because the csrs did not follow the available script or provide sufficient information about the implications of the beneficiary's decision .

csrs' responses to question 1 ( which requires csrs to use the prescription drug plan finder web tool ) were accurate and complete less than 50 percent of the time .

the rate is largely caused by csrs' inappropriate responses — 35 out of 100 times — that they were unable to answer the question without personal identifying information , such as the beneficiary's medicare number or date of birth .

inadvertently disconnected the call ( 19 calls ) .

intentional disconnections were programmed by the telephone company when wait times were projected to exceed 20 minutes ( 3 calls ) .

the prescription drug plan finder web tool used by csrs was not operative at the time of our call ( 1 call ) .

significantly , ranging from no wait to more than 55 minutes .

about 75 percent of calls were connected in less than 5 minutes .

for calls where we waited more than 5 minutes to speak to a csr , the wait time ranged from 5 minutes to over 55 minutes .

sixty - two calls were on hold from 5 to 14 minutes , 59 seconds .

thirty - nine calls were on hold from 15 to 24 minutes , 59 seconds .

twenty - five calls were on hold 25 minutes or more .

for both intentional and unintentional disconnections , we often waited more than 5 minutes before the disconnection occurred .

in one case , we were placed on hold for 54 minutes before being disconnected .

make information and services fully available to individuals with disabilities .

our review included an examination of cms's march 2006 report assessing the compliance of its medicare web site with this federal requirement and discussions with cms officials .

nn / g performed the following three separate evaluations: evaluation one: nn / g calculated an overall score of the site's usability , to reflect the ease of finding necessary information and performing various tasks .

for this calculation , nn / g considered various factors , such as site navigation , customer support , and presentation of online forms .

evaluation two: nn / g evaluated in detail the usability of 137 detailed aspects of the part d benefit portion of the web site .

topics included web design ( eg , home page , navigation , search function , graphics , and organization ) ; tools ( eg , plan finder ) ; writing style ( eg , tone , content , legibility , and readability ) ; accessibility ( eg , availability of site version for the blind ) ; and languages ( eg , links for users who have difficulty reading english ) .

evaluation three: nn / g conducted a total of 34 user tests to determine the ease of performing a variety of web - related tasks , such as browsing the site , making a change in address , finding plan information under certain scenarios , comparing medigap and part d drug coverage , and determining how to join a plan .

nn / g asked five medicare beneficiaries — who were not disabled — and two advisers to beneficiaries to perform one or more user tests each using the web site .

at the end of the user tests , the seven participants were asked to provide feedback about their experiences .

information to assist navigation was often not helpful — for example , text labels associated with links were not always functioning ; and the writing style presented some challenges — for example , material was written at the 11th grade level .

for evaluation three , the 34 user tests showed that the site was a challenge for the seven participants to use .

for example: for 12 of the 34 tests , participants' initial reactions were that they would not be able to complete the tests and wanted to quit trying .

on average , participants were able to proceed slightly more than halfway through each of the 34 tests .

when asked for feedback on their experience with using the site , the seven participants , on average , indicated high frustration levels and low satisfaction .

showed that two requirements were not met: the plan finder did not provide alternative text for all images — that is , there was no text for the screen reader to read .

therefore , images could not be translated into spoken words for the visually impaired .

the plan finder did not allow screen readers to recognize form fields and translate forms into spoken words .

as a result , visually impaired users would not have been able to complete web - based forms .

a cms official told us that the agency made the necessary corrections on april 20 , 2006 , but we did not verify that these corrections were made .

a ship grant year begins on april 1 of the year the funds become available .

help line to ships has increased significantly .

the monthly average of number of calls referred to ships increased from 16,000 referrals for may through september 2005 to approximately 43,000 for october and november 2005 , the months around the time when enrollment in the part d benefit began .

according to cms officials , this increased demand was influenced by callers seeking advice on choosing a drug plan .

unlike csrs on the help line , ship counselors can offer individualized guidance to callers .

to about 35,000 served in all of 2005 .

florida , mostly during november and december of 2005 , held at least six “phone bank” events — where ship counselors were available to take calls on the part d benefit during live newscasts .

florida plans to hold two additional phone banks as the may 15 enrollment deadline approaches .

new york reported nearly doubling its formal training sessions for ship counselors in 2005 , to prepare them for the demand for services related to the part d benefit .

texas counseled 45,719 clients and conducted 523 outreach events from november 15 , 2005 — the official start of the enrollment period — to march 22 , 2006 .

pennsylvania held over 3,000 enrollment events , which were attended by more than 130,000 people , from may 2005 to february 28 , 2006 .

meetings with its regional offices , which interact directly with ship offices , to gauge ships' ability to meet the demands of beneficiaries .

in this report , we assessed ( 1 ) the extent to which the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms ) written documents describe the medicare part d prescription drug benefit in a clear , complete , and accurate manner ; ( 2 ) the effectiveness of cms's 1-800-medicare help line in providing accurate , complete , and prompt responses to callers inquiring about the part d benefit ; ( 3 ) whether cms's medicare web site presents information on the part d benefit in a usable manner ; and ( 4 ) how cms has used state health insurance assistance programs ( ship ) to respond to the needs of medicare beneficiaries for information on the part d benefit .

to obtain information on cms's efforts to educate beneficiaries about part d , we interviewed agency officials responsible for part d written documents , the 1-800-medicare help line , the medicare web site , and ships .

following our briefing of congressional staff on april 19 , 2006 , the briefing slides were updated to reflect cms's reported correction to the medicare web site to comply with section 508 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 .

we determined that the data used were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report .

to assess the clarity , completeness , and accuracy of written documents , we compiled a list of all available cms - issued part d benefit publications intended to inform beneficiaries and their advisers and selected a sample of 6 from the 70 cms documents available , as of december 7 , 2005 , for in - depth review , as shown in table 1 .

the sample part d documents were chosen to represent a variety of publication types , such as frequently asked questions and fact sheets available to beneficiaries about the part d drug benefit .

we selected documents that targeted all beneficiaries or those with unique drug coverage concerns , such as dual - eligibles and beneficiaries with medigap .

to evaluate clarity , we contracted with the american institutes for research ( air ) — a firm with experience in evaluating written material .

air evaluated the texts of the six sample documents using three methodologies: 1. three standard readability tests ; 2 .

60 commonly recognized written communications guidelines , including practices to aid senior readers ; and 3. user testing with 11 medicare beneficiaries and 5 advisers to beneficiaries , who performed 18 specified tasks related to enrollment , coverage , cost , penalty , and information resources and provided feedback about their experiences .

we reviewed the sample documents for completeness to determine whether they contained sufficient information to allow the beneficiaries to identify ( 1 ) their next steps in determining whether to enroll and what plan to choose and ( 2 ) important factors , such as penalty provisions , that could affect their coverage decisions .

to identify those important factors associated with the part d benefit , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and 1-800-medicare scripts prepared for customer service representatives ( csr ) to read to callers and obtained information from advocacy groups .

to evaluate the accuracy of information , we reviewed the sample materials for compliance with laws , regulations , and cms guidance .

to determine the accuracy and completeness of information provided regarding the part d benefit , we placed a total of 500 calls to the 1-800- medicare help line .

we posed one of five questions about part d in each call , so that each question was asked 100 times .

each question was pretested before we finalized its wording .

we randomly placed calls at different times of the day and different days of the week from january 17 to february 7 , 2006 .

our calling times were chosen to match the daily and hourly pattern of calls reported by 1-800-medicare in october 2005 .

we informed cms officials that we would be placing calls ; however , we did not tell them the questions we would ask or the specific dates and times that we would be placing our calls .

to select the five questions , we considered topics identified in the medicare web site's frequently asked questions .

in addition , we considered topics most frequently addressed by 1-800-medicare csrs based on help line reports .

to evaluate the accuracy of csrs' responses to our five questions , we used three resources: ( 1 ) the prescription drug plan finder tool on the medicare web site , ( 2 ) 1-800-medicare scripts , and ( 3 ) input obtained from cms officials on the criteria we used for evaluating csr responses .

table 2 lists the questions we asked and the criteria we used to evaluate the accuracy of responses .

when placing our calls , we identified ourselves as a beneficiary's relative , but did not provide csrs with specific identifying information , such as a medicare beneficiary number or date of birth .

during our calls , csrs were not aware that their responses would be included in a research study .

we recorded the length of each call , including wait times , and the time it took before being connected to a csr .

we evaluated the accuracy and completeness of the responses by csrs to the 500 calls by determining whether key information was provided .

the results from our 500 calls are limited to those calls and are not generalizable to the universe of calls made to the help line .

the questions we asked were limited to matters concerning the part d benefit and do not encompass all of the questions callers might ask .

we contracted with the nielsen norman group ( nn / g ) — a firm with expertise in web design — to assess the usability of the part d information available on the medicare web site .

this study consisted of three separate evaluations .

first , nn / g compared the site's compliance with established usability guidelines to determine a usability score to reflect the ease of finding necessary information and performing various tasks .

specifically , to determine the usability scores , nn / g evaluated various aspects of the web site using industry - recognized “good” web design practices , as indicated by the contractor , and the collective body of knowledge from nn / g internal reports and experts , or nn / g usability guidelines .

second , nn / g determined the degree of difficulty associated with 137 detailed aspects of web site design for the part d portion of the site .

the 137 aspects fall into the following general categories: overall web design ( eg , home page , navigation , search function , graphics , and overall organization ) ; tools ( eg , plan finder ) ; writing style ( eg , content , tone , legibility , and readability ) ; accessibility ( eg , availability of a version of the web site for the blind ) ; and languages ( eg , availability of languages other than english ) .

nn / g determined the difficulty level in using each of the 137 aspects .

nn / g noted aspects that had good design and would not be expected to cause confusion .

for those aspects with a design that would be expected to cause confusion , nn / g ranked the associated difficulty level as high , medium , or low .

third , nn / g performed a qualitative evaluation on january 20 and 23 , 2006 , to test the ability of five medicare beneficiaries and two beneficiary advisers to perform specified tasks related to medicare beneficiaries using the web site and to obtain feedback about participants' experiences .

while the results are not statistically valid , these users provided important insights into the usability of the medicare web site .

participants were asked to “think out loud” as they worked through their tasks , while an nn / g facilitator observed their behavior and took notes .

nn / g gave each task a score .

at the end of their sessions , nn / g asked participants for input regarding their confidence in the answers they obtained from the web site , and their overall satisfaction and frustration levels associated with using the site .

finally , we obtained the results of cms's march 2006 review of its web site's compliance with section 508 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended .

this law requires federal agencies to make the information on their web sites accessible to people with disabilities .

we also discussed the results of this review with agency officials and followed up with them to determine the status of cms's corrective actions .

to determine the role of ships in helping medicare beneficiaries understand part d , we interviewed cms officials who monitor ships' activities .

we also reviewed information that we obtained from cms officials and other sources on the program , its funding , changes made in response to the introduction of part d , and the impact of part d on the demand for ship services .

in addition , we interviewed ship officials in california , florida , new york , texas , and pennsylvania — the five states with the largest medicare populations — to obtain information on the experience of their ships with part d. we conducted our work from november 2005 through may 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in addition to the contact named above , susan t. anthony and geraldine redican - bigott , assistant directors ; ramsey l. asaly ; enchelle bolden ; laura brogan ; shaunessye d. curry ; chir - jen huang ; m. peter juang ; ba lin ; michaela m. monaghan ; roseanne price ; pauline seretakis ; margaret j. weber ; and craig h. winslow made contributions to this report .

