dual - eligible beneficiaries — those qualifying for both medicare and medicaid benefits — accounted for under one - fifth of each program's population but over one - third of each program's spending in 2009 .

dual - eligible beneficiaries are often in poorer health and require more care compared with other medicare and medicaid beneficiaries .

in 2009 , nearly 4 million dual - eligible beneficiaries ( 40 percent ) were under age 65 and qualified for medicare because they were disabled .

compared with aged ( 65 and over ) dual - eligible beneficiaries , disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries have a higher incidence of mental illness and are less likely to live in an institution .

in 2009 , the medicare and medicaid programs spent an estimated $103 billion combined on all disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries .

dual - eligible beneficiaries typically receive their medicare and medicaid benefits through each program separately .

for medicare benefits , beneficiaries may opt to enroll in medicare's traditional fee - for - service ( ffs ) program or in a private medicare advantage ( ma ) plan ( medicare part c ) , which is administered by a managed care organization ( mco ) , under contract with the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , the agency in the department of health and human services that administers the medicare program and oversees state medicaid programs .

in addition , dual - eligible beneficiaries may choose a type of ma plan called a dual - eligible special needs plan ( d - snp ) , which is designed to target the needs of this population .

for medicaid benefits , beneficiaries generally enroll in their state's medicaid ffs program or a medicaid managed care plan administered by an mco under contract with the state .

because the medicare and medicaid programs are separately responsible for covering certain services for dual - eligible beneficiaries , there may not be an incentive for one program to help control costs in the other program .

for example , cms and others have noted that because state medicaid programs do not pay for most of the costs of acute hospitalizations for dual - eligible beneficiaries , there is little incentive for states to ensure that nursing facilities provide a level of care that will avoid unnecessary hospitalizations .

in contrast , an incentive may exist for providers to shift beneficiaries from one type of service to another to increase their payments .

for example , nursing facilities can benefit financially if their residents are hospitalized for 3 days or more and then returned because nursing facility care , which is typically reimbursed by medicaid , generally is reimbursed at a higher rate by medicare for a limited period of time following a hospital stay .

these types of program misalignments can result in unnecessary hospitalizations , which can reduce quality of care and increase medicare costs .

recently , congress and cms have placed greater emphasis on the coordination and integration of medicare and medicaid benefits for dual - eligible beneficiaries .

for example , the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 required d - snps to contract with state medicaid agencies to provide medicaid benefits .

patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ) established a type of d - snp , referred to as a fully integrated dual eligible ( fide ) snp , which — unlike other d - snps — is designed to integrate program benefits for dual - eligible beneficiaries through a single managed care organization , although payment is generally provided separately by each in addition , highly integrated d - snps — including fide - snps — program.that meet certain performance and quality - based standards may seek cms approval to offer benefits beyond what other ma plans may offer if such benefits would help bridge the gap between medicare and medicaid covered services .

only about one - third of the 2012 contracts contained any provisions for benefit integration , and only about one - fifth provided for active care coordination between d - snps and medicaid agencies , which indicates that most care coordination was done exclusively by d - snps , without any involvement of state medicaid agencies .

see gao , medicare special needs plans: cms should improve information available about dual - eligible plans' performance , gao - 12-864 ( washington , d.c.: sept. 13 , 2012 ) .

offices , awarded contracts of up to $1 million to 15 states to design new models of care that integrate the two programs' benefits .

later in 2011 , cms announced a financial alignment demonstration that is intended to further integrate the programs' services .

cms expects that the demonstration will decrease incentives for cost shifting and increase care coordination , resulting in improved care for beneficiaries and savings to medicare and medicaid .

you asked us to examine the characteristics , spending , and service use of disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries to help provide insights for potentially increasing quality while reducing medicare and medicaid spending .

we examined 1 .

medicare and medicaid spending patterns for high - expenditure 2. service use and health status of high - medicare - expenditure and high - medicaid - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries ; 3. the extent to which integrated d - snps have provided high quality of care for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries while controlling medicare spending ; and 4 .

d - snps' and traditional ma plans' performance in serving disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries based on quality and resource use measures .

to examine spending patterns for high - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries , we analyzed 2009 data , the most recent available , from the medicare - medicaid linked enrollee analytic data source ( mmleads ) to determine which beneficiaries had the highest medicare , highest medicaid , and highest combined program spending .

we excluded from our analysis disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries who were not eligible for full medicaid benefits ; were under age 21 ; qualified for medicare due to end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) ; lived outside the 50 united states and washington , d.c. ; did not have full medicare coverage ( parts a and b ) for all eligible months ; or were enrolled in ma for any part of the year .

we also excluded individuals who lived in maine or arizona because we did not have complete data for these states .

we defined high - expenditure beneficiaries as those in the top quintile ( top 20 percent ) of total program spending in their state .

we used spending by state because of the variation in states' medicaid benefits .

we analyzed mmleads and 2009 medicare master beneficiary summary file ( mbsf ) data to examine the distribution of medicare and medicaid spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries compared with other beneficiaries .

we examined the distribution of medicare spending for all covered services ( eg , inpatient hospital stays , outpatient hospital services , physician and other related services , prescription drugs , post - acute care , and durable medical equipment ) and the distribution of medicaid spending for users of different types of long - term services and supports ( ltss ) ( eg , services provided in nursing facilities , intermediate care facilities , or in the community ) .

we also analyzed the patterns of program spending across states for high - expenditure beneficiaries .

to examine service use and health status of high - medicare - expenditure and high - medicaid - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries , we used 2009 data from mmleads and medicare carrier claims to determine the proportion of high - expenditure beneficiaries in each program who used certain services .

we excluded from this analysis the same beneficiaries we excluded from our analysis of spending patterns .

for medicaid services , we focused on the use of different types of ltss .

for medicare services , we focused on the use of three costly acute services — inpatient stays , readmissions , and emergency room visits — and two other categories of services — primary care and mental health .

we also determined the proportion of high - expenditure beneficiaries in each program who had chronic and mental health conditions ( as defined by cms's chronic conditions data warehouse ) .

to calculate d - snps' performance on quality , we used quantile normalization to compare plan performance against 13 measures related to either effectiveness of care or readmissions in the snp healthcare effectiveness data and information set ( hedis ) public use files for performance in 2012 — the most recent data available .

each of the measures contained data for at least 75 percent of the d - snps in the public use files .

we calculated a quality score by using the weighted average performance of d - snps that reported data for all 13 measures ( 74 percent of d - snps with any data for these measures ) .

we weighted measures according to cms's star rating methodology , which recognizes 3 of the 13 measures as outcome - based and assigns those measures a weight of 3 to signify relative importance .

all d - snps categorized as high quality performed better than the national average on at least 2 of the 3 outcome measures and the majority of any measures for which the d - snp reported data .

we ensured these d - snps were not in a contract under sanction by cms .

our high - quality threshold aligned similarly with performance of 4 stars and above in cms's star ratings .

the lowest performing d - snp in a one - plan contract that received at least 4 stars on cms's 2014 part c and overall ratings ( which are mainly based on performance during 2012 ) received a quality score at the 82nd percentile .

furthermore , among d - snps in contracts with a star rating , 31 of the 35 d - snps that met our criteria for high quality also received an overall rating of 4 stars or higher .

none of the d - snps that met our criteria for high quality received a rating below 3.5 stars .

had at least 2 years of experience in serving this population .

we analyzed the 2013 contract year risk - adjusted bids of d - snps relative to the expected medicare ffs spending for those services in the same service area .

we used each plan's projected county enrollments and cms's projected county - level risk - adjusted ffs spending to compute a weighted average of ffs spending in its service area .

we compared high - quality fide - snps that bid below or close to medicare ffs spending with d - snps that projected at least 95 percent of their enrollment in the same service area .

because cms approves benefits flexibility for d - snps that meet standards for integration and quality , we also separately examined the quality and relative bids of d - snps that were approved for benefits flexibility in 2013 .

for additional context , we used the quality and bids relative to medicare ffs spending of highly integrated d - snps that cms approved for flexible benefits to help guide a selection of four fide - snps with high quality of care and four other highly integrated d - snps to interview about their models of care .

to examine d - snps' and traditional ma plans' performance for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries on quality and resource use measures , we analyzed data from the 2011 mbsf and 2011 healthcare effectiveness data and information set ( hedis ) patient level files .

specifically , we evaluated performance on 23 process measures and 7 health outcome measures , as well as resource use measures for three costly acute medicare - covered services: inpatient stays , readmissions , and emergency room visits .

we excluded beneficiaries who were not eligible for full medicaid benefits ; were under age 18 ; qualified for medicare due to esrd ; lived outside the 50 united states and washington , d.c. ; did not have full medicare coverage ( part a and part b ) for the entire year ; were not enrolled in ma for the entire year ; or for whom data were missing or inconsistent .

as some of d - snps' care coordination approaches may be targeted to the sickest beneficiaries , we evaluated performance for all disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries as well as just for those with six or more chronic conditions ( as defined by cms's hierarchical condition categories ) .

to provide additional context , we also evaluated performance for aged dual - eligible beneficiaries , including how d - snps' performance varied by fide designation .

to assess the reliability of the data we used in our analyses , we reviewed related documentation , interviewed knowledgeable officials from cms and its contractors , and performed appropriate electronic data checks .

this allowed us to determine that the data were suitable for our purposes .

we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to august 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

beneficiaries under age 65 may qualify for medicare coverage on the basis of disability ( such as a physical disability , developmental disability , or disabling mental health condition ) .

disabled individuals typically enroll in the federal social security disability insurance program and then have a 24-month waiting period before medicare benefits begin .

during the waiting period , low - income individuals who qualify for the supplemental security income program ( ssi ) in their state can also qualify for medicaid coverage .

ssi is a means - tested income assistance program that provides cash benefits to individuals who meet certain disability criteria and have low levels of income and assets .

after the medicare waiting period ends , beneficiaries become dually enrolled in both programs .

medicare becomes the primary payer for most services , but medicaid continues to cover benefits not offered by medicare .

medicare coverage for dual - eligible beneficiaries includes hospitalizations , physician services , prescription drugs , skilled nursing facility care , home health visits , and hospice care .

under medicaid , states are required to cover certain items and services for dual - eligible beneficiaries , including nursing facility services and home health services .

although states are required to cover certain populations and services , they have the option to expand coverage beyond these mandatory levels , and accordingly state medicaid programs vary in scope .

compared with aged dual - eligible beneficiaries , disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries in 2009 were more likely to be male and african - american , and they tended to have a much higher incidence of mental illness .

however , they had a far lower incidence of three or more chronic conditions and were less likely to be institutionalized .

in terms of relative spending , disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries had lower per capita medicare spending but higher per capita medicaid spending in 2009 .

however , among beneficiaries who did not use ltss , per capita medicare and medicaid spending were both slightly higher for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries .

disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries were less likely to live in an institution than aged dual eligible beneficiaries ; however , among those that did , medicaid spending was significantly higher than for aged dual - eligible beneficiaries in institutions .

see table 1 .

in addition to requiring snps to meet all the requirements of other ma plans , cms requires snps to provide specialized services targeted to the needs of their unique beneficiaries , including beneficiaries with certain severe and disabling chronic conditions , beneficiaries who live in institutions , or beneficiaries dually enrolled in both the medicare and medicaid programs .

snps that provide specialized services , such as case management , for dual - eligible beneficiaries are referred to as d - snps .

cms pays d - snps the same way that it pays other ma plans , that is , a monthly amount determined by the plan bid — the plan's estimated cost of providing medicare part a and part b benefits — in relation to a benchmark , which is the maximum amount the medicare program will pay ma plans in a given locality .

cms then adjusts the monthly payments to ma plans on the basis of beneficiaries' risk scores .

for ma plans that bid below the benchmark , cms provides a rebate that is modified by an overall assessment of quality at the contract level using a 5-star rating scale based on measures of clinical quality and patients' reported care experience for medicare part c and part d. cms designates certain d - snps as fide - snps , which is a designation for plans that integrate medicare and medicaid program benefits for dual - eligible beneficiaries through a single mco .

all fide - snps are financially at risk for enrollees' nursing facility services for at least 6 months of the year .

in 2013 , cms designated 35 fide - snps that enrolled about 98,000 beneficiaries across seven states .

beginning in contract year 2013 , cms may give certain d - snps that meet a high standard of integration and specified performance and quality - based standards the flexibility to offer supplemental benefits beyond those that cms currently allows for other ma plans if the agency determines these benefits would better integrate care .

this benefits flexibility is designed to assist dual - eligible beneficiaries who are at risk of institutionalization to remain in the community and may prevent health status decline and reduce the quantity and cost of health care services .

as part of the qualifying criteria that cms currently applies to benefits flexibility , the agency requires d - snps either to be in a contract with a 3 star ( or higher ) overall rating for the previous contract year or , if the d - snp is part of a contract that does not have sufficient enrollment to generate a star rating , to score 75 percent or above on five of seven specific snp plan - level hedis measures .

for 2013 , cms approved 21 highly integrated d - snps for benefits flexibility that enrolled about 75,000 beneficiaries .

in 2011 , cms announced a financial alignment demonstration that is intended to align medicare and medicaid services and funding to reduce costs and improve the quality of care for dual - eligible beneficiaries .

as of june 2014 , 12 states have been approved to participate in the demonstration and 4 states have active proposals pending.demonstration is authorized for at least 3 years .

most states participating in the financial alignment demonstration plan to use a capitated model .

under the capitated model , cms and states provide a single capitated payment to health plans to provide all medicare and medicaid benefits to enrolled dual - eligible beneficiaries .

payment rates to health plans will be reduced up front each year based on a predetermined combined medicare and medicaid savings estimate by cms .

in general , cms and states expect the savings percentages to increase during the second and third years of the demonstration .

furthermore , to encourage quality of care improvements , cms and states will withhold a portion of the payments — starting at 1 percent in the first year and up to 3 percent in the third year — that participating health plans can earn back by meeting a certain threshold of performance on quality measures .

cms expects that the capitated model will result in savings ( 1 ) to medicare by reducing hospital admissions , emergency room visits , and skilled nursing care , and ( 2 ) to medicaid by avoiding costly long - term nursing home care .

at the same time , cms expects that there may be increased use of primary care services , outpatient services , behavioral health services , and community - based ltss , due to a greater emphasis on care coordination and maintaining beneficiaries in the community .

although cms projects that approximately 61 to 75 percent of savings will come from reductions in costly medicare - covered services , the agency requires that — as part of a more integrated approach — both the medicare and medicaid programs adjust their payment rates to plans based on aggregate savings percentages .

in massachusetts's demonstration , only disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries between the ages of 21 and 64 are eligible for enrollment .

voluntary enrollment for the program began on october 1 , 2013 , and passive enrollment — whereby individuals are automatically enrolled in the program but can opt out — began january 1 , 2014 .

since 2004 , massachusetts has separately participated in a financial alignment program for dual - eligible beneficiaries age 65 and older known as senior care options .

this program provides all of the services covered by medicare and masshealth — the massachusetts medicaid program — and is funded by a combined capitated payment from both programs .

high medicaid spending for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries drove high combined ( medicare and medicaid ) program spending for these beneficiaries .

beneficiaries ranked within the top 20 percent — or top quintile — of spending in their respective states accounted for more than 60 percent of national combined program spending for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries .

furthermore , for these high - expenditure beneficiaries , nearly two - thirds ( 63 percent ) of combined program spending was medicaid spending and slightly over one - third ( 37 percent ) was medicare spending .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

high - expenditure beneficiaries in the top combined spending quintile were also more likely to be in the top medicaid spending quintile in their states than in the top medicare spending quintile .

specifically , 72 percent of high - expenditure beneficiaries were in the top medicaid spending quintile , while 54 percent of these beneficiaries were in the top medicare spending quintile .

only 26 percent of high - expenditure beneficiaries were in both the top medicare and the top medicaid spending quintiles in their states .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

just over half ( 52 percent ) of medicaid spending for high - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries was for those who used community - based ltss , while for low - expenditure beneficiaries ( those in the bottom combined spending quintile ) , community - based ltss users accounted for only 4 percent of medicaid spending .

inpatient stays accounted for the largest share ( 39 percent ) of medicare spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries but accounted for less than 1 percent of medicare spending for low - expenditure beneficiaries .

because medicaid benefits differ across states , per capita medicaid spending for high - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries varied more across states than per capita medicare spending did .

per capita medicaid spending for these beneficiaries ranged from about $27,000 in michigan to about $188,000 in new york , while per capita medicare spending ranged from about $18,000 in north dakota to about $49,000 in florida .

largely because of the variation in medicaid spending , combined program spending ranged from about $68,000 in alabama to about $220,000 in new york .

although states with greater per capita medicaid spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries often had less per capita medicare spending , they were usually among the states with the greatest per capita combined ( see fig .

3. ) .

for example , 5 of the 10 states with the greatest spending.per capita medicaid spending had per capita medicare spending that was less than the average across states .

nevertheless , all 10 states were among those with the greatest per capita combined spending .

in fact , 17 of the 20 states with the greatest per capita medicaid spending were also among those with the greatest per capita combined spending .

because the majority of spending for high - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries was for beneficiaries who used community - based ltss , and because cms expects to see an increase in the use of these services under the financial alignment demonstration , we repeated this analysis for only beneficiaries who used community - based ltss and found similar results .

states that had greater per capita medicaid spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries who used community - based ltss tended to have less per capita medicare spending but greater per capita combined spending for these beneficiaries .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

in particular , 8 of the 10 states with the greatest per capita medicaid spending for community - based ltss users had per capita medicare spending that was less than the average across states .

nevertheless , 9 of the 10 states with the greatest per capita medicaid spending were among the 10 states with the greatest per capita combined spending .

the services most commonly used by disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries in the top medicare - spending quintile and those in the top medicaid - spending quintile often differed widely .

as expected — because medicare is the primary payer for acute hospital stays — beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures were highly likely to use inpatient services .

however , a relatively low percentage of beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures used these services .

in contrast , beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures were much more likely than beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures to use ltss — particularly community - based ltss .

 ( see fig .

5. ) .

beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures were also more likely to use community - based ltss and less likely to use inpatient services than most beneficiaries with lower medicaid expenditures .

despite differences in service use , high - medicare - expenditure and high - medicaid - expenditure disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries had similar utilization levels of medicare - covered primary care and mental health services .

nearly 80 percent of beneficiaries in each group received at least one primary care service , and approximately 40 percent of beneficiaries in each group received at least one mental health service .

both groups also were more likely to receive primary care or mental health services than beneficiaries with lower expenditures in their respective programs .

 ( see app .

i for more information on the use of selected medicare and medicaid services by disabled dual - eligible beneficiary expenditure levels. ) .

disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures were considerably more likely than beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures to have multiple chronic or mental health conditions .

about 35 percent of beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures had six or more chronic conditions , compared with 14 percent of beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures .

in addition , 25 percent of beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures had three or more mental health conditions , compared with 13 percent of beneficiaries with high medicaid expenditures .

the presence of multiple health conditions may drive the use of costly medicare services among beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures .

as the number of chronic and mental health conditions increased among these beneficiaries , the average number of emergency room visits , inpatient stays , and readmissions also increased .

the increase in the average number of emergency room visits was particularly dramatic as the number of mental health conditions increased .

 ( see fig .

6. ) .

furthermore , as the number of chronic conditions increased , the percentage of beneficiaries with high medicare expenditures who had at least one inpatient admission increased substantially , although as the number of mental health conditions increased , the percentage was relatively stable .

fide - snps in 2013 were far more likely than other d - snps to meet criteria for high quality .

among those that reported sufficient data to receive a quality score , 14 ( 56 percent ) of the 25 fide - snps met criteria for high quality but only 24 ( 14 percent ) of all other 169 d - snps met these criteria .

while fide - snps often received an overall quality score within the top two quintiles , 7 fide - snps ( 28 percent ) scored below this mark , including 6 fide - snps that scored below the 40th percentile and 3 fide - snps that scored below the 25th percentile .

the 14 high quality fide - snps operated across four states under programs through which all d - snps fully integrated medicare and medicaid benefits .

in contrast , all 6 fide - snps that operated outside of these four states received a quality score below the 60th percentile .

while 207 ( 64 percent ) of the 323 d - snps in 2013 served disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries , only 13 ( 37 percent ) of the 35 fide - snps served this population ( see fig .

7 ) .

the proportion of disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries in each of these 13 fide - snps ranged from 12 percent to nearly all of plan enrollment .

these 13 d - snps operated across four states .

among the 22 fide - snps that did not serve disabled beneficiaries , most operated in state fully integrated programs that excluded this population from enrollment in those plans .

furthermore , only 2 fide - snps met criteria for high quality and served disabled beneficiaries .

while 11 of the 21 highly integrated d - snps that cms approved for 2013 benefits flexibility were high quality fide - snps , cms's quality requirements did not prevent some d - snps with relatively low quality from being approved for benefits flexibility .

although cms approved 18 of the 21 d - snps for benefits flexibility through their contract star rating , only d - snps without a star rating are assessed for quality at the plan level .

just 3 of the 18 d - snps approved through their contract star rating would have met cms's plan - level quality requirements .

furthermore , 3 of the 18 d - snps approved for benefits flexibility through their star rating performed below the median quality score , including the only two d - snps approved with an overall star rating of 3.0 .

only 8 of the 35 fide - snps — and 3 of the 14 with high quality — bid below medicare ffs spending in 2013 , an indication that these plans can provide standard medicare part a and b benefits at a lower cost than what medicare would have likely spent for these beneficiaries in ffs .

also , only 3 fide - snps that served disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries bid below medicare ffs spending , and none of these met criteria for high quality.medicare ffs spending , only 2 bid within 3 percentage points of ffs spending .

on average ( weighted by july 2013 enrollment ) , the 35 fide - snps bid 6 percent above ffs spending , and the 14 high quality fide - among the 11 high quality fide - snps that bid at or above snps bid 3 percent above ffs spending.fide designation bid 4 percent below ffs spending .

in contrast , d - snps without a prior gao research found that ma plans in service areas with high medicare ffs spending were more likely to bid below medicare ffs spending than ma plans in service areas with low ffs spending ; fide - snps in 2013 generally followed that pattern .

that bid below ffs spending , five operated in the 70th percentile or higher of ma service area ffs spending , two operated between the 60th and 70th percentiles , and only one operated below the median .

in addition , among the 10 fide - snps that bid below ffs spending or had high quality and bid within 3 percentage points above ffs spending , 5 operated in the same service area as d - snps that were not fully integrated .

in each of these 5 cases , total bids as a percentage of ffs spending were lower for d - snps with less integration of medicare and medicaid benefits .

furthermore , fide - snps were not notably more likely to bid below ffs spending based on cms approval for benefits flexibility , not - for - profit status , relatively smaller projected profit margin , or plan enrollment size above 1,000 .

see gao , medicare advantage: comparison of plan bids to fee - for - service spending by plan and market characteristics , gao - 11-247r ( washington , d.c.: feb. 4 , 2011 ) .

d - snps' performance for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries relative to traditional ma plans' was similar on average for process measures , but was moderately better on health outcome measures .

on average , d - snps' relative performance on 23 process measures ( including screening for certain diseases and annual monitoring for patients on certain prescriptions ) was 1 percentage point higher both for all beneficiaries and for those with six or more chronic conditions .

while d - snps performed better on approximately two - thirds of the process measures,from 6 percentage points lower to 9 percentage points higher for all beneficiaries , and by an even wider range for those with six or more chronic conditions .

in contrast , on average , d - snps' performance on seven health outcome measures ( including maintaining healthy cholesterol , blood pressure , and blood sugar levels ) was 5 percentage points higher for all beneficiaries and 7 percentage points higher for those with six or more chronic conditions .

d - snps' relative performance was consistently better on each health outcome measure — ranging from 3 to 6 percentage points higher for all beneficiaries and 2 to 16 percentage points higher for those with six or more chronic conditions .

 ( see table 2. ) .

these results suggest that cms's expectations regarding the extent to which integration of benefits will produce savings through lower use of costly medicare services may be optimistic .

whether cms and participating states will be able to improve quality without increasing overall program spending for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries is uncertain .

while increasing the use of community - based ltss may improve the quality of care for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries who utilize those services , community - based ltss users drove high combined program spending for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries .

likewise , states with the highest per capita medicaid spending for disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries were usually among the states with the highest overall program spending .

in addition , the wide differences in health characteristics between disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries with the highest medicare spending and those with the highest medicaid spending may indicate the potential challenge of providing additional services without disproportionately impacting the costs of each program .

although most disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries with the highest medicaid spending used community - based ltss to assist them with activities of daily living , these beneficiaries generally did not have the numerous chronic conditions associated with those who had the highest medicare spending .

furthermore , if the models of care in the financial alignment demonstrations or other integrated models build on fully integrated d - snp models , these efforts may improve the care provided to dual - eligible beneficiaries but may not produce significant medicare savings for dual - eligible beneficiaries .

d - snps that fully integrated medicare and medicaid benefits were far more likely than other d - snps to meet criteria for high quality but usually operated under fully integrated state programs that excluded disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries from enrollment .

regardless of whether they served disabled beneficiaries , high quality fully integrated d - snps did not usually demonstrate the potential for medicare savings .

in addition , many fully integrated d - snps that demonstrated the potential for medicare savings operated in service areas where d - snps with less integration of benefits demonstrated more potential for medicare savings .

our findings also suggest that even if there is moderate improvement in the performance of health outcome measures , and if dual - eligible beneficiaries are enrolled in plans specifically designed for them , instead of enrolled in traditional ma plans , these conditions are not necessarily sufficient to reduce disabled dual - eligible beneficiaries' use of costly medicare services .

despite moderately better performance on health outcome measures for both disabled and aged dual - eligible beneficiaries , the fact that d - snps had similar levels of costly medicare - covered services ( i.e. , inpatient admissions , readmissions , and emergency room visits ) as traditional ma plans for this population has significant implications for program costs .

furthermore , for dual - eligible beneficiaries with six or more chronic conditions — a group that is at risk for high medicare spending — although d - snps had better relative performance on health outcome measures , they still had similar , if not higher , levels of costly medicare - covered services .

we provided a draft of this report to cms for comment .

cms did not have any general comments .

the agency provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of health and human services , interested congressional committees , and others .

the report also is available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or cosgrovej@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

any long - term services and supports ( ltss ) .

in addition to the contact named above , individuals making key contributions to this report include catina bradley , assistant director ; phyllis thorburn , assistant director ; alison binkowski ; aubrey naffis ; and luis serna iii .

todd anderson , emily johnston , elizabeth t. morrison , and hemi tewarson also provided valuable assistance .

