the growing cost of brand - name prescription drugs can be a burden on patients , payers , and providers of health care — particularly when price increases are large and occur suddenly .

controlling rising prescription drug prices helps to ensure that patients can afford medically necessary and sometimes life - saving medications , and to moderate costs for hospitals and third - party payers such as insurance plans and state and federal governments .

however , a hearing held in july 2008 by the joint economic committee drew attention to certain prescription drugs that recently had an extraordinary price increase — a price increase equal to 100 percent or more at a single point in time .

drug manufacturers may consider several factors when setting prices for brand - name prescription drugs , including a drug's patent status and market exclusivity .

patents and market exclusivity may provide a limited period of protection from competition , thereby allowing a drug company to recoup research and development costs and earn a return on its financial investment .

drug manufacturers may obtain patents or patent extensions from the u.s. patent and trademark office .

in addition , independent of a drug product's patent status , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act authorizes various periods of market exclusivity for drug products .

in this report , gao studied extraordinary price increases for brand - name prescription drugs .

specifically , we examined ( 1 ) the frequency of extraordinary price increases for brand - name prescription drugs from 2000 to 2008 , ( 2 ) the characteristics of the brand - name prescription drugs that had extraordinary price increases , and ( 3 ) the factors that contributed to the extraordinary price increases experienced by these brand - name prescription drugs .

to determine the frequency of extraordinary price increases , we reviewed the average wholesale price ( awp ) for all brand - name prescription drugs in thomson reuters' red book , and identified all extraordinary price increases — a unit price increase of 100 percent or more at a single point in time — from 2000 to 2008 .

red book includes drug prices for each package size ( for example , 30 , 60 , or 100 tablets ) and dosage form ( for example , tablet or injection ) of a brand - name drug .

we report the frequency of extraordinary price increases in two ways — by drug brand ( or drug label name as recorded in red book ) and by brand - name drug product .

for the drug brand frequencies , we counted an extraordinary price increase if the price of any version of a brand - name drug increased by 100 percent or more at a single point in time .

for brand - name drug products , we counted each extraordinary price increase for each version — drug strength and dosage form — of the brand - name drug separately .

for example , if both the 1mg and 5mg tablet versions of a drug had extraordinary price increases , we categorized this as one drug brand increase , and as two brand - name drug product increases ( one for each version of the brand - name drug ) .

the frequencies of extraordinary price increases reported include brand - name drug products that were repackaged for resale to health care providers such as hospitals or physicians .

to identify the characteristics of brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase , we used red book data on therapeutic class and price .

to identify the factors that may contribute to extraordinary price increases , we interviewed drug policy experts ; academic researchers ; state and federal government officials ; consumer advocates ; insurance company representatives ; and representatives from hospital , health insurance , and retail pharmacy associations .

to illustrate the factors that may contribute to extraordinary price increases , we developed case studies of six different brand - name drugs from different drug companies identified from our analysis of red book data .

each brand - name drug that was active in the market as of december 31 , 2008 and that had an extraordinary price increase was eligible for selection for the case study .

to achieve variability in the characteristics of the brand - name drugs reviewed for the case study , our selection was based on several factors , including a drug's price , the level of the percentage increase , whether the drug had more than one extraordinary price increase between 2000 and 2008 , availability of the drug from multiple sources , and permanence of the price increase .

to gain an understanding of the market and other dynamics leading to the extraordinary price increase experienced by each brand - name drug in our case studies , we interviewed representatives of the companies that manufacture and distribute these brand - name drugs , and obtained information about each drug company's business strategy from the companies' web sites , annual and quarterly reports , and other resources .

 ( see app .

i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) .

we reviewed the red book data file to assess its reliability .

this review involved an assessment of the variables in red book to identify incorrect and erroneous entries or extreme outliers .

we compared a random sample of the pricing data reported in red book with pricing data in another drug pricing compendium .

based on this review , we determined that the data used in this report were adequate for our purposes .

we conducted our work from october 2008 through december 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform our engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product .

extraordinary price increases for brand - name drugs can lead to substantially higher drug spending for public and private insurance plans , hospitals , and other providers that cover prescription drugs .

patients may also face higher out - of - pocket costs and reduced access to medically necessary and sometimes life - saving drugs .

in addition , extraordinary price increases for brand - name drugs may contribute to overall drug spending , which has increased an average of about 10 percent a year since 2000 .

as reported during the joint economic committee hearing , a small but growing subset of drugs have had very large and sudden price increases since 2000 , raising questions about the competitiveness of the prescription drug marketplace .

brand - name drugs are drug products that have received fda approval and typically have patent protection .

after the patent and any applicable period of market exclusivity expires , these drugs are still considered brand - name drugs , but other drug companies may develop a generic equivalent — a similar drug that contains the same active ingredient , strength , dosage form , route of administration , and intended use .

the fda reviews and approves both brand - name and generic prescription drugs .

brand - name drugs may be supplied to health care providers from companies other than a drug's manufacturer .

for example , brand - name drugs may be repackaged from large drug inventories into smaller packages , and sold by a repackaging company using a unique national drug code ( ndc ) .

repackagers include health maintenance organizations , pharmacies , and private companies .

repackagers are required to follow fda guidelines , such as registering annually with the fda and labeling drugs under the same brand name .

repackagers may obtain prescription drugs from wholesalers , and sell the repackaged drugs to health care providers such as hospitals or physicians who then dispense them to patients .

proponents of repackaged drugs believe that they offer convenience to patients and may reduce medication errors .

however , some experts suggest that repackaging drugs may unnecessarily increase drug prices and profits .

repackagers may assign awps for repackaged drugs that differ from the awp suggested by the drug's manufacturer .

patents and market exclusivity protect prescription drugs by limiting competition for a set period of time .

a drug manufacturer may seek a 20-year patent on various aspects of its new chemical entity from the u.s. patent and trademark office .

once a patent is granted , other drug manufacturers are excluded from making , using , or selling the patented formula during the life of the patent .

companies that develop new brand - name drugs generally obtain a patent on the active ingredient used in the drug .

patents may be granted for other properties of a brand - name drug , such as its formulation and composition , and / or method of use .

after receiving a patent on a brand - name drug , drug companies typically seek approval from the fda for use of the drug to treat certain indications .

market exclusivity may be granted for approved drugs and is independent of the rights granted by a patent .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act authorizes various periods of market exclusivity for drug products .

generally , market exclusivities prevent the fda from approving any application for a competing drug compound for a stated period of time .

these exclusivities may relate to new chemical entities ( 5 years ) , previously approved drugs with a new application that is based on new clinical studies ( 3 years ) , generic drugs ( 180 days ) , drugs tested for use in children ( 6 months ) , and orphan drugs ( 7 years ) .

market exclusivity and patent protection may run concurrently .

the joint economic committee hearing in july 2008 identified certain brand - name drugs which treat rare diseases that experienced extraordinary price increases .

incentives are available for drug companies to develop innovative drugs for rare diseases ( orphan drugs ) .

in addition to the 7-year market exclusivity status , these incentives may include tax incentives of up to 50 percent of the cost of clinical research , and a waiver of fda fees .

research grants are also available through the fda for the development of drugs used to treat rare diseases or conditions .

according to experts , the drug industry's traditional business model is changing .

in the past , large drug companies conducted research and development on several drugs , with the goal of releasing one or more “blockbuster” drugs that treat a large population and can earn billions of dollars .

recently , drug companies have increasingly focused on specialty drugs that target niche markets , or a smaller population of people with a narrow indication or medical condition .

according to experts and industry representatives , the pace of consolidation among drug companies through mergers and acquisitions and transfers of drug ownership rights has increased .

fewer companies producing and marketing drugs can lead to greater market domination among certain companies and less competition .

in addition , large drug companies have purchased other drug companies that specialize in manufacturing drugs targeting niche populations or drugs in similar therapeutic classes .

according to some economists , the usual mechanisms that enforce market discipline may not work in the same manner in the health care market .

in most markets — automobiles , for example — consumers are expected to be conscious of the price of goods .

if a company raises the price of its goods , consumers would likely purchase fewer goods , causing the company's revenues to decline .

however , health care providers influence demand because they typically act on behalf of patients , who may remain unaware of drug costs .

if the patient is insured and their medical bills are paid by a third - party payer , then demand may not be significantly influenced by changes in price to the extent that it might be in other markets .

some price restraint may be provided by pharmacy benefit managers and health plans that use drug formularies to negotiate price rebates on brand name prescription drugs .

according to industry representatives and experts , drug companies may consider several issues when setting the price of a drug .

these include: ( 1 ) the perceived value of a drug relative to its competitors , such as its ease of use ; ( 2 ) the unique characteristics of a drug , such as its novelty , the frequency of administration , and safety ; ( 3 ) the cost of therapeutically alternative drugs and alternative therapies , such as surgery , medical devices , and existing drugs ; ( 4 ) the disease treated ; ( 5 ) the size and characteristics of the patient market ; ( 6 ) research and development , manufacturing , and marketing costs ; ( 7 ) the willingness of customers to pay for the drug ; and ( 8 ) the amount of reimbursement for the drug from third - party payers .

to mitigate high drug prices some companies subsidize the price of some of their brand - name drugs through a patient assistance program to low - income uninsured or underinsured patients .

while prescription drug pricing in the private sector is not subject to federal regulation , drug companies are subject to antitrust enforcement .

the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) enforce federal antitrust laws that prohibit activities such as mergers and acquisitions that may substantially reduce competition or create a monopoly .

companies are required to notify the ftc and doj of certain pending mergers , also known as the pre - merger notification program .

in addition , the ftc has authority to investigate and take action against unfair methods of competition affecting commerce , including in the drug industry .

price fixing agreements between businesses , certain monopolies , and other anticompetitive conduct are subject to review and enforcement action .

ftc officials indicated that the ftc has not brought a case against a drug company for charging extraordinarily high prices because such activity is not expressly prohibited by federal law , and because high drug prices in the absence of anticompetitive behavior are not per se illegal .

the ftc has challenged anticompetitive patent settlements between brand - name and generic drug manufacturers .

for example , ftc officials indicated that the agency has filed cases challenging “pay - to - delay” settlements in which a brand - name manufacturer shares a portion of its future profits with a potential generic competitor in exchange for an agreement to delay marketing the generic prescription drug .

finally , drugs must be manufactured in accordance with fda regulations called good manufacturing practices , and the fda inspects manufacturing facilities before a drug can be approved .

good manufacturing practices are designed to ensure the safety and quality of drug products and lay out minimum standards for the facilities and equipment used in manufacturing drug products .

all drug manufacturers — including companies that acquire the rights to a drug from another manufacturer — are required to comply with good manufacturing practices .

between 2000 and 2008 , 416 brand - name drug products representing 321 drug brands had extraordinary price increases .

most often , these extraordinary price increases ranged from 100 percent to 499 percent , but in a few cases were 1,000 percent or more .

from 2000 to 2008 , 416 brand - name drug products representing 321 drug brands had an extraordinary price increase .

a number of these 321 drug brands had two or more extraordinary price increases between 2000 and 2008 .

the number of brand - name drug products that had these extraordinary price increases each year trended upwards , more than doubling from 2000 to 2008 ; however , they represent about half of 1 percent of all brand - name drug products .

 ( see table 1 for the frequency of extraordinary price increases. ) .

most brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase sustained the new price after the extraordinary price increase occurred .

for example , following the extraordinary price increase , about 87 percent of the brand - name drug products remained at the increased price , or had another increase in price , and only 13 percent had a decrease in price .

a number of these brand - name drug products had more than one extraordinary price increase .

for example , 21 of the 416 brand - name drug products had more than one extraordinary price increase between 2000 and 2008 , and 9 of those 21 brand - name drug products had more than one extraordinary price increase in the same year .

the 416 brand - name drug products were sold by 91 drug companies , and 12 of these 91 drug companies sold brand - name drug products that had more than one extraordinary price increase between 2000 and 2008 .

furthermore , 4 of these 91 drug companies sold brand - name drug products that had more than one extraordinary price increase within the same year .

 ( see app .

ii for a list of brand - name drugs that had an extraordinary price increase. ) .

most extraordinary price increases — for 357 of the 416 brand - name drug products with extraordinary price increases — ranged from 100 percent to 499 percent .

overall , the median increase for brand name drug products was about 158 percent .

however , some brand - name drug products had very large extraordinary price increases .

for example , 26 brand - name drug products had extraordinary price increases greater than 1,000 percent — a tenfold increase .

the largest extraordinary price increase for brand - name drug products was about 4,200 percent .

 ( see table 2 for the frequency of extraordinary price increases by percent increase. ) .

in addition , 7 brand - name drug products had extraordinary price increases of 500 percent or more multiple times from 2000 to 2008 .

brand - name drug products that had extraordinary price increases shared similar characteristics including therapeutic class , cost , or packaging .

while extraordinary price increases occurred in 20 therapeutic classes , more than half of the increases fell into 3 therapeutic classes — central nervous system agents , anti - infective agents , and cardiovascular agents .

most extraordinary price increases were for brand - name drug products costing less than $25 per unit .

depending on the condition treated and length of treatment , the full cost of treatment for a drug could total several thousand dollars .

more than half of all extraordinary price increases were for repackaged brand - name drug products .

while extraordinary price increases for brand - name drug products occurred in 20 therapeutic classes , the majority of the drugs — 52 percent — that had extraordinary price increases fell into 3 therapeutic classes — central nervous system , anti - infective , and cardiovascular drugs .

central nervous system — 126 brand - name drug products had extraordinary price increases .

central nervous system drugs include sedatives an or anxiety .

d antidepressants , and are typically used to treat depression anti - infective — 55 brand - name drug products had extraordinary price increases .

anti - infect bacteria , or viruses .

ive drugs are used to treat infections caused by fungi , cardiovascular drugs — 35 brand - name drug products had extraordinary price increases .

cardiov used to treat the heart .

ascular drugs such as anti - arrhythmia agents are the remaining 17 therapeutic classes comprised 192 brand - name drug products that had extraordinary price increases .

 ( see ta of extraordinary price increases by therapeutic class. ) .

ninety - six percent of brand - name drug products that had extraordinary price increases cost less than $25 per unit prior to the price increase .

overall , brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase ranged in price from $0.01 per unit to $5,400 per unit prior to the price increase .

the median price of the brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase rose from $1.66 per unit before the increase to $4.70 per unit after the increase .

 ( see table 4 for the frequency of extraordinary price increases by price level. ) .

it is important to note that the unit price of a drug is only one factor in determining the cost of a full course of treatment for a medical condition .

other factors affecting cost include the total number of units prescribed and the duration of the treatment .

for example , the full cost of treatment for a drug that is priced less than $25 per unit could total several thousand dollars or more .

one of the drugs we reviewed that is used to treat a rare cancer cost $390 for a full course of treatment prior to the extraordinary price increase .

after two extraordinary price increases , the full cost of a course of treatment rose to more than $3,000 .

more than half of the brand - name drug products that had extraordinary price increases were repackaged — that is , purchased from drug manufacturers or wholesalers and resold in smaller packages to health care providers such as hospitals or physicians .

 ( see table 5 for frequency of extraordinary price increases for repackaged and nonrepackaged drugs. ) .

almost all the extraordinary price increases for repackaged drugs appear to have originated from the company that repackaged the drug rather than from the company that manufactured the drug .

specifically , 95 percent of repackaged drugs had an extraordinary price increase without a corresponding extraordinary price increase by the drug's manufacturer for the identical nonrepackaged drug .

however , some drug repackagers serve a niche in the drug market and therefore may have a small share of the market in a therapeutic class .

almost one - fifth of the 91 companies that sold brand - name drug products that had extraordinary price increases were repackagers .

the four companies with the greatest number of brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase were repackagers — ranging from 26 to 51 brand - name drug products per repackaging company .

about 99 percent of repackaged drugs cost less than $25 per unit .

the median price of repackaged drugs that had extraordinary price increases rose from $2.14 per unit to $5.39 per unit after the increase .

based on interviews with experts and industry representatives , we found that a lack of therapeutically equivalent drugs — generics and other brand - name drugs used to treat the same condition — and limited competition may contribute to extraordinary price increases .

according to these experts and industry representatives , the availability of few therapeutically equivalent drugs may result from patent protection and market exclusivity , and the limited size of the market for a given drug .

experts noted that the transfer of drug rights and corporate consolidations may limit competition among drug companies , resulting in few drug options .

the experts and industry representatives also noted that unusual events — such as disruptions in production due to shortages of raw materials — and other factors may also contribute to some extraordinary price increases .

limited availability of therapeutic equivalents: experts we interviewed said that drugs without therapeutic equivalents — in some cases due to patents or a limited market size — may be more likely to have an extraordinary price increase .

experts and industry representatives also reported that competition within a therapeutic class of drugs may be limited by ( 1 ) patents for a new drug , such as patents for the active ingredient ; ( 2 ) patents for existing drugs that have been modified by , for example , changing a drug's active ingredient , strength , or delivery mechanism ; and ( 3 ) market exclusivity protections .

patents and market exclusivity may limit the entry of other prescription drugs into the market .

an expert also noted that no single factor leads to extraordinary price increases , rather a combination of several factors likely contributes to these extraordinary price increases .

two of our six case study drugs had patent protection at the time of the extraordinary price increase .

 ( see app .

iii for a summary of the characteristics of the case study drugs. ) .

one drug had a method - of - use patent and was the only fda - approved drug available to treat an acute illness affecting infants and young children .

the other drug was under patent at the time of its extraordinary price increase , and was sold by a licensed repackager that purchased the drug from wholesalers .

in addition , experts and industry representatives we interviewed reported that small market drugs , such as orphan drugs or drugs for rare diseases , may lack therapeutically equivalent drugs , and thus may be prone to extraordinary price increases .

when the target patient population or market for a drug is relatively small , there may be little financial incentive for potential competitors to enter the market and offer competing drugs .

two of the drugs we examined in our case studies treat rare diseases .

these drugs did not have generic equivalents at the time of their extraordinary price increases ; however , the drug companies reported the availability of other drugs that treat similar conditions .

both drugs had more than one extraordinary price increase — one of the drugs had two price increases that were each more than 1,000 percent , and the other had extraordinary price increases in 2 consecutive years .

representatives of the manufacturer for one of these drugs reported that their company's business model is based almost solely on sales from the drug that had the extraordinary price increases .

this drug is currently approved for several dozen indications , and the company is funding research on other uses for the drug .

the second company reported that its business model is structured around facilitating the development of drug products for rare diseases .

the company provides financial support to researchers developing new drugs for rare diseases and obtains the rights to the drugs created by these researchers .

the company considered their financial support for developing other rare disease drugs when determining the price of their drug .

furthermore , a representative of this company stated that it had obtained other drugs that were discontinued by a prior owner and then reintroduced the drugs onto the market .

both of these drug companies market specialized drugs that treat rare diseases .

transfer of drug rights , corporate consolidations , mergers , and acquisitions: experts and industry representatives we interviewed reported that transfers of drug ownership rights and consolidations among drug companies have increased .

these transfers and consolidations may limit competition as companies that may offer competing prescription drugs in a therapeutic class merge or sell their rights to a drug , potentially leading to extraordinary price increases for drugs .

fewer drug companies competing in a therapeutic class may lead to fewer prescription drugs being developed and sold within that class .

industry representatives and experts reported that larger drug companies are acquiring drugs from smaller drug companies that conduct drug research .

notwithstanding potential ftc or doj review , drug companies may still acquire competitors that offer similar drugs , potentially leading to market domination in a therapeutic class .

the rights to four of our case study drugs were obtained by a new drug company , and two of these drugs had an extraordinary price increase shortly after the rights to the drugs were purchased .

unusual events: extraordinary price increases were also attributed by industry representatives and experts to the occurrence of unusual events , such as disruptions in the production of a drug due to shortages of necessary raw materials or the added costs to renovate outdated drug production plants .

for example , a drug in our case study was purchased from a drug company that was suspending production of the drug .

the company that purchased this drug reported investing millions of dollars transferring and upgrading the manufacturing equipment , processes , and testing methods required to make the drug .

the drug's manufacturer attributed the first of two extraordinary price increases to compensating for the drug's production expenses and other costs .

prior to the company's purchase of the drug , it was sold only in limited quantities through a patient advocacy group .

another drug from our case study was purchased by a company that spent several years trying to identify a technical partner capable of processing the drug's active ingredient , which was difficult to manufacture because of its cytotoxic nature and the limited quantity of drugs produced .

the company's representative stated that due to the unique challenges of producing the active ingredient of the drug , two companies were involved in manufacturing and packaging the drug .

as a result of changes made in manufacturing the drug , the company reported investing several million dollars upgrading its manufacturing equipment and processes in order to meet updated fda regulations .

this company considered its investment to produce a stable supply of the drug when pricing the product .

other factors: representatives of the drug companies we reviewed for our case studies reported that they considered other factors when determining the price of their drugs .

for example , one expert noted that extraordinary price increases may occur because a drug manufacturer updates the price of a drug after obtaining new information about certain demand and supply factors affecting the drug .

three of the drug companies reported that their products were difficult to manufacture .

these companies employ third - party manufacturers that produce the drugs .

one of these companies said that its drug was very toxic , and since its manufacturing equipment was used to make other drug products , the equipment must be decontaminated after each batch is produced .

these drug companies factored in these additional costs when they raised the price of their products .

some of the drug companies we reviewed revised the price of their brand - name drugs to bring them in line with the prices of what they regarded as similar drugs .

one company reviewed the estimated annual cost of several orphan drugs when determining the price for its drug , which treats a rare disease .

three companies reviewed various drug products and priced their drugs in line with these drugs .

this pricing strategy led , in part , to these drugs experiencing an extraordinary price increase .

an official from one of these companies reported that the drug was underpriced , and the company increased the price of the drug based on the prices of competing drug products used for similar medical conditions .

some of the drug companies considered the financial solvency of their drug product and company , and their fiduciary responsibility to their shareholders when determining the price of their drug .

in some cases , representatives of drug companies cited the quantity of free or low - cost drugs donated through their patient assistance program and the level of rebates paid to the medicaid program as factors that they considered when raising the price of their brand - name drugs .

two drug companies said that the level of rebates paid to the medicaid program was a factor for their drugs' extraordinary price increases .

the companies reported that they charged a higher retail price for their drugs , in part , to account for the large financial outlays to patient assistance and government programs .

one company said that medicaid beneficiaries represent a large portion of the patient population that uses their drug product .

this company's representatives stated that over half of its drug sales were targeted to their patient assistance program for low - income , underinsured , or uninsured individuals or were reimbursed under medicaid and therefore subject to rebates .

these companies reported that they offered patient assistance programs that provide a large volume of free prescription drugs to patients who meet established criteria .

the programs also provide financial assistance to insured patients who face financial hardship from paying copayments or coinsurance .

we provided a draft of this report to drug policy experts , who provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to other interested parties .

we will also provide copies to others upon request .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at dickenj@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff members who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

in this report we address the following objectives: ( 1 ) the frequency of extraordinary price increases for brand - name prescription drugs from 2000 to 2008 , ( 2 ) the characteristics of the brand - name drugs that had extraordinary price increases , and ( 3 ) the factors that contributed to the extraordinary price increases experienced by these brand - name drugs .

to determine the frequency of extraordinary price increases , we reviewed the average wholesale price ( awp ) for all brand - name drugs in thomson reuters' red book , and identified all extraordinary price increases — a unit price increase equal to 100 percent or more at a single point in time from 2000 to 2008 .

we calculated the percent change in unit awp recorded in the red book for each 11-digit national drug code ( ndc - 11 ) .

for example , where a ndc - 11 had three unit prices reported in red book from 2000 to 2008 ( unit price at point 1 , unit price at point 2 , and unit price at point 3 ) , two data records were created .

one record contained the percent change in unit price from point 1 to point 2 , and the other record contained the percent change from point 2 to point 3 .

we identified extraordinary price increases by selecting only records ( ndc - 11s ) with a percent change of 100 percent or more .

drugs sold in different package sizes — for example , 30 , 60 , or 100 tablets — have different ndc - 11 codes .

each ndc - 11 record captures the label name of the drug which includes the dosage form of the drug .

because a brand - name drug may have several ndc - 11 codes for different package sizes , we identified the number of brand - name drug products that had an extraordinary price increase by their ndc - 9 code , which represents the manufacturer and drug name , and strength .

where more than one package size of the same brand - name drug had an extraordinary price increase , we selected the package size with the highest extraordinary price increase .

we counted an ndc - 9 with different package sizes that had an extraordinary price increase on the same date only once .

in this report , we use three terms to refer to the brand - name prescription drugs recorded in the red book .

drug brand refers to the label name of a brand - name prescription drug ; brand - name drug product refers to the different products of the same drug brand .

otherwise we use the term brand - name drug or drug when we do not need to distinguish between drug brand and brand - name drug product .

we report the frequency of brand - name drugs that had extraordinary price increases by ( 1 ) drug brand ( drug label name as recorded in red book ) , and ( 2 ) brand - name drug product ( ndc - 9 code ) .

the frequencies of extraordinary price increases reported by brand - name drug products ( ndc - 9 ) include the same drug brand sold in different strengths and dosage forms ( eg , a 1mg or a 5mg tablet ) .

the frequency of extraordinary price increases reported includes brand - name drug products that were repackaged by a distributor for resale to health care providers .

 ( see app .

ii for a list of the brand - name drugs that had extraordinary price increases. ) .

to identify the characteristics of brand - name drugs that had an extraordinary price increase , we used red book data on therapeutic class and price .

to identify the factors that may contribute to extraordinary price increases we interviewed drug policy experts ; academic researchers ; state and federal government officials ; consumer advocates ; insurance company representatives ; and hospital , health insurance , and retail pharmacy associations representatives .

to illustrate the factors that may contribute to extraordinary price increases , we developed case studies of six drugs from different companies identified from our analysis of red book data .

each brand - name drug ( ndc - 11 ) was eligible for inclusion as a case study if it was active in the market as of december 31 , 2008 , and had an extraordinary price increase .

to achieve variability in the characteristics of the drugs reviewed for the case study , selection was based on several factors , such as the ( 1 ) unit price , ( 2 ) percentage increase in price , ( 3 ) year of increase , ( 4 ) number of increases , ( 5 ) availability from multiple sources , ( 6 ) orphan drug status , and ( 7 ) permanence of the price increase .

we also interviewed representatives of the companies that manufactured and distributed the case study drugs about the market dynamics leading to the drugs' extraordinary price increases .

we gathered information on: ( 1 ) the characteristics of each drug , such as its patent and market exclusivity status , indication , volume , and utilization ; ( 2 ) corporate business and marketing strategy for each drug ; ( 3 ) factors that influenced the extraordinary price increase ; and ( 4 ) agreements with the makers of drugs in the same therapeutic class .

some information provided by the representatives during these interviews is considered proprietary .

as a result , the names of the participating companies and brand - name drugs are not identified .

 ( see app .

iii for information on each of the drugs from the case studies. ) .

information was also obtained from drug companies' web sites , annual and quarterly reports , and other resources .

we systematically reviewed red book to assess its reliability .

the review involved an assessment of the frequencies of all numeric and date variables in red book to identify incorrect and erroneous entries or extreme outliers .

we compared a sample of the pricing data for brand - name drugs that had extraordinary price increases reported in red book with pricing data contained in another drug pricing compendium and found a high degree of concurrence between the prices recorded in both data sources .

based on this review , we determined that the data used in our report were adequate for our purposes .

we conducted our work from october 2008 through december 2009 in accordance with all sections of gao's quality assurance framework that are relevant to our objectives .

the framework requires that we plan and perform our engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work .

we believe that the information and data obtained , and the analysis conducted , provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product .

using thomson reuters' red book , we calculated the change in average wholesale price ( awp ) and identified all unit price increases equal to 100 percent or more at a single point in time from 2000 to 2008 .

 ( see app .

i for more information. ) .

based on this analysis , we identified the label names of drugs that had extraordinary price increases by their ndc - 9 code .

awp records in red book are reported by the drug manufacturer and published in red book .

in some cases , when drug manufacturers do not report awp , red book calculates awp from other drug pricing benchmarks provided by drug manufacturers .

gao did not audit the drug pricing information reported to red book by drug manufacturers nor the calculations performed by red book to fill nonreported awp data .

some of the drugs on this list were repackaged , or nonrepackaged , while other drugs were both repackaged and nonrepackaged .

in a few cases , drugs were removed from the list because changes in the recorded package size led to errors in the calculated change in unit prices .

see table 6 below for the label names of brand - name prescription drugs that had an extraordinary price increase between 2000 and 2008 .

to gain an understanding of the market dynamics leading to extraordinary price increases for brand - name drugs , we developed case studies of six brand - name drugs identified from our analysis of red book data .

selection for inclusion as a case study was based on several factors including price , the level of the percentage increase , whether the drug had more than one extraordinary price increase between 2000 and 2008 , availability of the drug from multiple sources , and the permanence of the price increase .

see table 8 for characteristics of the drugs selected for the case studies .

john e. dicken at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or dickenj@gao.gov .

in addition to the contact named above , martin t. gahart , assistant director ; n. rotimi adebonojo ; rashmi agarwal ; george bogart ; kristin helfer koester ; martha kelly ; yesook merrill ; giao n. nguyen ; daniel ries ; and timothy walker made major contributions to this report .

medicaid outpatient prescription drugs: second quarter 2008 federal upper limits for reimbursement compared with average retail pharmacy acquisition costs .

gao - 10-118r .

washington , d.c.: november 30 , 2009 .

prescription drugs: overview of approaches to control prescription drug spending in federal programs .

gao - 09-819t .

washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2009 .

medicare part d prescription drug coverage: federal oversight of reported price concessions data .

gao - 08-1074r .

washington , d.c.: september 30 , 2008 .

prescription drugs: trends in usual and customary prices for drugs frequently used by medicare and non - medicare health insurance enrollees .

gao - 07-1201r .

washington , d.c.: september 7 , 2007 .

prescription drugs: oversight of drug pricing in federal programs .

gao - 07-481t .

washington , d.c.: february 9 , 2007 .

prescription drugs: an overview of approaches to negotiate drug prices used by other countries and u.s .

private payers and federal programs .

gao - 07-358t .

washington , d.c.: january 11 , 2007 .

medicaid outpatient prescription drugs: estimated 2007 federal upper limits for reimbursement compared with retail pharmacy acquisition costs .

gao - 07-239r .

washington , d.c.: december 22 , 2006 .

prescription drugs: price trends for frequently used brand and generic drugs from 2000 through 2004 .

gao - 05-779 .

washington , d.c.: august 15 , 2005 .

medicaid drug rebate program: inadequate oversight raises concerns about rebates paid to states .

gao - 05-102 .

washington , d.c.: february 4 , 2005 .

medicaid: states' payments for outpatient prescription drugs .

gao - 06-69r .

washington , d.c.: october 31 , 2005 .

federal employees' health benefits: effects of using pharmacy benefit managers on health plans , enrollees , and pharmacies .

gao - 03-196 .

washington , d.c.: january 10 , 2003 .

prescription drugs: expanding access to federal prices could cause other price changes .

gao / hehs - 00-118 .

washington , d.c.: august 7 , 2000 .

