thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss federal employee engagement .

a growing body of research on both private - and public - sector organizations has found that increased levels of engagement — generally defined as the sense of purpose and commitment employees feel towards their employer and its mission — can put another way , if a talented lead to better organizational performance.workforce is the engine of productivity and mission accomplishment , then a workplace that fosters high levels of employee engagement helps fuel that engine .

government - wide levels of employee engagement have recently declined 4 percentage points , from an estimated 67 percent in 2011 , to an estimated 63 percent in 2014 , as measured by the office of personnel management ( opm ) federal employee viewpoint survey ( fevs ) , and a score derived by opm from the fevs — the employee engagement index ( eei ) .

the administration has elevated the importance of strengthening employee engagement across government .

for example , strengthening employee engagement is now one of three subgoals of the people and culture cross agency priority ( cap ) goal .

moreover , agency leaders are to be held accountable for making employee engagement a priority , as well as an integral part of their agency's performance management system .

the administration also set a goal for these efforts: by the issuance of the 2016 fevs results , the federal government is expected to increase employee engagement — as measured by the eei — from 63 percent to 67 percent .

in addition , as part of their annual performance plans and appraisals , each member of the senior executive service ( ses ) will be responsible for improving employee engagement within their organization , and for creating inclusive work environments .

my remarks today will focus on ( 1 ) trends in employee engagement from 2006 through 2014 ; ( 2 ) various practices that could strengthen engagement levels based on the eei results and the experiences of selected agencies and gao ; and ( 3 ) certain limitations of the eei that will be important for agency managers and leaders to consider as they use this metric to assess and improve engagement within their own organizations .

my observations on employee engagement represent the preliminary findings from our ongoing work conducted on this issue .

we expect to complete our study in early - summer and to issue a final report at that time .

our preliminary work indicates that improving employee engagement , especially during challenging times , is a difficult but doable challenge .

in fact , since 2006 , the majority of agencies maintained their engagement levels and a few even improved their scores .

agencies can take steps to strengthen employee engagement in the face of difficult circumstances such as constrained budgets .

the key is ( 1 ) to understand drivers of engagement , such as constructive performance conversations and opportunities for career development and training , and ( 2 ) to weave those practices into the everyday fabric of managing staff and leading agencies .

for our ongoing work , among other steps , we analyzed responses to questions from the fevs for the years 2006 through 2014 , from which the eei is derived .

we started with 2006 to include recent trends in two administrations .

we calculated the eei on a scale of zero to 100 at the individual level , based on the proportion of positive responses to the 15 eei questions for each individual .

for 2006 and 2008 , we recreated the index using the eei questions that were included in the survey during that time period .

we analyzed this information government - wide , by agency , and for selected demographic groups .

for each analysis , we determined statistically significant changes in the eei from 2006 to 2014 .

when aggregated to the agency level , our index was almost perfectly correlated with the opm eei in 2014 .

in addition to analyzing index changes over time , we used linear multiple regression analysis to assess the relationship between potential drivers of engagement and the index in 2014 , controlling for other factors .

to assess the reliability of the fevs data , we examined descriptive statistics , data distribution , and explored missing data .

we also reviewed fevs technical documentation as well as the statistical code opm uses to generate the index and variance estimates .

based on this analysis , we found the data sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

to identify potential drivers of , and strategies for , improving employee engagement , we conducted a literature review of recent studies of public - and private - sector engagement , and interviewed officials from opm and members of the chief human capital officers ( chco ) council and labor management relations joint working group on employee engagement .

to identify examples of agency efforts to improve employee engagement , we also interviewed officials from other federal agencies with sustained or increased engagement levels — the department of education , federal trade commission and national credit union administration .

we obtained agency officials' views on the information contained in this statement and have incorporated their comments as appropriate .

our ongoing work is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

engaged employees are more than simply satisfied with their jobs .

instead , engaged employees are passionate about , and energized by what they do , are committed to the organization , the mission , and their job , and are more likely to put forth extra effort to get the job done .

take pride in their work , the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) found that higher levels of employee engagement in federal agencies led to improved agency performance , less absenteeism , and fewer equal employment opportunity complaints .

similarly , a number of studies of private - and public - sector organizations have found that increased levels of engagement result in improved individual and organizational performance .

in addition , studies of the private sector have established that firms with higher levels of employee engagement exhibit increased individual employee performance , increased productivity , and have higher customer service ratings , while also having fewer safety incidents , and less absenteeism and turnover .

opm has conducted the fevs — a survey that measures employees' perceptions of whether , and to what extent , conditions characterizing successful organizations are present in their agencies — every year since 2010 .

the eei was started in 2010 when fevs became an annual survey and is composed of 15 fevs questions covering the following areas: leaders lead , which surveys employees' perceptions of the integrity of leadership , as well as employees' perception of leadership behaviors such as communication and workforce motivation .

supervisors , which surveys employees' perceptions of the interpersonal relationship between worker and supervisor , including trust , respect , and support .

intrinsic work experience , which surveys employees' feelings of motivation and competency relating to their role in the workplace .

according to opm , the eei does not directly measure employee engagement , but it does cover most of the conditions likely to lead to employee engagement .

sometimes the eei is discussed in the same context as another workforce metric known as the best places to work rankings .

although the best places to work scores are also derived from the fevs , it differs from the eei in that the partnership for public service ( partnership ) created the rankings as a way of rating employee satisfaction and commitment across federal agencies .

the rankings are calculated using a weighted formula of three different questions from opm's fevs: ( 1 ) i recommend my organization as a good place to work , ( 2 ) considering everything , how satisfied are you with your job , and ( 3 ) considering everything , how satisfied are you with your organization .

our ongoing work indicates that the recent government - wide average decline in the eei masks the fact that the majority of federal agencies either sustained or increased employee engagement levels during the same period .

from 2006 through 2014 , government - wide employee engagement levels initially increased — reaching a high of 67 percent in 2011 — and then declined to 63 percent in 2014 , as shown in figure 1 .

however , the decline in engagement is the result of several large agencies bringing down the government - wide average .

specifically , our preliminary work indicates that 13 out of 47 agencies saw a statistically significant decline in their eei from 2013 to 2014 ; while this is only 28 percent of agencies , nearly 69 percent of federal employees are at one of those agencies , including the department of defense , department of homeland security , and department of veterans affairs.majority of agencies sustained or improved engagement , as shown in figure 2 .

between 2013 and 2014 , of 47 agencies included in our analysis of the eei , three increased their scores ; 31 held steady ; and 13 declined .

based on our preliminary analysis , of the three components that comprise the eei — employees' perceptions of agency leaders , supervisors , and their intrinsic work experience — employees' perceptions of leaders consistently received the lowest score , and at times was about 20 percentage points lower than other components .

moreover , from a high - point in 2011 , leadership scores saw the greatest decrease and accounted for much of the government - wide average decline in the eei , as figure 3 shows .

the questions comprising the eei leadership component focus on integrity of leadership and on leadership behaviors such as communication and workforce motivation .

three of the five questions are specific to senior leaders — department or agency heads and their immediate leadership team , responsible for directing policies and priorities and typically members of the senior executive service or equivalent ( career or political ) .

two are specific to managers — those in management positions who typically supervise one or more supervisors .

we have previously reported that leaders are the key to organizational change — they must set the direction , pace , and tone , and provide a clear , consistent rationale that brings everyone together behind a single mission .

federal employee viewpoint survey questions that comprise the in my organization , senior leaders generate high levels of motivation and commitment in the workforce .

my organization's senior leaders maintain high standards of honesty and integrity .

managers communicate the goals and priorities of the organization .

overall , how good a job do you feel is being done by the manager directly above your immediate supervisor ? .

i have a high level of respect for my organization's senior leaders .

supervisors in my work unit support employee development .

my supervisor listens to what i have to say .

my supervisor treats me with respect .

i have trust and confidence in my supervisor .

overall , how good a job do you feel is being done by your immediate supervisor ? .

i feel encouraged to come up with new and better ways of doing things .

my work gives me a feeling of personal accomplishment .

i know what is expected of me on the job .

my talents are used well in the workplace .

i know how my work relates to the agency's goals and priorities .

the strength of the eei supervisors component suggests that the employee - supervisor relationship is an important aspect of employee engagement .

these questions focus on the interpersonal relationship between worker and supervisor and concern supervisors' support for employee development , employees' respect , trust , and confidence in their supervisor , and employee perceptions of an immediate supervisor's performance .

intrinsic work experience was the strongest eei component prior to 2011 , but fell during the period of government - wide decline in engagement levels .

these questions reflect employees' feelings of motivation and competency related to their role in the workplace , such as their sense of accomplishment and their perception of utilization of their skills .

our ongoing work has found that government - wide , the demographic groups with the widest gap between most engaged and least engaged were pay category and supervisory status .

for example , respondents in progressively lower general schedule ( gs ) pay categories had progressively lower levels of engagement government - wide .

in contrast , employees in the ses pay category reported consistently higher engagement levels — at least 10 percent more than any lower pay category .

according to our preliminary analysis , while there was less difference between the engagement levels of other pay categories , employees in the gs 13-15 categories were consistently higher than all other lower gs pay categories .

employees in the federal wage system consistently reported the lowest levels of engagement .

similarly , respondents with fewer supervisory responsibilities had progressively lower levels of engagement government - wide .

generally , employees with higher supervisory status have more autonomy in how they do their work .

employees in higher pay categories are likely to have more supervisory responsibilities , so it is not surprising that the trends for each are similar .

variations in engagement by supervisory status are shown in figure 4 .

with respect to other demographic cohorts , our preliminary analysis shows that engagement levels tended to be similar , regardless of the respondents' gender , ethnicity ( hispanic or non - hispanic ) , or work location ( agency headquarters or field ) .

for our ongoing work we used regression analysis to test which selected fevs questions best predicted levels of employee engagement as measured by our index , after controlling for other factors such as demographic characteristics and agency .

of the various topics covered by the fevs that we analyzed , we identified six that had the strongest association with higher eei levels compared to others , including ( 1 ) having constructive performance conversations , ( 2 ) career development and training , ( 3 ) work - life balance , ( 4 ) inclusive work environment , ( 5 ) employee involvement , and ( 6 ) communication from management ( see table 1 ) .

in many ways , these and similar practices are not simply steps to better engage employees ; they are also consistent with the key attributes of high performing organizations .

our preliminary results show that having constructive performance conversations was the strongest driver of employee engagement .

for the question “my supervisor provides me with constructive suggestions to improve my job performance,” we found that , controlling for other factors , someone who answered “strongly agree” on that fevs question would have on average a 20 percentage point higher engagement score , compared to someone who answered “strongly disagree” on the 5-point response scale .

as we found in our march 2003 report on performance management , candid and constructive feedback helps individuals maximize their contribution and potential for understanding and realizing the goals and objectives of the organization .

our preliminary results also show that after constructive performance conversations , career development and training was the strongest driver .

for the question , “i am given a real opportunity to improve my skills in my organization,” we found that someone who answered strongly agree to that question would have on average a 16 percentage point higher engagement score , controlling for other factors , compared to someone who answered strongly disagree .

as we found in our earlier work on this topic , the essential aim of training and development programs is to assist the agency in achieving its mission and goals by improving individual and , ultimately , organizational performance .

for the remaining four drivers , our preliminary results indicate that someone who answered strongly agree to those questions would have on average a 12 percentage point higher engagement score , controlling for other factors , compared to someone who answered strongly disagree .

importantly , our ongoing work suggests that these six practices were generally the consistent drivers of higher eei levels when we analyzed them government - wide , by agency , and by selected demographic groups ( such as agency tenure and supervisory status ) .practices are the strongest predictors of engagement , this suggests they could be key starting points for all agencies embarking on efforts to improve engagement .

during our ongoing work , we have found that agencies that have improved employee engagement , or that already have high levels of engagement , apply the drivers noted above .

their experience with what works can provide practical guidance for other agencies as they attempt to improve their own engagement scores .

for example , at gao — which has consistently placed among the top five agencies on the partnership for public service's best places to work list since 2005 — we have a number of initiatives related to the drivers of engagement .

with respect to constructive performance conversations , at gao , effective performance management is a priority .

performance conversations — including ongoing feedback and coaching — are expected to occur on a regular basis and not just as part of the annual appraisal process .

moreover , at all levels of the agency , supervisors are expected to create a “line of sight” connecting individual performance to organizational results .

likewise , with respect to an inclusive work environment , with involvement and support of top management , our human capital office and our office of opportunity and inclusiveness lead the agency through several continuous efforts , including ( 1 ) communicating the importance of diversity and inclusiveness from senior leaders , ( 2 ) linking ses / senior leader performance expectations to emphasize diversity , and ( 3 ) attracting and retaining a diverse workforce by , among other things , recruiting at historically black colleges and universities .

actions taken by other agencies can also provide insights about implementing key engagement drivers .

for example , during our ongoing work , education's office of the general counsel ( ogc ) officials told us that they convened an office - wide meeting with employees at all levels to discuss the fevs results — both to identify areas in which they could continue to build on positive trends , and also to identify opportunities for taking constructive steps to improve in other specific areas of the eei scores .

the focus of the conversation included steps that they could take to enhance and strengthen communication throughout the office , employee training and professional development , performance evaluation processes , and employee empowerment overall ; as a result , education's ogc management introduced additional training and professional development opportunities and improved employee on - boarding through a new handbook and mentoring program .

education's ogc officials said these opportunities — and the permanent , staff - driven workforce improvement team ( wit ) that formed as a result — have created feelings of stronger ownership , engagement , and influence in office decision making .

education's ogc officials said that ogc's management relies on the wit for feedback to evaluate the effectiveness of improvement efforts .

this strengthens two - way communication , which improves employee engagement and organizational performance .

in another example , national credit union administration ( ncua ) officials told us that the head of the agency and its senior leaders communicate with line employees ( who are mostly in the field ) through quarterly webinar meetings .

the meetings are scheduled to accommodate the field employees' frequent travel schedule and generally start with any “hot topics” and continue with discussion of agency efforts to meet mission goals .

the agency head takes questions in advance and during the webinar and , when needed , participants research and share responses with agency employees .

according to ncua officials , these regular , substantive conversations demonstrate top leadership's commitment to line workers as valued business partners .

opm provides a range of different tools and resources to help agencies use eei data to strengthen employee engagement .

they include , for example , an online mechanism to share opm - generated survey reports ( at government - wide , agency specific , and sub - agency levels ) to facilitate data analysis .

opm has also created an online community of practice to help share best practices .

our ongoing work indicates that these resources could provide agencies with needed support .

however , when analyzing the information , it is critical that opm highlight ( and for agencies to be aware of ) various limitations in the eei data that could affect agencies' analyses .

our preliminary results found that these limitations include , for example , the following: the eei does not show whether changes are statistically significant .

opm does not report whether changes to an agency's eei are statistically significant — that is , whether an up or down change is not due to random chance .

as a result , agency officials may be misinterpreting changes to the eei and acting on data that may not be meaningful .

although opm provides agencies with absolute changes in the eei , those increases and decreases are not always statistically significant .

our preliminary analysis of the fevs showed that 34 percent ( 16 of 47 ) of the absolute changes in agency eei scores from 2013 to 2014 were actually statistically significant .

in smaller agencies and at component or lower levels within larger agencies , large absolute differences are less likely to be significant .

the eei calculation does not allow for analysis of engagement drivers .

research on employee engagement emphasizes the importance of identifying the drivers of an engagement score as an initial step in improving employee engagement .

for example , the partnership for public service's best places to work guidance lists a driver analysis as a key element in determining where agencies should focus their action planning efforts .

however , we found that the way opm calculates the eei precludes a driver analysis because individual level data are needed to assess correlates of engagement , controlling for other factors .

the short cycle time between surveys presents analytical challenges .

according to some agency officials we spoke with , the short cycle time between one annual survey and the next and the amount of time it takes for organizational change to take effect could be problematic .

for example , because the fevs survey cycle begins around may and agencies receive results in september or october , it may be late - winter or early - spring before an agency will have designed an action plan .

by this time , the next survey cycle is on the horizon , allowing little time for agencies to analyze , interpret , and implement their action plans .

moreover , the annual survey cycle may not allow enough time for employees' perceptions to change before the next cycle begins .

according to agency officials we interviewed , it can take at least few years , sometimes more , for a particular organizational change to have an impact on employee engagement .

as a result , when examining a particular change in engagement level , it could be unclear whether that change is due to an action implemented the previous year or a different action implemented several years earlier .

thus , determining what works and what does not could be challenging .

while acknowledging the issues with short survey cycle time , opm stated that agencies are increasingly using the fevs as a management tool to help them understand issues at all levels of an organization and to take specific action to improve employee engagement and performance .

an annual survey such as fevs can help ensure that newly appointed agency officials ( or a new administration ) can maintain momentum for change , as the surveys suggest employees are expecting their voices to be heard .

further , opm noted if agencies , managers , and supervisors know that their employees will have the opportunity to provide feedback each year , they are more likely to take responsibility for influencing positive change .

given these limitations and agencies' current uses of fevs data , our preliminary results suggest that agencies will need to supplement fevs data with other sources of information .

for example , some agencies use facilitated discussions to better understand their eei scores and to identify and implement strategies for improvement .

other quantitative data — such as turnover rates , equal employment opportunity complaints , and sick leave use — may provide insights as well .

in conclusion , research on both private firms and government agencies has demonstrated the linkage between high levels of employee engagement and improved organizational performance .

given the complex and challenging missions agencies face as well as the myriad number of routine actions and services they perform on a daily basis — all within a constrained fiscal environment — agencies must make strengthening and sustaining employee engagement an integral part of their organizational culture and not simply a set of isolated practices .

opm recognizes this and has taken a variety of actions that , in concept , show promise for improving employee engagement government - wide .

they include ( 1 ) focusing agencies' attention on strengthening engagement by leading efforts to implement the cap goal ; ( 2 ) establishing a performance target ; ( 3 ) providing a variety of tools and resources to help agencies analyze fevs data and share best practices ; and ( 4 ) holding agencies and senior leaders accountable for specific efforts and achieving key results .

at the same time , our ongoing work has shown that the eei has limitations and the short time between survey cycles could be problematic .

agencies need to understand and address these limitations so that they properly interpret the information and target corrective actions accordingly .

chairman meadows , ranking member connolly , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have .

