as a part of their responsibilities federal inspectors general ( igs ) offices conduct criminal investigations of fraud , waste , and abuse in federal departments and programs .

ig criminal investigators exercise law enforcement authority to make warrantless arrests , obtain and execute warrants , and carry firearms .

because igs generally do not possess permanent statutory law enforcement authority , most presidentially appointed igs have to request temporary deputation from the department of justice ( doj ) .

however , three presidentially appointed igs — u.s .

department of agriculture ( usda ) , department of defense ( dod ) , and treasury inspector general for tax administration ( tigta ) — possess permanent statutory law enforcement authority and do not need to obtain doj's approval .

this report responds to your request that we identify the similarities and differences between providing statutory authority and deputation to presidentially appointed igs .

specifically , you asked us to compare the statutory authority and deputation in terms of the scope of law enforcement authority granted to the ig criminal investigators , amount of supervision and training of criminal investigators , and the extent of oversight required ; obtain the views of ( 1 ) igs using deputation ( deputized igs ) regarding whether statutory authority would improve their investigative practices or impact their current jurisdictions ; and ( 2 ) other federal officials , including doj and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , regarding statutory authority and deputation ; estimate the cost implications if legislation were enacted to grant statutory authority to those igs who do not possess such law enforcement authority .

to address these areas , we interviewed officials from various federal departments and agencies , including usda , dod , and doj , the fbi , and the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) , tigta , and department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; congressional budget office ( cbo ) , general services administration ( gsa ) , omb , and office of personnel management ( opm ) .

we compared and analyzed information to determine similarities and differences associated with statutory authority and deputation .

to obtain the views about specific aspects of law enforcement authority , we surveyed and received responses from all 23 deputized igs .

we reviewed cbo's cost analysis to determine the costs involved in switching from deputation to statutory authority .

the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended , among other things , identified specific federal departments and agencies that are required to have igs appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

the act also requires each such ig to appoint an assistant inspector general for investigations to supervise the performance of investigative activities , including criminal investigations , relating to their agencies' programs and operations .

although presidentially appointed igs have the authority to conduct criminal investigations , the igs have not been granted across - the - board statutory law enforcement authority .

however , as the role of the presidentially appointed igs in active investigations of criminal activity expanded , so too did their requests for deputation seeking the authority to make warrantless arrests , obtain and execute warrants , and carry firearms to reduce requests for assistance from other law enforcement personnel in dangerous situations .

subsequently , 23 presidentially appointed igs' criminal investigators received law enforcement authority through case - by - case deputation granted by the usms .

under this process , the presidentially appointed igs applied for deputation for each criminal investigator in each case where the need was anticipated .

upon completion of the case , the deputation and its accompanying law enforcement authority expired , and the process would start over again .

in 1995 , in an effort to reduce paperwork and excessive delays , certain presidentially appointed igs began receiving 1-year deputation law enforcement authority for criminal investigators .

appendix i provides a list of the 23 deputized igs who requested and received annual deputation .

as of january 2001 , these deputized igs renew their law enforcement authority for a 3-year period , rather than annually .

this process includes ( 1 ) requesting temporary law enforcement authority and obtaining approval from doj , ( 2 ) submitting a formal deputation application to doj , and ( 3 ) taking an oath .

deputized igs' criminal investigators must also adhere to the terms and conditions disclosed in a doj memorandum of understanding ( mou ) .

the mou is designed to provide doj guidance and oversight of ig criminal investigator training and conduct of criminal investigations .

although not passed , proposed legislation ( s. 3144 ) was introduced during the 106th congress , which would have , among other things , provided criminal investigators in specified ig offices ( see appendix i ) with certain statutory law enforcement authorities .

under this bill , deputized igs would ( 1 ) no longer be required to renew their law enforcement authority through the usms ; and ( 2 ) obtain a statutory basis for carrying firearms , making certain types of warrantless arrests , and executing warrants .

in addition , the bill contained provisions for oversight over the igs .

the bill , for example , provided for “peer reviews” of igs by other igs .

 ( the results of such reviews would have been forwarded to the applicable ig and the attorney general ) and required doj's continued oversight of igs' activities , such as involving the fbi when initiating certain criminal investigations .

in addition , the attorney general would have the authority , under certain conditions , to rescind or suspend such law enforcement authority of these igs .

to compare the similarities and differences between providing statutory authority and deputation , we examined mous , federal statutes , operating manuals , and other pertinent documents between the two groups of igs .

we also interviewed officials involved with the deputation program and / or related efforts to obtain statutory authority for the deputized igs .

this included officials in washington , d.c. , from the usms , fbi , doj's criminal division , omb , and selected presidentially appointed igs with deputation — hhs , gsa , doj ig , opm , and the pcie .

in addition , we identified and interviewed three presidentially appointed igs — usda , dod , tigta — having statutory authority comparable to the law enforcement authority granted to deputized igs .

we obtained perspectives and relevant documents related to their use of law enforcement authority .

we compared the scope of law enforcement authority , supervision , and training of ig criminal investigators for both methods .

to obtain views of deputized igs on whether statutory authority would improve their investigative practices or impact their current jurisdictions , we surveyed and received responses from all 23 deputized igs ( see app .

ii for the questionnaire ) .

to identify the cost and any savings that might result by switching from deputation to statutory authority , we reviewed congressional hearing documents and the cbo cost analysis associated with a recent legislative proposal .

in addition , we interviewed officials from doj , omb , cbo , and selected igs to obtain applicable cost and savings information .

we performed our work from may 2001 through may 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

regardless of the origin of law enforcement authority — either through statutory authority or deputation , igs' scope of law enforcement authority , supervision , and training are similar .

however , differences exist in the level of doj's oversight given to the deputized igs by doj .

whether under statute or deputation , igs' law enforcement authority is similar .

our comparative analysis revealed that igs have comparable duties , practices , and standards regarding their ( 1 ) scope of law enforcement authority to make warrantless arrests , obtain and execute warrants , and carry firearms ; ( 2 ) supervision of criminal investigators , which generally provides for day - to - day oversight by an agency official such as a special agent - in - charge ; and ( 3 ) training standards .

for example , ig criminal investigators with statutory authority and ig criminal investigators with deputation train together at the federal law enforcement training center located in glynco , georgia .

the facility provides both groups the same basic training curriculum in matters such as firearms , search and seizure , and arrest procedures as well as criminal investigator - specialized training .

we found differences in the level of doj oversight for igs who are deputized by doj .

deputized igs must renew their law enforcement authority every 3 years , while igs with statutory authority do not have this requirement .

doj established a process for granting and renewing deputation that allows its deputy attorney general , criminal division , fbi , and the usms to review certain aspects of deputized igs activities .

the purpose of this process is to determine whether deputized igs continue to meet standards for ( 1 ) keeping firearms skills current , ( 2 ) providing adequate training , and ( 3 ) coordinating with federal prosecutors and other federal law enforcement agencies .

as part of doj's deputation process , deputized igs are required to report to doj annually on the results they achieved , as a condition for renewing their deputation .

table 1 summarizes the results achieved with deputation from 1998 through 2000 that we identified from deputized ig responses to our survey .

both doj and fbi officials told us that the reporting requirement is being re - evaluated , and doj said that it is outdated and no longer used as a condition for renewing deputized igs' law enforcement authority .

furthermore , doj said that no deputized ig has been denied its deputation renewal request .

in addition , deputized igs are required to notify the fbi when initiating certain criminal investigations as well as work jointly with the fbi on certain other sensitive investigations .

the three presidentially appointed igs with statutory authority do not have a specific statutory requirement to coordinate their investigations with the fbi .

doj requires deputized igs and the fbi to provide each other written notification involving areas of concurrent jurisdiction .

the fbi has jurisdiction in all matters involving fraud against the federal government and jointly shares this jurisdiction with the deputized igs in matters of fraud against each ig's agency .

doj also requires the fbi or another federal law enforcement agency to assist the deputized igs when conducting specific types of sensitive investigations , such as court - ordered electronic surveillance .

according to the fbi , the purpose of these requirements is to provide oversight in order to ( 1 ) place limits on the authority of the deputized igs' criminal investigators , and ( 2 ) help ensure compliance with applicable doj guidelines , and ( 3 ) address law enforcement coordination procedures for deputized igs when conducting their criminal investigations .

as requested , we obtained views of deputized igs and other federal officials on certain matters related to statutory authority and deputation .

we found that deputized igs prefer statutory authority to deputation and most believed statutory authority would improve their investigative practices at least to some extent .

most deputized igs also reported that statutory authority would have little impact on their current statutory jurisdictions .

other federal officials generally believed that the current deputation process has improved .

doj has not yet settled on its position on providing law enforcement authority to deputized igs under either method .

omb deferred the matter for doj's consideration .

fifteen of the 23 deputized igs reported that having statutory authority would improve their criminal investigative practices to at least some extent and 9 of these reported that statutory authority would improve their investigative practices to a great or very great extent .

three of these believed that practices would be improved because statutory authority would enhance their investigators status as fully authorized officers in the law enforcement community .

further , 20 of the 23 deputized igs reported that granting statutory authority would change their current jurisdiction of authority to little or no extent .

in july 2000 , doj and omb testified at congressional hearings in favor of a legislative proposal that would have granted statutory authority to specified ig offices .

however , the issue is currently under review within the administration , and doj has not yet settled on its position as of may 2002 .

fbi officials we interviewed said that the deputation process is a much better system of conferring law enforcement authority to the igs because it provides greater flexibility for doj and appropriately places oversight responsibilities at the attorney general level .

the attorney general has the authority to delegate these responsibilities to justice entities including doj's criminal division , fbi and usms .

the attorney general has delegated this authority to usms .

although the fbi reported no significant problems of abuse or misconduct from the deputized igs , they continue to believe that deputation enables doj to ensure coordination in matters of concurrent jurisdiction .

in responding to our questionnaire , omb indicated that the issue of whether deputized igs should be switched from deputation to statutory authority was a matter that doj would have to consider .

officials with doj's criminal division , fbi , and usms generally agree that recent improvements , including extending the deputation renewal cycle from 1 to 3 years , will ease the processing burden .

most deputized igs believed no significant cost or savings would derive from conferring statutory authority to them .

eighteen of the 23 deputized igs reported that no significant cost would be associated with switching them from deputation to statutory authority .

the remaining 5 deputized igs reported that some savings would be likely by eliminating administrative responsibilities associated with preparing , processing , and reviewing deputation requests and annual reports .

usms officials told us that about 2,000 of the approximately 7,500 deputations they authorize each year are for ig criminal investigators .

this number will be cut by one - third in 2004 when renewals will be done every 3 years .

however , usms currently invests less than 4 staff years in its deputation responsibilities , so the overall impact on usms's deputation process would be minimal .

usms would be able to reduce its workload ( reviewing deputation requests ) by about 27 percent annually .

however , beginning in january 2004 , usms will begin renewing igs' deputation on a 3-year cycle .

officials at doj concurred that the cost and any savings associated with switching from deputation to statutory authority would be minimal .

in addition , the cbo provided a cost estimate for a proposed bill ( s. 3144 ) during the 106th congress that would have granted statutory authority to specified ig offices .

because the bill would have codified powers already exercised by deputized igs , and replaced one system of review and oversight with another , cbo estimated that implementing it would have no significant effect on federal costs .

cbo told us that any costs would be less than $500,000 .

however , cbo told us they did not consider the potential cost related to peer review .

the vice chair of the president's council on integrity and efficiency said at hearings that a legislative proposal to grant permanent statutory law enforcement authority to deputized igs would have carried with it no additional costs , in part because the deputized igs' criminal investigators already ( 1 ) exercised law enforcement authority through deputation , ( 2 ) trained as criminal investigators , and ( 3 ) participated in the federal law enforcement retirement system .

officials at omb and cbo agreed with this cost assessment .

with the exception of doj's imposed oversight requirements , we could not identify any other significant differences relating to law enforcement authority between the three igs with statutory authority and the 23 deputized igs .

to some extent , doj has eased its requirements by extending the deputation renewal cycle from 1 to 3 years .

in addition , doj concedes that its requirement for annual reports from deputized igs has become outdated , and doj is reassessing the need for the requirement .

some deputized igs believe that their status would be enhanced if they were statutorily authorized .

we received comments on a draft of this report from the pcie ( which presents the views of the ig community ) , and doj .

the pcie's march 18 , 2002 , comments and doj's march 25 , 2002 , comments are in appendixes iii and iv , respectively .

the pcie disagreed with our report message .

doj neither agreed nor disagreed with our report .

officials from these organizations also provided technical comments , which were incorporated into the report as appropriate .

the pcie felt that gao should have focused on determining which means of providing law enforcement authority to igs would foster the most effective investigative process .

we were not requested to address this issue and therefore it was not within the scope of our work .

we did however survey all 23 igs and obtained their views on providing law enforcement authority ( see our survey results on p. 8 ) .

the pcie disagreed with our methodology comparing presidentially appointed igs' deputation with statutory law enforcement authority .

they stated that we should have compared deputized igs' law enforcement authority to s. 3144 rather than the statutes that granted law enforcement authority to igs at dod , usda , and tigta .

the pcie stated that s. 3144's provisions included , among other things , the statutory law enforcement authority that they are seeking .

because legislative proposals , including proposals from a previous session of congress , are subject to change , we do not believe it is appropriate to use s. 3144 as the basis of comparison .

moreover , based on our analysis , law enforcement authority — the authority to carry firearms , make certain arrests , and execute warrants — proposed under s. 3144 is essentially the same as granted by statute to igs at dod , usda , and tigta .

in addition , the pcie claimed that the deputation renewal process caused an administrative burden on usms .

our work did not support such a conclusion .

the usms told us that the deputation process has improved and that renewing deputized igs' law enforcement authority was the easiest task of their deputation workload .

the pcie stated that the draft report seems to assume that , unless significant cost savings can be associated with permanent statutory law enforcement authority , temporary deputation should be retained .

the pcie said that it is a misperception that a decision on permanent statutory law enforcement authority for all igs should be driven by cost considerations .

we did not conclude or imply that significant cost savings should be a determining factor in deciding whether to switch deputized igs to permanent statutory law enforcement authority .

rather , deputized igs and other federal agencies including the cbo said that minimal costs or savings would result from switching from deputation to statutory authority .

we were specifically asked by congress to answer this question .

the pcie also said that as part of its oversight mechanisms , the proposed bill ( s. 3144 ) would have established a peer review process among deputized igs .

the pcie said there are no known administrative burdens associated with this approach and its implementation would not increase federal expenditures .

while the operational procedures of the peer review are not known , undoubtedly any review system would have some level of administrative burden and costs .

for example , the pcie's draft peer review guidelines — “guide for conducting qualitative assessment reviews of the investigative operations of offices of inspector general,” among other things , recommends reviewing samples of ig criminal investigators' training and basic qualification records as well as closed investigative files to ensure adherence to professional law enforcement standards .

according to the pcie , depending on the size of the ig agency or level of detail of the review , a peer review cycle could take up to 120 days .

the staff resources and activities related to scheduling , conducting , and reporting results of 23 igs' “peer reviews” would incur time and costs .

on may 3 , 2002 the pcie provided further comments on our draft report .

the pcie continued to disagree with our draft report for the basic reasons stated in their earlier comments .

also , the pcie requested that we defer issuance of the final report until we obtain and incorporate doj's current views .

the pcie said it had become aware that doj was close to making a decision and was optimistic that this decision will support a grant of statutory law enforcement authority to the deputized igs .

on may 7 , 2002 , doj told us that the matter is still under review within the administration with no estimated date of completion .

as a result , we do not feel that it is appropriate to delay the report issuance .

the pcie also provided technical comments , which were incorporated into the report as appropriate .

doj neither agreed nor disagreed with our draft report .

doj requested that our report state that doj has not settled on a position on providing law enforcement authority through either statute or deputation and that the issue is under review within the administration .

we incorporated doj's suggestion into the report .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the acting assistant attorney general for administration ; director , office of management and budget ; director , congressional budget office ; and the vice chairman , president's council on integrity and efficiency .

we will also make copies available to others upon request .

this report will also be available on gao's home page at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me or weldon mcphail at ( 202 ) 512-8777 .

other key contributors to this report were clarence tull , veronica mayhand , lou v.b .

smith , david alexander , and geoffrey hamilton .

this appendix lists the 23 presidentially appointed inspectors general ( igs ) who have been granted deputation through calendar year 2000 for their respective criminal investigators by the department of justice .

