thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's hearing on the ability of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) veterans health administration ( vha ) to recruit and retain high - quality physicians .

a strong clinical workforce capable of providing quality and timely care to our nation's veterans is critical to the success of vha , which operates one of the largest health care systems in the united states , providing care at 1,252 facilities , including 170 va medical centers ( vamc ) .

as the demand for vha's services grows — due in part to increasing demand from servicemembers returning from the united states' military operations in afghanistan and iraq , and the growing needs of an aging veteran population — attracting , hiring , and retaining top talent is critical to vha's mission to provide high - quality and timely health care for our nation's veterans .

physicians — who provide and supervise a broad range of care , including primary and specialty care — serve an integral role in vha's mission .

vha indicated that physicians occupy a top spot on its annual list of mission - critical occupations , as a result of factors including the time frames needed for vha's hiring process , a limited supply of candidates , and competition for candidates .

within the physician category , vha has also identified the top five physician occupations that are the hardest to recruit and retain .

we use the term “mission - critical physician occupations” to refer to the top five physician occupations vha identified in fiscal year 2016 as most in need of staffing: primary care , mental health , gastroenterology , orthopedic surgery , and emergency medicine .

vha hires more than 2,800 mission - critical physicians annually .

yet , physicians have consistently been identified by vha as a critical staffing priority due to recruitment and retention concerns .

over the past two decades , we and others have expressed concerns about vha's ability to ensure that it has the appropriate clinical workforce to meet the current and future needs of veterans .

a 2015 independent assessment found that if vha does not increase its total number of clinical employees , including physicians , it will be difficult for it to meet the projected demand for services .

further , in july 2016 , we found that the number of physicians who leave vha had steadily increased from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 .

during this time , physicians were among the 10 occupations with the highest rates of attrition each year .

the attrition was primarily due to voluntary resignations and retirements .

my statement today is based on our october 2017 report examining vha physician staffing , recruitment , and retention strategies .

in particular , my statement focuses on ( 1 ) vha information on how many mission - critical physicians provided care at vamcs ; ( 2 ) vha guidance for determining its physician staffing needs ; and ( 3 ) the strategies vha used to support the recruitment and retention of physicians at vamcs , and the extent to which it has evaluated these strategies to determine their effectiveness .

as part of that work , we made several recommendations for vha to improve staffing , recruitment , and retention strategies for physicians .

to do the work for our october 2017 report , we reviewed key documents and interviewed knowledgeable officials from vha in headquarters offices , as well as in six vamcs across the country .

more detailed information on the objectives , scope , and methodology for our 2017 report can be found in that report .

for this statement , we obtained information from vha officials in june 2018 about any steps they have taken to implement our 2017 recommendations .

this statement is based on work conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the attrition among vha physicians has been of particular concern given that the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) anticipates that by 2025 the national demand for physician services will exceed supply .

hrsa's office of rural health policy reported , in 2017 , that physician shortages were exacerbated in rural areas , where communities struggle to attract and keep well - trained providers .

this difficulty has posed a particular challenge for vha , as approximately one in four vamcs is located in a rural area .

most physicians providing care at vamcs are employed by vha .

vha also supplements the capacity of its employed physician staff by acquiring additional physician services through fee - basis arrangements or contracts .

under fee - basis arrangements , providers are paid a pre - agreed - upon amount for each service provided .

under contracts , physician services may be obtained on a short - term basis ; for example , through sole - source contracts with academic affiliates .

vamcs may also use physicians who volunteer their time , who are referred to as work - without - compensation providers .

in addition to vha - employed , contract , and fee - basis physicians , vamcs often supplement their capacity by using physician trainees , who include medical residents and advanced fellows .

in 2016 , 135 of the 170 vamcs had active physician training programs .

according to vha officials , there were 43,768 medical residents who trained at a vamc in 2016 .

vha has been expanding its physician training program , as directed by the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 , as amended .

in 2017 , vha added 175 physician trainee positions across vamcs nationwide , including 3 vamcs that did not have physician trainees prior to this expansion .

vha's objective is to add 953 additional physician trainee positions to its vamcs by 2025 in order to improve access and hire additional physicians .

further , vha officials told us they want to continue to add new positions that would eventually allow all vamcs access to physician trainees .

in our october 2017 report , we found that vha's data on physicians who provided care at vamcs were incomplete .

specifically , we found that vha had data on the number of mission - critical physicians it employed ( more than 11,000 ) and who provided services on a fee - basis ( about 2,800 ) , but lacked data on the number of contract physicians and physician trainees .

as a result , vha did not have data on the extent to which vamcs used these arrangements and thus , underestimated its physician use overall .

therefore , vha was unable to ensure that its workforce planning processes sufficiently addressed any gaps in staffing .

all six vamcs included in our review used at least one type of arrangement other than employment for physicians , and five of the six used contract physicians or physician trainees .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

on average , contract and fee - basis physicians made up 5 to 40 percent of the physicians in a given mission - critical physician occupation at each vamc in our review .

for example , officials from a large , highly complex vamc told us that , in march 2017 , they augmented the 86 employed primary care physicians with eight contract and three fee - basis physicians , which represented about 16 percent of their primary care physician workforce .

further , this vamc also had about 64 primary care physician trainees providing certain medical services under the supervision of a senior physician .

during the course of our work for the october 2017 report , vha officials told us that its personnel databases were designed to manage vha's payroll systems , but that these databases did not contain information on contract physicians or physician trainees .

vha officials told us they were working to include information on physician trainees in a new human resources ( hr ) database — hr smart — which at the time of our review , was scheduled to be implemented in 2017 .

however , these officials were not aware of plans to add information to the database on contract physicians .

instead , vamc leaders used locally devised methods to identify and track contract physicians , fee - basis physicians , and physician trainees .

for example , one vamc in our october 2017 review used a locally maintained spreadsheet to track its physicians under arrangements other than employment , while another vamc asked department leaders to identify how many of these provided care within their respective departments .

at each of the six vamcs in our review , we found that department leaders were generally knowledgeable about the total number of physicians that provided care within the departments they managed .

however , this locally maintained information was not readily accessible by vha officials .

to address the limitations in vha's data , we recommended in our october 2017 report that vha develop and implement a process to accurately count all physicians providing care at each of its vamcs , including physicians not employed by vha .

vha did not concur with this recommendation , stating that it uses other tools for workforce planning .

however , a vha official acknowledged that data sources used for workforce planning may not include all types of contract physicians or work - without - compensation physicians .

as we discussed in our prior report , implementing such a systematic process would eliminate the need for individual vamcs to use their own mechanisms , such as a locally developed and maintained spreadsheet to track its physician workforce , as was done by one vamc in our prior review .

further , local mechanisms may not be readily accessible to vha officials engaged in workforce planning , resulting in incomplete information for decision - making purposes .

since our report , vha officials told us that they have completed implementation of hr smart , which provides the capability to track every position with a unique position number , and each employee's full employment history .

however , vha officials told us they do not plan to enhance the capability of hr smart to track contractors .

we continue to believe that having a systematic and consistent process to account for all physicians who provide care across vamcs , including physicians not employed by vha , would help address concerns that vha is unable to identify all physicians providing care at its vamcs .

in our october 2017 report , we found that vha gave responsibility for determining staffing needs to its vamcs and provided its facilities with guidance , through policies and directives , on how to determine the number of physicians and support staff needed for some physician occupations .

specifically , vha provided this guidance for primary care , mental health , and emergency medicine , but lacked sufficient guidance for its medical and surgical specialties , including occupations such as gastroenterology and orthopedic surgery .

for these occupations , vha provided guidance on the minimum number of physicians , but did not provide information on how to determine appropriate staffing levels for physicians or support staff based on the need for care .

specifically , the vha guidance available at the time set a minimum requirement that vamcs of a certain complexity level have at least one gastroenterologist and one orthopedic surgeon that is available within 15 minutes by phone or 60 minutes in person 24 hours a day , 7 days a week .

vha guidance did not include information on how to use data , such as workload data , to manage the demand for care or help inform staffing levels for these physician occupations beyond this minimum requirement .

officials from four of the six vamcs we reviewed for our october 2017 report told us that because they lacked ( 1 ) guidance on how to determine the number of physicians and support staff needed , and ( 2 ) data on how their staffing levels compared with those of similar vamcs , they were sometimes unsure whether their staffing levels were adequate .

in our october 2017 report , we discussed that vha had previously established , in 2016 , a specialty physician staffing workgroup that examined the relationships between staffing levels , provider workload and productivity , veterans' access , and cost across vamcs for its medical and surgical specialties , including gastroenterology and orthopedic surgery .

this group's work culminated in a january 2017 report that found vha was unable to assess and report on the staffing at each vamc , as required by the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 , because a staffing model for specialty care had not been established and applied across vamcs .

this report made a number of recommendations , including that vha provide guidance to its vamcs on what level of staffing is appropriate for its mission - critical physician occupations .

however , as we noted in our october 2017 report , vha leadership had not yet taken steps to develop such staffing guidance .

we reported that , according to a vha official , other priorities were taking precedence and continued work in this area had not yet been approved by vha leadership .

although vha officials agreed that further steps should be taken , they did not indicate when these would occur .

in our report , we concluded that until vha issues guidance on staffing levels for certain physician occupations that provide specialty care to veterans , there would continue to be ambiguity for vamcs on how to determine appropriate staffing levels .

to address this , we recommended that vha develop and issue guidance to vamcs on determining appropriate staffing levels for all mission - critical physician occupations .

vha concurred with our recommendation and reported it would evaluate and develop staffing guidance for its medical and surgical specialties .

since our report , vha officials told us that on november 27 , 2017 , the executive - in - charge for vha signed the specialty care workgroup charter .

the primary goal of the workgroup is to develop a specialty care staffing model that will include staffing information for all specialty care .

vha anticipates completing its work and issuing staffing guidance by december 2018 .

in our october 2017 report , we found that vha used various strategies to recruit and retain its physician workforce , including providing assistance recruiting for mission - critical physician occupations through the national recruitment program ; policies and guidance ; financial incentives to enhance hiring and retention offers ; and a national physician training program .

 ( see table 1. ) .

in our october 2017 report , we found that vha faced challenges using its strategies for recruiting and retaining physicians .

for example , according to vha officials , budget shortfalls in the education debt reduction program — which reimburses qualifying education loan debt for employees , including physicians , in hard - to - recruit positions — reduced vamcs' ability to offer this recruitment incentive to physician candidates .

in addition , the relatively small number of physician recruiters in vha's national recruitment program — 19 recruiters for the 170 vamcs at the time of our report — limited their ability to understand the particular nuances of some markets , particularly in rural areas .

further , despite vha's large and expanding graduate medical training program , vamcs experienced difficulties hiring physicians who received training through its residency and fellowship programs .

vha did not track the number of physician trainees who were hired following graduation , but officials told us that the number was small in comparison to the almost 44,000 physician trainees educated at vamcs each year .

we found that vamcs faced challenges hiring physician trainees , in part , because vha did not share information on graduating physician trainees for recruitment purposes with vamcs across the system .

vha officials told us that recruitment efforts could be improved by developing and maintaining a database of physician trainees , but said that vha had no such database .

according to vha officials , information sharing could help both vamcs in geographically remote locations that do not have a residency program and help identify trainees who want to work at vha after graduating , but who received no offers from the vamc they trained at due to the lack of vacancies in their specialty .

we also reported in october 2017 that vha did not have complete information on whether its recruitment and retention strategies were meeting its needs .

vha had gathered feedback on barriers vamcs face when offering financial incentives to physician candidates through its education debt reduction program and created a workgroup to look at its overall use of physician retention strategies , although it had not completed a comprehensive review of its recruitment and retention strategies to identify any areas for improvement .

as a result , vha did not have complete information on the underlying causes of the difficulties vamcs faced or whether its recruitment and retention strategies met its objective of having a robust physician workforce to meet the health care needs of veterans .

to address these issues , we recommended that vha ( 1 ) establish a system - wide method to share information about physician trainees to help fill vacancies across vamcs , and ( 2 ) conduct a comprehensive , system - wide evaluation of its physician recruitment and retention efforts , and establish an ongoing monitoring program .

vha concurred with our recommendations , and reported it planned to enhance its personnel database , hr smart , to include physician trainees .

additionally , vha said it planned to complete a comprehensive , system - wide evaluation of the physician recruitment and retention strategies .

since our report , vha reported taking some steps to address these recommendations .

specifically , officials told us they are working to include information in the newly implemented hr smart database on work - without - compensation employees , such as physician trainees , and anticipate conducting pilot projects at various sites before fully implementing this capability by september 30 , 2019 .

additionally , officials said that they are in the process of completing a review of physician recruitment and retention incentives .

furthermore , according to vha officials , beginning in october 2017 , vha's office of workforce management and consulting partnered with the partnered evidence - based policy resource center — an internal vha resource center — to evaluate and recommend a systematic approach for allocating workforce management resources , such as the education debt reduction program .

vha expects to complete its efforts by september 2018 .

chairman dunn , ranking member brownley , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have .

for further information about this statement , please contact debra a. draper at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or draperd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony .

key contributors to this statement were janina austin ( assistant director ) , sarah harvey ( analyst - in - charge ) , jennie apter , frederick caison , alexander cattran , and krister friday .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

