individuals , businesses , and other entities owed the u.s. government about $330 billion in known unpaid taxes , including interest and penalties , as of september 30 , 2010 , according to the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

irs enforcement of the nation's tax laws continues to be on our high - risk list .

in addition , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) appropriated $275 billion to be distributed for federal contracts , grants , and loans .

according to recovery.gov data on federal spending , as of march 25 , 2011 , about $191 billion of that had been paid out .

because of the potential that some recipients also have unpaid federal taxes you asked us to investigate this issue .

this is the first in a series of reports to respond to your request .

in this report , we ( 1 ) determined , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients ; and ( 2 ) provided examples of recovery act contract and grant recipients who have known unpaid federal taxes .

to determine , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients , we obtained and analyzed quarterly spending reports submitted by contractors and grantees to www.recovery.gov ( recovery.gov ) through july 2010 .

we also obtained known tax debt data from irs as of september 30 , 2009 .

to determine the extent to which recovery act contract and grant recipients had known unpaid federal taxes , we used the taxpayer identification number ( tin ) as a unique identifier , and electronically matched irs's tax debt data to the population of recovery act contract and grant recipients .

we included only those tax debts from tax year 2008 and before to eliminate tax debt that may involve matters that are routinely resolved between the taxpayers and irs , with the taxes paid or abated within a short time .

to identify examples , we selected 30 recovery act fund recipients for a detailed audit and investigation , which we then narrowed to 15 .

this nonrepresentative selection of 15 recovery act contract or grant recipients were selected primarily based on such factors as the ( 1 ) amount of known unpaid federal taxes ( including income , payroll , and other taxes ) ; ( 2 ) number of delinquent tax periods ; ( 3 ) location of the recipient ; and ( 4 ) potential disclosure issues .

because we considered the number of delinquent tax periods in selecting these 15 recipients , we were more likely to select recipients who owed primarily payroll taxes ; our prior work has shown delinquent payroll taxes to be an indicator of potential abusive or criminal activity .

our investigators also contacted several of the recipients and conducted interviews .

these case studies serve to illustrate the sizeable amounts of taxes owed by some organizations that received recovery act funding and cannot be generalized beyond the cases presented .

a more detailed description of the scope and methodology related to our audit and investigative work supporting this report is provided in appendix i .

we conducted this forensic audit and related investigations from july 2010 through april 2011 .

we performed this forensic audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our audit findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we performed our related investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency .

the recovery act was enacted to help preserve and create jobs and promote economic recovery , invest in technology to spur technological advances , and invest in infrastructure to provide long - term economic benefits , among other things .

the act was a response to significant weakness in the economy ; in february 2011 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated the net cost as $821 billion .

congress and the administration built into the recovery act numerous provisions to increase transparency and accountability , including requiring recipients of some funds to report quarterly on a number of measures .

to implement these requirements , the office of management and budget ( omb ) worked with the newly established recovery board to deploy a nationwide system at www.federalreporting.gov ( federalreporting.gov ) for collecting data submitted by the recipients of funds .

omb set the specific time line for recipients to submit reports and for agencies to review the data .

recipients are required to submit the reports in the month after the close of a quarter , and , by the end of the month , the data are to be reviewed by federal agencies for material omissions or significant reporting errors before being posted to the publicly accessible recovery.gov .

the recovery board's goals for this web site were to promote accountability by providing a platform to analyze recovery act data and serving as a means of tracking fraud , waste , and abuse allegations by providing the public with accurate , user - friendly information .

the reporting requirements apply only to nonfederal recipients of funding , including all entities receiving recovery act funds directly from the federal government such as state and local governments , private companies , educational institutions , nonprofits , and other private organizations .

omb guidance , consistent with the statutory language in the recovery act , states that these reporting requirements apply to recipients who receive funding through the recovery act's discretionary appropriations , not recipients receiving funds through entitlement programs , such as medicaid , or tax programs .

individuals are also not required to report .

federal law does not prohibit a contractor with unpaid federal taxes from receiving contracts from the federal government .

currently , regulations calling for federal agencies to do business only with responsible contractors do not require contracting officers to consider a contractor's tax delinquency unless the contractor was specifically debarred or suspended by a debarring official for specific actions , such as conviction for tax evasion .

according to the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , a responsible prospective contractor is a contractor that meets certain specific criteria , including having adequate financial resources and a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics .

however , the far does not currently require contracting officers to take into account a contractor's tax debt when assessing whether a prospective contractor is responsible and does not currently require contracting officers to determine if federal contractors have unpaid federal taxes at the time a contract is awarded .

further , federal law generally prohibits the disclosure of taxpayer data to contracting officers .

thus , contracting officers do not have access to tax data directly from irs unless the contractor provides consent .

on may 22 , 2008 , the civil agency acquisition council and the defense acquisition regulations council amended the far by adding conditions regarding delinquent federal taxes and the violation of federal criminal tax laws .

the far rule requires offerors on federal contracts to certify whether or not they have , within a 3-year period preceding the offer , been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against them for , among other things , violating federal criminal tax law , or been notified of any delinquent federal taxes greater than $3,000 for which the liability remains unsatisfied .

this certification is made through the online representations and certifications application ( orca ) web site , orca.bpn.gov .

neither federal law nor current governmentwide policies for administering federal grants or direct assistance prohibit applicants with unpaid federal taxes from receiving grants and direct assistance from the federal government .

omb circulars provide only general guidance with regard to considering existing federal debt in awarding grants .

specifically , the circulars state that if an applicant has a history of financial instability , or other special conditions , the federal agency may impose additional award requirements to protect the government's interests .

the circulars require grant applicants to self - certify in their standard government application ( sf 424 ) whether they are currently delinquent on any federal debt , including federal taxes .

there is no requirement for federal agencies to take into account an applicant's delinquent federal debt , including federal tax debt , when assessing applications .

no assessment of tax debt is required by omb on a sampling or risk - based assessment .

to improve the collection of unpaid taxes , congress , in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 , authorized irs to collect delinquent tax debt by continuously levying ( offsetting ) up to 15 percent of certain federal payments made to tax debtors .

the payments include federal employee retirement payments , certain social security payments , selected federal salaries , contractor , and other vendor payments .

subsequent legislation increased the maximum allowable levy amount to 100 percent for payments to federal contractors and other vendors for goods or services sold or leased to the federal government .

the continuous levy program , now referred to as the federal payment levy program ( fplp ) , was implemented in 2000 .

under the fplp , each week irs sends the department of the treasury's financial management service ( fms ) an extract of its tax debt files .

these files are uploaded into the treasury offset program .

fms sends payment data to this offset program to be matched against unpaid federal taxes .

if there is a match and irs has updated the weekly data sent to the offset program to reflect that it has completed all statutory notifications , the federal payment owed to the debtor is reduced ( levied ) to help satisfy the unpaid federal taxes .

in creating the weekly extracts of tax debt to forward to fms for inclusion in the offset program , irs uses the status and transaction codes in the master file database to determine which tax debts are to be included in or excluded from the fplp .

cases may be excluded from the fplp for statutory or policy reasons .

cases excluded from the fplp for statutory reasons include tax debt that had not completed irs's notification process , or tax debtors who filed for bankruptcy protection or other litigation , who agreed to pay their tax debt through monthly installment payments , or who requested to pay less than the full amount owed through an offer in compromise .

cases excluded from the fplp for policy reasons include those tax debtors whom irs has determined to be in financial hardship , those filing an amended return , certain cases under criminal investigation , and those cases in which irs has determined that the specific circumstances of the cases warrant excluding it from the fplp .

at least 3,700 recipients of recovery act contracts and grants are estimated to owe $757 million in known unpaid federal taxes as of september 30 , 2009 , though this amount is likely understated for reasons discussed below .

this represented nearly 5 percent of the approximate 80,000 contract and grant recipients in the recovery.gov data as of july ly 2010 that we reviewed .

these approximately 3,700 recipients received over $24 billion through recovery act contracts and grants .

as indicated in figure 1 , corporate income taxes comprised $417 million , or about 55 percent , of the estimated $757 million of known unpaid federal taxes .

payroll taxes comprised $207 million , or about 27 percent , of the taxes owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients we reviewed .

unpaid payroll taxes included amounts that were withheld from employees' wages for federal income taxes , social security , and medicare but not remitted to irs , as well as the matching employer contributions for social security and medicare .

the remaining $133 million was from other unpaid taxes , including excise and unemployment taxes .

employers are subject to civil and criminal penalties if they do not remit payroll taxes to the federal government .

when an employer withholds taxes from an employee's wages , the employer is deemed to have a responsibility to hold these amounts “in trust” for the federal government until the employer makes a federal tax deposit in that amount .

when these withheld amounts are not forwarded to the federal government , the employer is liable for these amounts as well as the employer's matching federal insurance contribution act contributions for social security and medicare .

individuals within the business ( eg , corporate officers ) m held personally liable for the withheld amounts not forwarded assessed a civil monetary penalty known as a trust fund recovery penalty ( tfrp ) .

failure to remit payroll taxes can also be a criminal felony offense punishable by imprisonment of not more than 5 years , while the failure t o properly segregate payroll taxes can be a crim punishable by imprisonment of up to a year .

a substantial amount of the estimated unpaid federal taxes shown in ir records owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients had been outstanding from several tax years .

as reflected in figure 2 , about 65 percent of the estimated $757 million in unpaid taxes were for tax periods from tax years 2003 through 2008 , and about 35 percent of the estimated unpaid taxes were for tax periods prior to that .

26 u.s.c .

§ 6672 .

for the 15 cases of recovery act recipients with outstanding tax debt that we selected for a detailed audit and investigation , we found abusive or potential criminal activity related to the federal tax system .

specifically , the 15 recipients we investigated owed delinquent payroll taxes .

as discussed previously , businesses and organizations with employees are required by law to collect , account for , and transfer income and employment taxes withheld from employees' wages to irs ; failure to do so may result in civil or criminal penalties .

these 15 recipients — 8 contract and 7 grant recipients — received about $35 million in recovery act funds .

the 15 case study recipients typically operate in industries , such as construction , engineering , security , and technical services .

the amount of known unpaid taxes associated with these case studies is about $40 million , ranging from approximately $400,000 to over $9 million .

irs has taken collection or enforcement activities ( eg , filing of federal tax liens , assessment of a tfrp ) against all 15 of these recipients .

in addition , irs records indicate that at least one of the entities is under criminal investigation .

table 1 highlights the 15 recipients with known unpaid taxes .

we have referred all 15 recipients to irs for criminal investigation , if warranted .

our analysis and investigation found that only 1 of these 15 recovery act recipients was subject to the new far requirement for certification of tax debts in relation to their recovery act awards .

because that contractor was current on its repayment agreement , the contractor was not required to disclose its tax debts .

the other 14 recipients were grant recipients or contract subrecipients .

however , 1 of the 14 companies that recently filed an online representations and certifications application ( orca ) improperly stated that the company had not been notified of any delinquent federal taxes ( greater than $3,000 ) within the preceding 3 years .

we did not identify any circumstances ( eg , current repayment agreement ) that would allow the company to make such certification .

we provided a draft of our report to fms , irs , and the recovery accountability and transparency board ( recovery board ) for review and comment .

fms and irs provided technical comments which were incorporated into this report .

irs further noted that it had taken enforcement and collection actions in all of the 15 cases we investigated .

this included filing federal tax liens to protect the government's interest in 13 of the 15 cases , and investigating and asserting the tfrp in 12 of the 15 cases .

of the 15 cases , 6 have established installment agreements to pay their outstanding tax liabilities .

except in cases of bankruptcy or where it has been determined that there is currently no meaningful collection potential , irs is actively investigating and pursuing collection in the remaining cases .

we received written comments on a draft of this report from the ratb director , accountability ( see app .

ii ) .

the director stated that , as we acknowledged in our report , federal law places considerable restrictions on the disclosure of taxpayer information by irs to other federal entities , including the recovery board .

he further stated that should such access to such taxpayer information be made available to the recovery board , they could more proactively work to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse of government funds .

as far back as 1992 , we have said that congress should consider whether tax compliance should be a prerequisite for receiving a federal contract .

in 2004 , we recommended that the director of omb develop and pursue policy options ( in accordance with restrictions on the disclosure of taxpayer information ) for prohibiting federal contract awards to contractors in cases in which abuse to the federal tax system has occurred and the tax owed is not contested .

options could include designating such tax abuse as a cause for governmentwide debarment and suspension or , if allowed by statute , authorizing irs to declare such businesses and individuals ineligible for government contracts .

we continue to support efforts to implement this recommendation .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of the financial management service , the commissioner of internal revenue , the chairman of the recovery accountability and transparency board and other interested parties .

the report is also available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you have any questions concerning this report , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-6722 or kutzg@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

our objectives were to: ( 1 ) determine , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt which is owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients ; and ( 2 ) provide examples of recovery act contract and grant recipients who have known unpaid federal taxes .

to determine , to the extent possible , the magnitude of known tax debt owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients , we obtained and analyzed quarterly recipient reports submitted by contractors and grantees , as available through www.recovery.gov ( recovery.gov ) through july 2010 .

specifically , we obtained all contract and grant recipient reports from the fourth quarterly submission , and all reports from prior quarterly submissions that were marked as “final” by the recipients .

since recovery.gov data do not contain taxpayer identification numbers ( tins ) required for comparisons against irs tax debt data , we obtained the central contractor registry ( ccr ) database in order to obtain the tins for recovery act contract and grant recipients .

we matched the data universal numbering system ( duns ) number available in the quarterly recipient reports with ccr to obtain the tins for the recovery act contract and grant recipients .

we were not able to match about 17,000 recipients in recovery.gov to the ccr database .

as such , those 17,000 recipients were not included in our analysis .

we obtained and analyzed known tax debt data from the internal revenue service ( irs ) as of september 30 , 2009 .

using the tin we electronically matched irs's tax debt data to the population of recovery act contract and grant recipient tins .

to avoid overestimating the amount owed by recovery act contract and grant recipients with known unpaid tax debts and to capture only significant tax debts , we excluded from our analysis tax debts meeting specific criteria to establish a minimum threshold in the amount of tax debt to be considered when determining whether a tax debt is significant .

the criteria we used to exclude tax debts are as follows: tax debts irs classified as compliance assessments or memo accounts for financial reporting , known tax debts from calendar year 2009 tax periods , and , recipients with total known unpaid taxes of $100 or less .

the criteria above were used to exclude known tax debts that might be under dispute or generally duplicative or invalid , and known tax debts that are recently incurred .

specifically , compliance assessments or memo accounts were excluded because these taxes have neither been agreed to by the taxpayers nor affirmed by the court , or these taxes could be invalid or duplicative of other taxes already reported .

we excluded known tax debts from calendar year 2009 tax periods to eliminate tax debt that may involve matters that are routinely resolved between the taxpayers and irs , with the taxes paid or abated within a short time .

we excluded tax debts of $100 or less because they are insignificant for the purpose of determining the extent of known taxes owed by recovery act recipients .

using these criteria , we identified at least 3,700 recovery act recipients with federal tax debt .

to provide examples of recovery act recipients who have known unpaid federal taxes , we selected 15 of the approximately 3,700 recovery act recipients for a detailed audit and investigation .

the 15 recipients were chosen using a nonrepresentative selection approach based on data mining .

specifically , we narrowed the 3,700 recipients with known unpaid taxes to 30 cases based on ( 1 ) the amount of known unpaid taxes ( including income , payroll , and other taxes ) ; ( 2 ) the number of delinquent tax periods ; ( 3 ) location ; and ( 4 ) potential disclosure issues .

because we considered the number of delinquent tax periods in selecting these 15 recipients , we were more likely to select recipients who owed primarily payroll taxes ; our prior work has shown delinquent payroll taxes to be an indicator of potential abusive or criminal activity .

for these 30 cases , we obtained and reviewed copies of automated tax transcripts and other tax records ( for example , revenue officer's notes ) from irs as of october 2010 , and reviewed these records to exclude contractors or grantees that had recently paid off their unpaid tax balances and considered other factors before reducing the number of recovery act recipients to 15 case studies .

we did not evaluate the status of collections activities related to penalties assessed against recipient organization officers , only those assessed against the recipient organization itself .

our investigators also contacted several of the recipients and conducted interviews .

these case studies serve to illustrate the sizeable amounts of taxes owed by some organizations that received recovery act funding and cannot be generalized beyond the cases presented .

we conducted this forensic audit and related investigation from july 2010 through april 2011 .

we performed this forensic audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our audit findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we performed our related investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency .

for the irs unpaid assessments data , we relied on the work we performed during our annual audit of irs's financial statements .

while our financial statement audits have identified some data reliability problems associated with tracing irs's tax records to source records and including errors and delays in recording taxpayer information and payments , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to address this report's objectives .

in previous gao reports , we have reported that fieldwork and initial review and analysis of recipient data from www.recovery.gov indicated that there were a range of reporting and quality issues , such as erroneous or questionable data entries .

however , the problems identified in our previous reviews have been associated with job data fields that are not relevant to this review .

in addition , for the purposes of this review , we limited the population of recipient data we reviewed to records showing continuity in reporting as demonstrated by consistency in reporting over multiple periods and by excluding certain records containing known data inconsistencies .

therefore , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable to address our engagement objectives .

medicare: thousands of medicare providers abuse the federal tax system .

gao - 08-618 .

washington , d.c.: june 13 , 2008 .

tax compliance: federal grant and direct assistance recipients who abuse the federal tax system .

gao - 08-31 .

washington , d.c.: november 16 , 2007 .

tax compliance: thousands of organizations exempt from federal income tax owe nearly $1 billion in payroll and other taxes .

gao - 07-1090t .

washington , d.c.: july 24 , 2007 .

tax compliance: thousands of organizations exempt from federal income tax owe nearly $1 billion in payroll and other taxes .

gao - 07-563 .

washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 .

tax compliance: thousands of federal contractors abuse the federal tax system .

gao - 07-742t .

washington , d.c.: april 19 , 2007 .

medicare: thousands of medicare part b providers abuse the federal tax system .

gao - 07-587t .

washington , d.c.: march 20 , 2007 .

internal revenue service: procedural changes could enhance tax collections .

gao - 07-26 .

washington , d.c.: november 15 , 2006 .

tax debt: some combined federal campaign charities owe payroll and other federal taxes .

gao - 06-887 .

washington , d.c.: july 28 , 2006 .

tax debt: some combined federal campaign charities owe payroll and other federal taxes .

gao - 06-755t .

washington , d.c.: may 25 , 2006 .

financial management: thousands of gsa contractors abuse the federal tax system .

gao - 06-492t .

washington , d.c.: march 14 , 2006 .

financial management: thousands of civilian agency contractors abuse the federal tax system with little consequence .

gao - 05-683t .

washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2005 .

financial management: thousands of civilian agency contractors abuse the federal tax system with little consequence .

gao - 05-637 .

washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2005 .

financial management: some dod contractors abuse the federal tax system with little consequence .

gao - 04-414t .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2004 .

financial management: some dod contractors abuse the federal tax system with little consequence .

gao - 04-95 .

washington , d.c.: february 12 , 2004 .

debt collection: barring delinquent taxpayers from receiving federal contracts and loan assistance , gao / t - ggd / aimd - 00-167 , washington , d.c.: may 9 , 2000 .

unpaid payroll taxes: billions in delinquent taxes and penalty assessments are owed .

gao / aimd / ggd - 99-211 .

washington , d.c.: august 2 , 1999 .

tax administration: federal contractor tax delinquencies and status of the 1992 tax return filing season .

gao / t - ggd - 92-23 .

washington , d.c.: march 17 , 1992 .

