thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's timely hearing on information security at the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

as taxpayers file their returns for 2015 , it is especially important that irs ensure that adequate protections are in place to secure the sensitive information entrusted to the agency by members of the public .

the federal government faces an evolving array of cyber - based threats to its systems and data .

reported incidents and data breaches at federal agencies , including irs , have affected millions of people through the compromise of sensitive personal information and underscore the continuing and urgent need for effective information security .

we initially designated federal information security as a government - wide high - risk area in 1997 , and in 2003 we expanded this area to include computerized systems supporting the nation's critical infrastructure .

in 2015 we added the protection of personally identifiable information ( pii ) that is collected , maintained , and shared by both federal and nonfederal entities .

in carrying out its mission to collect taxes , process tax returns , and enforce u.s. tax laws , irs relies extensively on computerized systems and on information security controls to protect the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of sensitive personal and financial information for each u.s. taxpayer .

as requested , my statement today will discuss ( 1 ) information security controls over tax processing and financial systems at irs and ( 2 ) roles that federal agencies with government - wide information security responsibilities play in providing guidance and oversight to executive branch agencies .

in preparing this statement , we relied on previously published work on irs and government - wide information security .

we also reviewed relevant federal laws and information security - related guidance issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) .

the gao reports cited in this statement each contain a detailed description of the scope of the work on which they are based and the methodologies used to carry it out .

all the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as technology has advanced , the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems to carry out operations and process , maintain , and report essential information .

federal agencies rely on such systems to process , maintain , and report large volumes of sensitive data , such as personal information .

ineffective protection of these systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources , assets , and funds ; inappropriate access to and disclosure , modification , or destruction of sensitive information , such as pii ; undermining of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public's confidence in government ; damage to networks and equipment ; and high costs for remediation .

recognizing the importance of these issues , federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems .

these laws include the federal information security modernization act ( fisma ) of 2014 , which among other things , requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction of the agency's information or information systems .

more specifically , federal agencies are to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program to provide security for the information and information systems that support the operations of the agency , including those provided or managed by another agency , a contractor , or other organization on behalf of the agency .

in addition , the head of each agency is responsible for , among other things , ensuring that senior agency officials carry out their information security responsibilities and that all personnel are held accountable for complying with the agency - wide information security program .

the act also assigned omb and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections .

in addition , nist is responsible for developing standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements .

irs's mission is to provide america's taxpayers top - quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities and to enforce the law with integrity and fairness to all .

in carrying out its mission , irs relies extensively on computerized information systems , which it must effectively secure to protect sensitive financial and taxpayer data for the collection of taxes , processing of tax returns , and enforcement of federal tax laws .

during fiscal year 2015 , irs collected more than $3.3 trillion ; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms ; and issued more than $403 billion in tax refunds .

irs employs about 90,000 people in its washington , d.c. , headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states , u.s. territories , and some u.s. embassies and consulates .

to manage its data and information , the agency operates two enterprise computing centers .

it also collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each u.s. taxpayer .

protecting this sensitive information is essential to protecting taxpayers' privacy and preventing financial loss and damages that could result from identity theft and other financial crimes .

further , the size and complexity of the irs add unique operational challenges .

the commissioner of internal revenue has overall responsibility for ensuring the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of the information and systems that support the agency and its operations .

within irs , the senior agency official responsible for information security is the associate cio , who heads the irs information technology cybersecurity organization .

risks to cyber - based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats .

unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters , defective computer or network equipment , software coding errors , and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees .

intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups , hackers , disgruntled employees , foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare , and terrorists .

these adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities , willingness to act , and motives .

these threat sources make use of various techniques — or exploits — that may adversely affect federal information , computers , software , networks , and operations .

these exploits are carried out through various conduits , including websites , e - mails , wireless and cellular communications , internet protocols , portable media , and social media .

further , adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat by embedding exploits within software files that can be activated when a user opens a file within its corresponding program .

the number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing .

specifically , the number of incidents reported by federal agencies to the u.s. computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in fiscal year 2014 , an increase of 1,121 percent .

this upward trend continues .

according to omb , agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscal year 2015 .

similarly , the number of incidents involving pii reported by federal agencies has more than doubled in recent years , from 10,481 in 2009 to 27,624 in 2014 .

moreover , for fiscal year 2015 , omb reported that federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity , and agencies budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016 .

this amount may increase significantly , as the president's fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity .

cyber incidents can adversely affect national security , damage public health and safety , and compromise sensitive information .

regarding irs specifically , two recent incidents illustrate the impact on taxpayer and other sensitive information: in june 2015 , the commissioner of the irs testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its get transcript application .

according to officials , criminals used taxpayer - specific data acquired from non - agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts .

these data included social security information , dates of birth , and street addresses .

in an august 2015 update , irs reported this number to be about 114,000 , and reported that an additional 220,000 accounts had been inappropriately accessed .

in a february 2016 update , the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed .

thus , about 724,000 accounts were reportedly affected .

the online get transcript service has been unavailable since may 2015 .

in march 2016 , irs stated that as part of its ongoing security review , it had temporarily suspended the identity protection personal identification number ( ip pin ) service on irs.gov .

the ip pin is a single - use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft ( idt ) to help prevent future idt refund fraud .

the service on irs's website allowed taxpayers to retrieve their ip pins online by passing irs's authentication checks .

these checks confirm taxpayer identity by asking for personal , financial , and tax - related information .

the irs stated that it was conducting further review of the ip pin service and is looking at further strengthening the security features .

as of april 7 , the online service was still suspended .

as we reported in march 2016 , irs has implemented numerous protections over key financial and tax processing systems ; however , it had not always effectively implemented access and other controls , including elements of its information security program .

access controls are intended to prevent , limit , and detect unauthorized access to computing resources , programs , information , and facilities .

they include identification and authentication , authorization , cryptography , audit and monitoring , and physical security , among others .

in our most recent review we determined that irs had improved access controls , but some weaknesses remain .

identifying and authenticating users — such as through user account - password combinations — provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system .

irs established policies for identification and authentication , including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts and establishing password complexity and expiration requirements .

it also improved identification and authentication controls by , for example , expanding the use of an automated mechanism to centrally manage , apply , and verify password requirements .

however , weaknesses in identification and authentication controls remained .

for example , the agency used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems .

in addition , while irs continued to expand the use of two - factor access to its network , the treasury inspector general for tax administration reported that irs had not fully implemented unique user identification and authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements .

authorization controls limit what actions users are able to perform after being allowed into a system and should be based on the concept of “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties .

while irs established policies for authorizing access to its systems , it continued to permit excessive access in some cases .

for example , users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to perform their duties , including for an application used to process electronic tax payment information and a database on a human resources system .

cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users and protecting the integrity of transmitted or stored data .

irs policies require the use of encryption , and the agency continued to expand its use of encryption to protect sensitive data .

however , key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data .

audit and monitoring is the regular collection , review , and analysis of events on systems and networks in order to detect , respond to , and investigate unusual activity .

irs established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems and continued to enhance its capability by , for example , implementing an automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request and approval system .

but it had not established logging for two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts ; nor was the agency consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans .

physical security controls , such as physical access cards , limit access to an organization's overall facility and areas housing sensitive it components .

irs established policies for physically protecting its computer resources and physical security controls at its enterprise computer centers , such as a dedicated guard force at each of its computer centers .

however , the agency had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas .

irs also had weaknesses in configuration management controls , which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources ( eg , software and hardware ) and provide assurance that systems are configured and operating securely .

specifically , while irs developed policies for managing the configuration of its it systems and improved some configuration management controls , it did not , for example , ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems we reviewed , including a patch that had been available since august 2012 .

to its credit , irs had established contingency plans for the systems we reviewed , which help ensure that when unexpected events occur critical operations can continue without interruption or can be promptly resumed , and that information resources are protected .

specifically , irs had established policies for developing contingency plans for its information systems and for testing those plans , as well as for implementing and enforcing backup procedures .

moreover , the agency had documented and tested contingency plans for its systems and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems .

nevertheless , the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to irs's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency - wide information security program .

the agency established a comprehensive framework for its program , including assessing risk for its systems , developing system security plans , and providing employees with security awareness and specialized training .

however , irs had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access .

in addition , the agency had not fully mitigated previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective .

during our most recent review , irs told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations ; however , we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented .

the collective effect of the deficiencies in information security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015 , along with the new deficiencies we identified , are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of irs and therefore represented a significant deficiency in irs's internal control over financial reporting systems as of september 30 , 2015 .

to assist irs in fully implementing its agency - wide information security program , we made two new recommendations to more effectively implement security - related policies and plans .

in addition , to assist irs in strengthening security controls over the financial and tax processing systems we reviewed , we made 43 technical recommendations in a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management .

implementing these recommendations — in addition to the 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits — will help irs improve its controls for identifying and authenticating users , limiting users' access to the minimum necessary to perform their job - related functions , protecting sensitive data when they are stored or in transit , auditing and monitoring system activities , and physically securing its it facilities and resources .

table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to irs that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit , how many were resolved by the end of the audit , new recommendations , and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion of the audit .

in commenting on drafts of the reports presenting the results of our fiscal year 2015 audit , the irs commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with our new recommendations , it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes that implement appropriate security controls balanced against it and human capital resource limitations .

we have also previously reported that irs can take steps to improve its response to data breaches involving the inappropriate disclosure — or potential disclosure — of personally identifiable information .

specifically , in december 2013 we reported on the extent to which data breach policies at eight agencies , including irs , adhered to requirements and guidance set forth by omb and nist .

while the agencies in our review generally had policies and procedures in place that reflected the major elements of an effective data breach response program , implementation of these policies and procedures was not consistent .

with respect to irs , we determined that its policies and procedures generally reflected key practices , although the agency did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach .

in addition , irs did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts .

we recommended that irs correct these weaknesses , but the agency has yet to fully address them .

the importance of protecting taxpayer information is further highlighted by the billions of dollars that have been lost to idt refund fraud , which continues to be an evolving threat .

idt refund fraud occurs when a refund - seeking fraudster obtains an individual's social security number , date of birth , or other pii and uses it to file a fraudulent tax return seeking a refund .

this crime burdens legitimate taxpayers because authenticating their identities is likely to delay the processing of their tax returns and refunds .

moreover , the victim's pii can potentially be used to commit other crimes .

given current and emerging risks , in 2015 we expanded our high - risk area on the enforcement of tax laws to include irs's efforts to address idt refund fraud .

irs develops estimates of the extent of idt refund fraud to help direct its efforts to identify and prevent the crime .

while its estimates have inherent uncertainty , irs estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent idt refunds in filing season 2014 .

however , it also estimated that it paid $3.1 billion in fraudulent idt refunds .

irs has taken steps to address idt refund fraud ; however , it remains a persistent and evolving threat .

for example in its fiscal year 2014-2017 strategic plan , irs increased resources dedicated to combating idt and other types of refund fraud .

in 2015 , irs reported allocating more than 4,000 full - time equivalent staff and spending $470 million on refund fraud and idt activities .

in addition , irs received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service , idt identification and prevention , and cybersecurity efforts .

the agency has also taken actions to improve customer service related to idt fraud by , for example , providing an increased level of service to taxpayers calling its identity theft toll - free phone line .

in addition , irs has worked with tax preparation professionals , states , and financial institutions to better detect and prevent idt fraud .

these efforts notwithstanding , fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in idt defense , such as by gaining access to taxpayers' tax return transcripts through irs's online get transcript service .

according to irs officials , this allows fraudsters to create historically consistent returns that are hard to distinguish from one filed by a legitimate taxpayer .

these continuing challenges highlight the need for additional actions by irs .

as we have reported , there are steps irs can take to , among other things , better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds .

in january 2015 we reported that irs's authentication tools have limitations .

for example , individuals could obtain an e - file pin by providing their name , social security number , date of birth , address , and filing status for irs's e - file pin application .

identity thieves can easily find this information , allowing them to bypass some , if not all , of irs's automatic checks .

after filing an idt return using an e - file pin , the fraudster could file a fraudulent return through irs's normal return processing .

accordingly , we recommended that irs assess the costs , benefits , and risks of its authentication options .

in november 2015 , irs officials told us that the agency had developed guidance for its identity assurance office to assess costs , benefits , and risk of authentication tools .

in february 2016 , officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in september 2016 .

until it completes these steps , irs will lack key information to make decisions about whether and how much to invest in authentication options .

under fisma , the director of omb is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies , principles , standards , and guidelines on information security in federal agencies , except with regard to national security and certain other systems .

the director is also responsible for coordinating the development of standards and guidelines by nist .

for its part , nist is responsible under fisma for developing security standards and guidelines for agencies that include standards for categorizing information and information systems according to ranges of impact levels , minimum security requirements for information and information systems in risk categories , guidelines for detection and handling of information security incidents , and guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system .

accordingly , omb and nist have prescribed policies , standards , and guidelines that are intended to assist federal agencies with identifying and providing information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from the unauthorized access , use , disclosure , alteration , and destruction of information and information systems , including those systems operated by a contractor or others on behalf of the agency .

these include the following: omb m - 14-03 , enhancing the security of federal information and information systems , which provides agencies with direction for managing information security risk on a continuous basis , including requirements for establishing information security continuous monitoring programs .

nist , federal information processing standard 199 , standards for security categorization of federal information and information systems , requires agencies to categorize their information systems as low - impact , moderate - impact , or high - impact for the security objectives of confidentiality , integrity , and availability .

nist federal information processing standard 200 , minimum security requirements for federal information and information systems , specifies minimum security requirements for federal agency information and information systems and a risk - based process for selecting the security controls necessary to satisfy these requirements .

nist special publication 800-53 , security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations , provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations and a process for selecting controls .

omb and nist also have provided guidance to agencies on procedures for authenticating users to federal systems and websites , including the following: omb m - 15-13 , policy to require secure connections across federal websites and web services , which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection .

omb m - 04-04 , e - authentication guidance for federal agencies , which addresses federal government services accomplished using the internet , instead of on paper , and calls for identity verification or authentication to make sure that online government services are secure and protect privacy .

this guidance established four levels of identity assurance for electronic transactions requiring authentication .

each level describes the agency's degree of certainty that a user has presented an identifier that refers to his or her identity: level 1: little or no confidence in the asserted identity's validity .

level 2: some confidence in the asserted identity's validity .

level 3: high confidence in the asserted identity's validity .

level 4: very high confidence in the asserted identity's validity .

nist special publication 800-63-2 , electronic authentication guideline , provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication and covers remote authentication of users ( such as employees , contractors , or private individuals ) interacting with government it systems over open networks .

specifically , it provides technical requirements for agencies to use in selecting technology to achieve specified levels of e - authentication assurance , as defined by omb and illustrated by the following examples: level 1: identity proofing is not required .

successful authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token .

the cryptographic methods used at this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack ( i.e. , guessing a password through trial - and - error using a dictionary ) .

level 2: requires single - factor remote authentication , using one of three factors — something you know ( eg , a password ) , something you have ( eg , an identification badge ) , or something you are ( eg , a fingerprint ) .

identity proofing requirements are introduced , requiring presentation of identifying materials or information .

approved cryptographic methods would not allow the type of eavesdropping attack that is possible at level 1 .

level 3: requires multi - factor remote authentication , requiring at least two authentication factors .

an individual proves possession of a physical or software token in combination with some memorized knowledge .

approved cryptographic methods should be strong enough to protect against impersonation of the verifying entity .

level 4: is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance , requiring the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol .

at this level in - person identity proofing is required .

it is otherwise similar to level 3 , except with stronger cryptographic methods in place .

federal law also gives omb and dhs responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal information security .

in particular , the omb director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements by taking certain actions authorized by relevant federal law ( discussed in more detail below ) , and omb has developed various mechanisms to carry out its oversight function .

budgetary authority: federal law gives omb the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies' management of their information resources , which includes ensuring that information security policies , procedures , and practices are adequate .

in particular , in enforcing accountability , omb is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency's budget and restrict the availability of funds for information resources , among other things .

omb cyber unit: in fiscal year 2015 , omb established the omb cyber and national security unit ( omb cyber ) within the office of the federal chief information officer .

this unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government - wide programs , issuing and implementing policies to address emerging it security risks , and oversight of government - wide response to major incidents and vulnerabilities .

cyberstat reviews: omb has also established the “cyberstat review” process , which involves evidence - based meetings led by omb to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture , while assisting them in developing targeted , tactical actions to deliver results .

fisma reporting: as required by fisma , omb reports annually to congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year and a summary of evaluations conducted by agency inspectors general .

regarding dhs , the federal information security modernization act of 2014 codified its responsibility for certain operational aspects of federal agency cybersecurity .

in particular , dhs is responsible for administering , in consultation with omb , the implementation of agency information security policies and practices for information systems ( other than national security systems , department of defense , and the intelligence community's “debilitating impact” systems ) ; developing , issuing , and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives to agencies on matters such as incident reporting , contents of agency's annual reports , and other operational requirements ; and operating the federal information security incident center ( the u.s computer emergency readiness team or us - cert ) , deploying technology to continuously diagnose and mitigate threats , compiling and analyzing data , and developing and conducting targeted operational evaluations , including threat and vulnerability assessments of systems .

in may 2015 dhs issued its first directive , which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their internet - facing systems .

dhs identifies these vulnerabilities using scanning tools and reports the results to agencies on a weekly basis .

agencies are then required to mitigate the dhs - identified vulnerabilities within 30 days of the report , or provide a justification to dhs outlining barriers , planned steps for resolution , and a time frame for mitigation .

dhs has also supplied agencies with tools and technologies to assist in protecting against cyber threats and vulnerabilities .

for example: continuous diagnostics and mitigation program: since fiscal year 2013 , dhs has provided agencies the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks on an ongoing basis , prioritize these risks based on potential impacts , and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first .

national cybersecurity protection system: ncps is an integrated system - of - systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection , intrusion prevention , analytics , and information sharing .

when deployed on an agency's connection to the internet , the system monitors inbound and outbound traffic for malicious activity .

in summary , while irs has made progress in implementing information security controls , it needs to continue to address weaknesses in access controls and configuration management and consistently implement all elements of its information security program .

the risks irs is exposed to have been illustrated by recent incidents involving public - facing applications , highlighting the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data .

in addition , fully implementing key elements of a breach response program will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur , their impact on affected individuals will be minimized .

irs also needs to assess the costs , benefits , and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems .

finally , strengthening the security posture of irs — and other agencies — also depends on the key roles played by omb , nist , and dhs in providing oversight and guidance from a government - wide perspective , such as that related to improving authentication .

chairwoman comstock , ranking member lipinski , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you have .

if you have any questions regarding this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov , nancy kingsbury at ( 202 ) 512-2928 or kingsburyn@gao.gov , or james r. mctigue , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or mctiguej@gao.gov .

other key contributors to this statement include jeffrey knott , larry crosland , john de ferrari , and neil a. pinney ( assistant directors ) ; dawn e. bidne ; mark canter ; james cook , shannon j. finnegan ; lee mccracken ; justin palk ; j. daniel paulk ; monica perez - nelson ; david plocher ; erin saunders rath ; and daniel swartz .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

