thank you for the opportunity to appear before the subcommittee to present our findings on the enforcement of antidumping and countervailing duties .

since fiscal year 2001 , the federal government has been unable to collect over $1 billion in antidumping ( ad ) and countervailing ( cv ) duties imposed to remedy injurious , unfair foreign trade practices .

these include ad duties imposed on products exported to the united states at unfairly low prices ( i.e. , dumped ) and cv duties on products exported to the united states that were subsidized by foreign governments .

these uncollected duties show that the u.s. government has not fully remedied the unfair trade practices for u.s. industry and has lost out on a substantial amount of duties that would have increased revenue to the u.s. treasury .

in my statement today , i will summarize key findings from our prior reports on ( 1 ) past initiatives to improve ad / cv duty collection and ( 2 ) additional options for improving ad / cv duty collection .

this statement is based on a body of work that we have conducted over the last several years for congress on issues related to the enforcement of u.s. trade laws , particularly a 2008 report on collection of ad / cv duties and a report , issued earlier this year , that included improved collection of ad / cv duties among opportunities for enhancing government revenue .

since our 2008 report was issued , we have followed up with the u.s. government agencies involved in responding to our recommendations to improve ad / cv duty collection .

we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the united states and many of its trading partners have established laws to remedy the unfair trade practices of other countries and foreign companies that cause injury to domestic industries .

u.s. law authorizes the imposition of ad / cv duties to remedy these unfair trade practices , namely dumping ( i.e. , sales at less than normal value ) and foreign government subsidies .

the u.s. ad / cv duty system is retrospective , in that importers pay estimated ad / cv duties at the time of importation , but the final amount of duties is not determined until later .

by contrast , other major u.s. trading partners have ad / cv duty systems that , although different from one another , are fundamentally prospective in that ad / cv duties assessed at the time a product enters the country are essentially treated as final .

two key u.s. agencies are involved in assessing and collecting ad / cv duties owed .

the department of commerce ( commerce ) is responsible for calculating the appropriate ad / cv duty rate , which it issues in an ad / cv duty order .

commerce typically determines two types of ad / cv duty rates in the course of an initial ad / cv duty investigation on a product: a rate applicable to a product associated with several specific manufacturers and exporters , as well as an “all others” rate for all other manufacturers and exporters of the product who were not individually investigated .

after the initial ad / cv duty investigation , commerce can often conduct two subsequent types of review: administrative and new shipper .

administrative review: one year after the initial rate is established , commerce can also conduct a review to determine the actual , rather than estimated , level of dumping or subsidization .

at the conclusion of the administrative review , the final duty rate , also known as the liquidation rate , is established for the product .

new shipper review: after an initial rate is established , a new shipper ( i.e. , a shipper who has not previously exported the product to the united states during the initial period of investigation and is not affiliated with any exporter who exported the subject merchandise ) who is subject to the “all others” rate can request that commerce conduct a review to establish the shipper's own individual ad / cv duty rate .

u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , part of the department of homeland security , is responsible for collecting the ad / cv duties .

the initial ad / cv duty order issued by commerce instructs cbp to collect cash deposits at the time of importation on the products subject to the order .

once commerce establishes a final duty rate , it communicates the rate to cbp through liquidation instructions , and cbp instructs staff at each port of entry to assess final duties on all relevant products ( technically called liquidating ) .

this may result in providing importers — who are responsible for paying all duties , taxes , and fees on products brought into the united states — with a refund or sending an additional bill .

cbp is also responsible for setting the formula for establishing the bond amounts that importers must pay .

to ensure payment of unforeseen obligations to the government , all importers are required to post a security , usually a general obligation bond , when they import products into the united states .

this bond is an insurance policy protecting the u.s. government against revenue loss if an importer defaults on its financial obligations .

in general , the importer is required to obtain a bond equal to 10 percent of the amount the importer was assessed in duties , taxes , and fees over the preceding year ( or $50,000 , whichever is greater ) .

in addition , importers purchasing from the new shipper can pay estimated ad / cv duties by providing a bond in lieu of paying cash to cover the duties — an option known as the new shipper bonding privilege .

we previously reported that over $613 million in ad / cv duties from fiscal years 2001 through 2007 went uncollected , with the uncollected duties highly concentrated among a few industries , products , countries of origin , and importers .

recent cbp data indicate that uncollected duties from fiscal year 2001 to 2010 have grown to over $1 billion and are still highly concentrated .

for example , according to cbp , five products from china account for 84 percent of uncollected duties .

cbp , congress , and commerce have undertaken several initiatives to address the problem of uncollected ad / cv duties .

however , these initiatives have not resolved the problems associated with collections .

in response to the problems of collecting ad / cv duties , in july 2004 , cbp announced a revision to bonds covering certain imports subject to these duties , significantly increasing the value of bonds required of importers .

cbp's goal was to increase protection for securing ad / cv duty revenue for certain imports when the final amount of duties owed exceeds the amount paid at the time of importation , without imposing an “excessive burden” on importers .

in february 2005 , cbp applied this revision to imports of shrimp from six countries as a test case , which covered a potential increase in the final ad duty rate of up to 85 percent from the initial rate .

however , shrimp importers reported that the costs were substantial because they had to pay up front higher premiums and larger collateral requirements to obtain the bonds for the initial duties .

these increased up - front costs can deter malfeasance by illegitimate importers by increasing the cost of importing merchandise subject to ad / cv duties , but may also impose costs on legitimate importers that pose little risk of failing to pay retrospective ad / cv duties .

the enhanced bonding requirement was subject to domestic and world trade organization ( wto ) litigation , and cbp decided to terminate the requirement in april 2009 .

congress partially addressed the risk that cbp would not be able to collect ad / cv duties from new shippers by suspending the new shipper bonding privilege from august 2006 to july 2009 .

as a result , importers purchasing from new shippers were required to post a cash deposit for estimated ad / cv duties , like all other importers .

this requirement eliminated the risk of uncollected ad / cv revenues when the final duty amounts were assessed at the cash deposit rate or less because cbp did not have to issue a bill for the bonded amount .

upon the july 2009 expiration of the requirement , the new shipper bonding privilege was reinstated .

the treasury stated in a 2008 report to congress that the added risk associated with the bond compared with the cash deposit is low .

commerce has taken steps to improve the transmission of liquidation instructions to cbp , which should improve cbp's ability to liquidate ad / cv duties in a timely manner .

once commerce determines the final ad / cv duty , it publishes a notice in the federal register , and cbp has 6 months to complete the liquidation process .

if cbp fails to complete the liquidation process within 6 months , an entry is “deemed liquidated” at the rate asserted by the importer at the time of entry .

once an entry has been deemed liquidated , cbp cannot attempt to collect any supplemental additional duties that might have been owed because of an increase in the ad / cv duty rate from initial to final .

commerce's liquidation instructions are necessary for cbp to assess and collect the appropriate amount of ad / cv duties in a timely manner .

however , we reported in 2008 that there were frequent delays in commerce's transmission of liquidation instructions to cbp , and that about 80 percent of the time , commerce failed to send liquidation instructions within its self - imposed 15-day deadline .

in addition , we found that commerce's liquidation instructions were sometimes unclear , thereby causing cbp to take extra time to obtain clarification .

in december 2007 , after we made commerce officials aware of the untimely liquidation instructions , commerce announced a plan for tracking timeliness , including a quarterly reporting requirement .

in april 2011 commerce officials told us that commerce had deployed a system for tracking commerce's liquidation instructions .

in addition , commerce and cbp established a mechanism for cbp port personnel to submit questions to commerce regarding liquidation issues .

the house and senate appropriations committees directed us to examine whether international agreements to which the united states is a party could be strengthened to improve the collection of ad / cv duties from importers with no attachable assets in the united states .

we reported in 2008 that u.s. agency officials believed this would be both difficult and ineffective because of two key obstacles: few countries are willing to enter into negotiations , and u.s. and foreign governments have a practice of not enforcing a revenue claim based upon the revenue laws of another country .

in addition , agency officials stated that strengthening international agreements would not substantially improve the collection of ad / cv duties , given the retrospective nature of the ad / cv duty system and the high cost of litigation .

there are two key components of the u.s. ad / cv duty system that have not been addressed but could improve the collection of ad / cv duties: the retrospective nature of the system and the new shipper review process .

in addition , commerce and cbp are contemplating changes to the bonding process .

one key component of the u.s. ad / cv duty system is its unique retrospective nature , which creates risks of uncollected duties both because of time lags and rate changes .

as discussed earlier , importers pay the estimated amount of ad / cv duties when products enter the united states , but the final amount of duties owed is not determined until later .

in 2008 , we found that the average time elapsed between entry of goods and liquidation was more than 3 years .

the long time lag between the initial entry of a product and the final assessment of duties heightens the risk that the government will be unable to collect the full amount owed , as importers may disappear , cease business operations , or declare bankruptcy .

the final amount owed under the retrospective system of the united states can also be substantially more than the original estimate , putting revenue at risk .

we reported that , while final ad duty rates are lower than or the same as the estimated duty rates the vast majority of the time , in some cases final duty rates are significantly higher .

on the basis of our analysis of more than 6 years of cbp data covering over 900,000 entries subject to ad duties , we found that duty rates went up 16 percent of the time , went down 24 percent of the time , and remained the same 60 percent of the time .

when duty rates increased , the median increase was less than 4 percentage points .

however , because of some large increases , the average rate increase was 62 percentage points , with some increases greater than 150 to 200 percentage points .

the majority of uncollected duty bills over $500,000 are attributed to rate increases greater than 150 percentage points .

in our 2008 report , we noted that the advantages and disadvantages of prospective and retrospective ad / cv duty systems differ and depend on specific design features .

in prospective ad / cv duty systems , the amount of ad / cv duties paid by the importer at the time of importation is essentially treated as final .

this eliminates the risk of being unable to collect ad / cv duties and creates certainty for importers .

in a retrospective ad / cv duty system , however , the amount of ad / cv duties owed is not determined until well after the time of importation .

this time lag can result in “bad actors,” those importers who intentionally avoid paying required duties , not being identified until they have been importing for a long time .

only after its collections efforts are unsuccessful does the government clearly know that duties owed by this importer are at serious risk for noncollection .

prospective ad / cv duty systems create a smaller burden for customs officials because the full and final amount of ad / cv duties is assessed at the time of importation , whereas , according to cbp , the retrospective ad / cv duty system of the united states places a unique and significant burden on cbp's resources .

depending on the design of the prospective ad / cv duty systems , the amount of duties assessed is based on dumping or subsidization that occurred in a previous period , and therefore may not equal the amount of actual dumping or subsidization , whereas under a retrospective ad / cv duty system , the amount of duties assessed reflects the actual amount of dumping by the exporter for the period of review .

however , in practice , a substantial amount of retrospective ad / cv duty bills are not collected .

in response to a recommendation in our 2008 report , commerce reported to congress in 2010 on the advantages and disadvantages of retrospective and prospective systems .

while the commerce report cites a variety of strengths and weaknesses for both systems , it states that retroactive increases in ad / cv duties are particularly harmful for small businesses such as shrimp and seafood importers .

under a retrospective system , the commerce report notes , such small u.s. importers potentially face years of uncertainty over duty liability that can hinder their ability to make informed business decisions , plan investments , and create jobs .

another component of the ad / cv duty collection system that has not been resolved is the new shipper review process .

this process allows new manufacturers or exporters to petition for their own separate ad / cv duty rate .

however , u.s. law does not specify a minimum amount of exports or number of transactions that a company must make to be eligible for a new shipper review , and according to commerce officials , they do not have the legislative authority to create any such requirement .

as a result , a shipper can be assigned an individual duty rate based on a minimal amount of exports — as little as one shipment , according to commerce — and can intentionally set a high price for this small amount of initial exports .

this creates the possibility that companies may be able to get a low ( or 0 percent ) initial duty rate , which will subsequently rise when the exporter lowers its price .

this creates additional risk by putting the government in the position of having to collect additional duties in the future rather than at the time of importation .

importers that purchased goods from companies undergoing a new shipper review are responsible for approximately 40 percent of uncollected ad / cv duties .

commerce and cbp have proposed additional changes to the bonding process to try to reduce the risk of uncollected ad / cv duties .

in april 2011 , commerce proposed a rule that would eliminate the bond that all shippers post when entering products under an ad / cv investigation and require a cash deposit instead .

a key reason for the change is that importers bear full responsibility for future duties , according to commerce .

separately , in may 2011 , cbp's commissioner of international trade stated in a senate hearing that cbp is developing internal guidance to require that importers at risk of evasion take out onetime bonds that cover at least the full value of the shipment ( single - transaction bonds ) .

currently , shippers typically take out a “continuous bond” that covers all import transactions over the course of a year , and is calculated at 10 percent of the prior year's duties ( or $50,000 , whichever is greater ) .

gao has not reviewed these proposals or assessed their potential effect on the collection of additional ad / cv duties .

the existence of a substantial amount of uncollected ad / cv duties undermines the effectiveness of the u.s. government's efforts to remedy unfair foreign trade practices for u.s. industry .

while congress and federal agencies have taken actions to address the problem of uncollected duties , these initiatives have met with little success .

some additional options exist that congress could pursue to further protect government revenue .

in particular , congress could eliminate the retrospective component of the u.s. ad / cv duty system and consider the variety of alternative prospective systems available .

congress could also make adjustments to specific aspects of the u.s. ad / cv duty system without altering its retrospective nature , such as by providing commerce the discretion to require companies applying for a new shipper review to have a minimum amount or value of imports before establishing an individual ad / cv duty rate .

however , any effort to improve the u.s. ad / cv duty system should consider the additional costs placed on legitimate importers while attempting to address the issue of illegitimate importers .

we continue to respond to congressional interest in this issue , and have recently begun a review of the evasion of trade duty laws , in response to a request from the subcommittee on international trade , customs , and global competitiveness , senate committee on finance .

chairman landrieu , ranking member coats , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

for further information about this statement , please contact loren yager at ( 202 ) 512-4347 or yagerl@gao.gov .

individuals who made key contributions to this statement include christine broderick ( assistant director ) , jason bair , ken bombara , aniruddha dasgupta , grace lui , diahanna post , and julia roberts .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

