we appreciate the opportunity to testify today on bus rapid transit as an innovative option for improving bus service .

buses form the backbone of the public mass transit system in the united states .

the majority of those who use mass transit , about 58 percent of all riders , take the bus .

even in many cities with extensive rail networks , such as chicago and san francisco , more people ride buses than use the rail systems .

in recent years , innovative bus rapid transit systems have gained attention as an option for transit agencies to meet their mass transit needs .

in general , bus rapid transit is designed to provide major improvements in the speed , reliability , and quality of bus service through barrier - separated busways ( see fig .

1 ) , high - occupancy vehicle lanes , or reserved lanes or other enhancements on arterial streets .

bus rapid transit systems vary considerably in their characteristics but may include ( 1 ) improved physical facilities or specialized structures such as dedicated rights - of - way ; ( 2 ) operating differences such as fewer stops and higher speeds ; ( 3 ) new equipment such as more advanced , quieter , and cleaner buses ; and ( 4 ) new technologies such as more efficient traffic signalization and real - time information systems .

my testimony today will provide ( 1 ) information on federal support for bus rapid transit systems and ( 2 ) an overview of the factors affecting the selection of bus rapid transit as a mass transit option .

my statement is primarily based on information presented in our september 2001 report on bus rapid transit .

to complete that effort , we visited transit agencies in dallas , denver , los angeles , pittsburgh , san diego , and san jose to obtain capital and operating cost information .

we made cost and other comparisons between bus rapid transit and light rail transit systems , which often compete as project alternatives .

we also interviewed federal officials and industry experts to identify the advantages and disadvantages of bus rapid transit .

in addition , for the testimony , we obtained updates of the information in our 2001 report from federal transit administration officials .

federal support for bus rapid transit projects may come from several different sources , including the federal transit administration's new starts , bus capital , and urbanized area formula grants programs .

however , few bus rapid transit projects are scheduled to receive new starts grant funding .

through fiscal year 2004 , one bus rapid transit project in boston was awarded a new starts grant , totaling about $331 million .

new starts commitments for bus rapid transit projects are limited because ( 1 ) few bus rapid transit projects are ready to compete for funding ; ( 2 ) competition for new starts funds is intense — currently , 85 mass transit projects at various stages are competing for funds ; and ( 3 ) certain types of bus rapid transit projects are not eligible for new starts funding because the program provides funding only for projects that operate on separate right - of - ways for the exclusive use of mass transit and high - occupancy vehicles .

in addition , constraints on the use or size of the other federal grants may limit their usefulness for bus rapid transit projects .

however , some programs that expand the capacity of highways , such as introducing new variable toll lanes , can be used in conjunction with bus rapid transit to the mutual benefit of transit and highway users .

besides awarding grants to construct systems , the federal transit administration supports bus rapid transit through a demonstration program that began in 1999 .

under this program , $50,000 was provided to each of 10 grantees to improve information sharing among transit agencies about issues pertaining to bus rapid transit .

the demonstration program is designed to determine the extent to which bus rapid transit can increase ridership , improve efficiency , and provide high - quality service .

the grantees' projects include dedicated busways , bus lanes on arterial streets , improved technology on buses , and other innovations .

communities consider several factors when they select mass transit options .

our 2001 report examined such factors as capital cost and operating costs , system performance , and other advantages and disadvantages of bus rapid transit .

we found , for example , that the capital costs of bus rapid transit in the cities we reviewed averaged $13.5 million per mile for busways , $9.0 million per mile for buses on high - occupancy vehicle lanes , and $680,000 per mile for buses on city streets , when adjusted to 2000 dollars .

for comparison , we examined the capital costs of several light rail lines and found that they averaged about $34.8 million per mile , ranging from $12.4 million to $118.8 million per mile .

in addition , in the cities we reviewed that had both types of service , neither bus rapid transit nor light rail had a consistent advantage in terms of operating costs .

we also found that bus rapid transit compared favorably with light rail systems in terms of operating speed and ridership .

furthermore , bus rapid transit has the advantage of being flexible: buses can be rerouted more easily to accommodate changing travel patterns to eliminate transfers ; buses can operate on busways , high - occupancy vehicle lanes , and city arterial streets .

however , bus rapid transit has some disadvantages as well .

for example , the public may view buses as slow , noisy , and polluting .

moreover , according to some transit agency officials , alternatives to bus rapid transit , such as light rail , may be viewed as a hallmark of a “world - class” city and a means to improve the community's image and spur economic development .

bus rapid transit involves coordinated improvements in a transit system's infrastructure , equipment , operations , and technology that give preferential treatment to buses on urban roadways .

bus rapid transit is not a single type of transit system ; rather , it encompasses a variety of approaches designed to improve speed , reliability , and quality of service .

we identified three general types of bus rapid transit systems — those that ( 1 ) use buses on exclusive busways , ( 2 ) share high - occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lanes with other vehicles , and ( 3 ) provide improved bus service on city arterial streets .

busways — special roadways designed for the exclusive use of buses — can be totally separate roadways or separated by barriers from other traffic within highway rights - of - way .

busways currently exist in pittsburgh , miami , and charlotte .

buses on hov lanes operate on limited - access highways designed for long - distance commuters .

dallas , denver , houston , los angeles , and seattle make extensive use of hov lanes for buses .

bus rapid transit service on busways or hov lanes is sometimes augmented by park and ride facilities and entrances and exits for these lanes .

bus rapid transit systems using arterial streets may have lanes reserved for buses and street enhancements that speed buses and improve service .

los angeles has instituted a type of bus rapid transit service on two arterial corridors .

bus rapid transit may also include any of the following features: traffic signal priority .

buses receiving an early or extended green light at intersections reduce travel time — in los angeles , for example , by as much as 10 percent .

boarding and fare collection improvements .

prepaid or electronic passes increase the convenience and speed of fare collection , and low - floor or wide - door boarding saves time .

limited stops .

increasing distances between stations or shelters improves operating speeds .

improved stations and shelters .

bus terminals and unique stations or shelters differentiate bus rapid transit service from standard bus service .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

intelligent transportation system technologies .

advanced technology can maintain consistent distances between buses and inform passengers when the next bus is arriving .

cleaner and quieter vehicles .

improved diesel buses and buses using alternative fuels are cleaner than traditional diesel buses .

in our september 2001 review of bus rapid transit systems , we found that at least 17 u.s. cities were planning to incorporate aspects of bus rapid transit into their operations .

a variety of federal grant programs could be used to help fund bus rapid transit projects , but few projects are in line to receive awards .

the federal transit administration ( fta ) has also provided funding for several bus rapid transit projects through a demonstration program .

grant funds administered primarily by fta and , to a lesser extent , by the federal highway administration are available for bus rapid transit projects .

however , few bus rapid transit projects are ready to compete for these funds , competition for funding is intense , and constraints on the use and size of the grants limit their usefulness for bus rapid transit projects .

fta's new starts program is the primary source of federal funding for the construction of new transit systems and extensions to existing systems .

it provides grants of up to 80 percent of the capital costs of bus and rail projects that operate on exclusive rights - of - way .

to obtain funds , a project must progress through a local or regional review of alternatives , develop preliminary engineering plans , and receive fta's approval of the final design .

fta annually proposes new starts projects to the congress for funding , basing its proposal on an evaluation of each project's technical merits , including its planned mobility improvements and cost effectiveness , and the stability of the locality's financial commitment .

in making its funding proposal each year , fta gives preference to projects with existing grant agreements .

fta then considers projects with overall ratings of “recommended” or “highly recommended” under the evaluation criteria .

the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) authorized about $6 billion in “guaranteed” funding over 6 years for new starts transit projects .

as table 1 indicates , few bus rapid transit projects are ready to compete for new starts funding .

apart from the one project that has already received a funding commitment , none has progressed far enough for fta to evaluate it for funding , and not all of the six projects that are in the preliminary engineering and final design categories may decide to compete for new starts funding .

in addition to bus rapid transit projects , light rail , heavy rail , and commuter railroad projects can compete for new starts funding .

nationwide , over 200 projects are now in various stages of development , and these other types of projects outnumber bus rapid transit projects in all of the new starts program categories .

of the approximately $7.4 billion in proposed commitments for new starts projects with full - funding grant agreements for fiscal year 2004 , about $4.6 billion is for light rail , $2.0 billion for heavy rail , $430 million for commuter rail , and $330 million for bus rapid transit .

the funding for bus rapid transit was awarded to a project in boston .

a constraint on the use of new starts funding further limits its use for bus rapid transit projects .

currently , the program requires that , to be eligible for funding , a project must operate on separate rights - of - way for the exclusive use of mass transit and high - occupancy vehicles .

while some bus rapid transit projects , such as busways , fit this requirement , others , such as those that operate buses on city streets in mixed traffic , do not .

fta has proposed changing the fixed - guideway requirement in its fiscal year 2004 budget proposal .

under the proposal , new non - fixed - guideway improvements done on a corridor basis would be eligible for new starts funds .

this change could allow new starts funds to be used for arterial street bus rapid transit projects , because these projects operate in specific corridors .

other federal programs also provide grants for transit projects , but constraints on the use or size of these grants may limit their usefulness for bus rapid transit projects .

for example: as we noted in our 2001 report , transit agencies can apply funds obtained through fta's urbanized area formula grants program to bus rapid transit and other transit projects .

this program provides capital and operating assistance to urbanized areas with populations of more than 50,000 .

however , areas with populations over 200,000 may only use the funds for capital improvements .

the bus capital program provides a large number of relatively small grants to states and local transit agencies for bus improvements .

in fiscal year 2003 , the congress appropriated about $651 million for 387 grants , ranging from $30,000 to $16 million ; the largest amounts were typically provided for statewide bus projects .

in fiscal year 2003 , a number of bus rapid transit projects are expected to receive funds under this program .

for example , the hartford - new britain busway project in connecticut was allocated about $7.4 million , and the bus rapid transit system in honolulu was allocated about $7.9 million .

while these funds can be combined with funds from other programs , such as new starts , they are generally not sufficient to fund a major bus rapid transit project alone .

bus rapid transit and other transit projects can qualify for certain types of federal highway funds administered by the federal highway administration .

for example , as noted in our 2001 report , transit agencies have used surface transportation program and congestion mitigation and air quality improvement funds to help pay for transit projects .

the boston bus rapid transit project , with a full funding grant agreement , did not plan to use highway funds as part of its project financing .

bus rapid transit can also be utilized in conjunction with the federal highway administration's value pricing pilot program .

this program allows high occupancy vehicle lanes to be converted to variable toll lanes , where the toll varies with the level of congestion on the highway .

in a project on the i - 15 freeway in san diego , the revenue generated from the tolls is used to help fund an express bus service operating on the toll lane .

plans to build additional variable toll lanes in san diego include expansion of bus rapid transit to operate on the new lanes .

projects such as this are limited , however , by a prohibition on charging tolls on the interstate highway system and by the inherently limited scope of the pilot program .

in 1999 , fta initiated a demonstration program to generate familiarity and interest in bus rapid transit .

from fta's perspective , bus rapid transit is a step toward developing public transit systems that have the performance and appeal of light rail systems , but lower capital costs .

fta contends that using technological advancements will allow buses to operate with the speed , reliability , and efficiency of rail systems .

fta promotes the bus rapid transit concept with the slogan “think rail , use buses.” the goal of the demonstration program was to promote improved bus service as an alternative to more capital - intensive rail projects .

the program provided $50,000 to 10 transit agencies to share information and data on new bus rapid transit projects .

fta wanted the bus rapid transit program to show how using technological advancements and improving the image of buses would allow buses to increase ridership and operate with the speed , reliability , and efficiency of light rail .

the grantees in the demonstration program may also be eligible for federal capital funds through the new starts , bus capital , and urbanized area formula grants programs .

fta has held workshops focusing on developing components of bus rapid transit systems , such as vehicles , marketing and promoting the system's image , fare collection , and traffic operations .

some localities participating in the demonstration program have planned or put in place more extensive components of a bus rapid transit system than others .

for example , miami and charlotte have busways for the exclusive use of buses , while san jose is implementing technological and service improvements , such as signal prioritization on a high - ridership hov - lane arterial corridor .

in eugene , plans are to purchase buses that will look like trains and operate in special bus lanes .

in cleveland , an extensive bus rapid transit project is planned that involves the extensive reconstruction of euclid avenue , including signal prioritization , bus station structures , and reconstructed sidewalks along the corridor .

table 2 summarizes differences in the components of bus rapid transit demonstration projects .

fta plans to evaluate the demonstration projects after they are implemented .

through these evaluations , fta wants to determine the most effective bus rapid transit elements so that other transit agencies can model similar systems .

decisions to pursue a bus rapid transit project require significant planning and analysis of factors associated with transit options .

our 2001 report examined such factors as capital and operating costs , system performance , and other advantages and disadvantages of bus rapid transit .

the cost of constructing a mass transit system is a major consideration for communities as they evaluate their transportation options .

our september 2001 report examined 20 existing bus rapid transit lines and found that bus rapid transit capital costs , when adjusted to 2000 dollars , averaged $13.5 million per mile for busways , $9.0 million per mile for buses on hov lanes , and $680,000 per mile for buses on city streets .

to put this information in perspective , we also determined the capital costs for 18 existing light rail lines and found that , when adjusted to 2000 dollars , they averaged about $34.8 million per mile , ranging from $12.4 million to $118.8 million per mile .

bus rapid transit has some capital cost advantages because it does not require certain features typical of rail systems , such as train signals , electrical power systems , and overhead wires to deliver power to trains , nor does it need rail , ties , and track ballast .

as a result , bus rapid transit projects typically cost less to build than some alterative approaches .

the operating cost associated with alternatives also need to be considered in selecting a transit option .

our 2001 report analyzed operating costs for six cities that had some form of bus rapid transit and light rail systems .

in general , we found that the operating cost of bus rapid transit varied considerably from city to city and depended on what cost measure was used .

in considering operating costs , we did not find a systematic advantage of one mode over the other .

an important objective of any mass transit system is to move as many people as quickly as possible .

ridership and the speed of a system are therefore factors to be considered in selecting transit options .

in the systems we examined , these factors varied considerably for bus rapid transit .

for example , we found that bus rapid transit ridership on 4 busways ranged from about 7,000 to about 30,000 per day , and averaged about 15,600 per day .

for 13 bus lines on hov lanes , ridership varied from about 1,000 to 25,000 per day .

in addition , the ridership on the two arterial - street bus rapid transit lines in los angeles was about 9,000 to 56,000 per day , with an average of 32,500 per day .

thus , bus rapid transit systems are capable of moving large numbers of passengers each day .

we also found that light rail ridership varied widely on the 18 lines we reviewed , ranging from 7,000 to 57,000 riders per day and averaging about 29,000 per day .

according to a transportation consultant we contacted for our 2001 report , system speed generally depends on characteristics such as the distance between stops , fare - collection methods , and the degree to which the roadway or tracks are reserved for transit vehicles or share the right - of - way with cars and other vehicles .

our analysis for the 2001 report showed a range of average speeds for bus rapid transit , from 17 miles an hour for an arterial system on city streets to over 55 miles an hour for a system that used hov lanes .

we also found that , in most instances , bus rapid transit was faster than light rail in the six cities in our study .

the other advantages and disadvantages of bus rapid transit could also affect a community's decision to pursue it as a mass transit option .

for example , bus rapid transit generally has the advantage of being a flexible system that can respond to changes in employment , land - use , and community patterns by increasing or decreasing capacity .

in addition , bus rapid transit routes can be adjusted and rerouted over time to serve new developments and dispersed employment centers that may have resulted from urban sprawl .

bus rapid transit systems also have the ability to operate both on and off a busway or bus lane , giving them the flexibility to respond to operating problems .

furthermore , bus rapid transit has flexibility in how it is implemented and operated .

for example , it is not necessary to include all the final elements of a system before beginning operations ; improvements , such as signal prioritization or new low - floor buses , can be added as they become available .

another advantage is that bus rapid transit can be coupled with other transportation system improvements , such as newly added toll or variable toll lanes , to the mutual benefit of both transit and highway users .

transit users benefit from a new high - speed transit option , which could be funded from the toll revenues generated by the new lanes , while highway users would benefit from fewer drivers on the highway as a result of adding the high - speed transit option .

bus rapid transit also presents some disadvantages that may influence communities' decision - making .

for example , according to a number of transit agency officials and experts , bus service has a negative image , particularly when compared with rail service .

communities might not favor bus rapid transit , in part because the public often views buses as slow , noisy , and polluting .

in addition , the public might view an alternative to bus rapid transit , such as light rail , as the mark of a “world - class” city and a means to improve the community's image and stimulate economic development .

according to transit agency officials , because rail systems have permanent stations and routes , developers are more likely to locate new business , residential , or retail development along a rail line than along a bus route .

as more experience is gained with bus rapid transit , its advantages and disadvantages will become better understood .

mr. chairman , this concludes my testimony .

i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or members of the committee may have .

for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or heckerj@gao.gov .

samer abbas , robert ciszewski , elizabeth eisenstadt , and glen trochelman made key contributions to this testimony .

ten locations were originally included in fta's bus rapid transit demonstration programs .

in addition , various locations are consortium members that do not receive direct funding , but attend workshops and support program goals .

the demonstration and consortium locations are shown below .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

