in august and september 2017 , hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria made landfall in texas , florida , the u.s. virgin islands , and puerto rico , causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage to public transit facilities .

the loss of transit during a disaster can exacerbate the difficulties a community faces by impeding access to community services and medical care , and access to transit is important in a community's post - disaster recovery .

two agencies play an important role in providing funding to transit agencies following a disaster: the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the federal transit administration ( fta ) within the department of transportation ( dot ) .

prior to 2012 , the primary source of federal funding for transit agencies working to recover after a disaster was fema's public assistance program .

in 2012 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21st century act ( map - 21 ) authorized fta's public transportation emergency relief program .

because the fta program is focused on public transportation specifically — unlike fema's more general program — fta has primary responsibility for reimbursing emergency response and recovery costs after an emergency or major disaster that affects a public transportation system if fta receives funds for the program in an annual or supplemental appropriation , or continuing resolution .

in february 2018 , congress appropriated $330 million to fta's public transportation emergency relief program in a supplemental appropriation — the second time funding has been appropriated to the program — to provide funding to transit agencies affected by the 2017 hurricanes ( harvey , irma , and maria ) .

we have previously noted the importance of fta and fema coordination , given the fact that both agencies may provide funding for transit - related expenses following a disaster .

we were asked to evaluate the federal government's response and recovery efforts related to the 2017 natural disasters , including hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

this report provides information on the amount of emergency relief funds fta allocated to repair and replace transit facilities damaged by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria , and the purposes of these allocations , and examines the extent to which transit agencies applied to fema for funding as well as fta's and fema's coordination .

to determine the amount of funds fta allocated to repair and replace transit facilities damaged by the 2017 hurricanes , we reviewed fta's may 31 , 2018 , notice of allocation of emergency relief funds , in which fta described the amount of funding it would provide to each municipality and public transit provider .

to understand the purpose of the allocations and how fta funds would be used , we reviewed fta's damage assessment reports for the 2017 hurricane .

these reports describe the location and type of damage in specific areas as well as the estimated costs to address the damage .

one analyst categorized the types of expenses into specific categories and summed the total amount of funding provided for various types of expenses ( such as repairs to bus terminals ) , and a second analyst verified the categorizations .

to assess the reliability of the data , we shared our analysis with fta and incorporated its proposed updates , where appropriate .

we did not independently verify the estimated damage costs .

in addition , we conducted site visits to texas , florida , and puerto rico ( the states and territory receiving the largest fta allocations following the 2017 hurricane ) to tour damaged facilities and interview officials from a non - generalizable selection of two to four transit agencies in each state or territory .

sites were selected to include transit agencies with the largest allocations as well as those within driving distance of one another , for logistical reasons .

to examine whether transit agencies applied to fema for funding , we interviewed the transit agencies mentioned above and we conducted a web - based survey of the 52 transit agencies that received a direct allocation of emergency relief funding from fta ( fta grantees ) .

forty - four of the 52 fta grantees ( 85 percent ) completed our survey .

we asked about the level of their engagement with fema .

we initially fielded the survey from december 10 , 2018 , to january 15 , 2019 , and continued to accept responses from a few grantees until march 12 , 2019 .

to assess fta and fema's coordination , we interviewed officials from fta headquarters and division offices responsible for administering the public transportation emergency relief program , as well as fema officials at headquarters and regional offices responsible for administering fema's public assistance program for the selected states and territories .

we reviewed documentation from fta and fema coordination meetings , as well as emails regarding specific applications between fta and fema staff .

we compared fta's and fema's coordination against federal internal control standards as well as statutory requirements in map - 21 and fta and fema guidance regarding how the agencies should coordinate .

we conducted this performance audit from april 2018 to november 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

when a disaster overwhelms the ability of state , local , or voluntary agencies to adequately provide essential services on their own , the federal government , when requested , supports disaster response and recovery , providing selected resources where they are needed .

the federal government has provided significant funds for transit services following past catastrophic disasters .

for example , congress provided roughly $232 million in response to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes and over $10 billion in response to hurricane sandy .

fema is the federal government's primary agency for disaster response .

in addition to coordinating disaster response and recovery operations , fema's public assistance program provides funding to state and local governments and some nonprofit organizations for recovery efforts after a disaster , including removing debris , implementing emergency protective measures , and repairing or replacing damaged public equipment or facilities .

once the president has declared a disaster , fema ; the state or territorial government ( the recipient ) ; and the local or territorial entities ( the subrecipient ) work together to develop damage assessments and formulate project worksheets for eligible projects .

project worksheets detail the scope of work and estimated cost for repairing or replacing disaster - damaged infrastructure .

after a project has completed fema's review process and is approved , funding is available to fema for obligation from the disaster relief fund .

the recipient draws down — or withdraws — funding to pay the subrecipient for eligible work upon completion .

because fta's public transportation emergency relief program is focused on public transportation specifically — unlike fema's more general program — fta has primary responsibility for reimbursing emergency response and recovery costs after an emergency or major disaster affects a public transportation system if fta receives funds for the program in an annual or supplemental appropriation or continuing resolution .

the public transportation emergency relief program is a reimbursable grant program and allows fta to make grants for capital projects to protect , repair , reconstruct , or replace equipment and facilities of a public transportation system as well as for eligible operating costs .

such costs include reestablishing , expanding , or relocating public - transportation route service in the event of a natural disaster that affects a wide area or a catastrophic failure from any external cause .

congress has not provided an annual appropriation for fta's public transportation emergency relief program but has provided supplemental appropriations following a specific event .

eligible recipients ( referred to in this report as “fta grantees” ) of fta's public transportation emergency relief funding are entities that receive funds directly from fta .

following the appropriation for the 2017 hurricanes , fta staff and contractors visited sites to develop damage assessments — these assessments provide information on , among other things , the specific location , type of facility or equipment , nature and extent of damage , and a preliminary cost estimate to restore , replace , or reconstruct the damaged system .

fta then uses the information in these damage assessments to determine how to allocate funding among the affected fta grantees .

after fta announces the allocations , fta grantees can submit an application for funding to fta .

after fta has approved the application and obligated funds , recipients must execute the grant agreement to draw down funding for reimbursement of eligible expenses .

as required by map - 21 , fta and fema have entered into a memorandum of agreement ( moa ) to delineate the roles and responsibilities of the two agencies and establish procedures to coordinate assistance for public transportation following a disaster .

we reported in 2014 that because fta's public transportation emergency relief program is inherently limited by its inability to fund any activities without specific congressional action ( in contrast to the other emergency program we examined ) , fta and fema face challenges clearly delineating the responsibilities and costs each agency will assume during future disasters .

we recommended that fta and fema establish specific guidelines to monitor , evaluate , and report the results of collaborative efforts for future disasters .

fema concurred with this recommendation and fta took no position .

the agencies addressed the recommendation by: ( 1 ) implementing a communications protocol to coordinate the two agencies in providing funding to transit agencies and ( 2 ) committing to jointly monitoring , evaluating , and reporting on the effectiveness of agency collaboration following events in which both agencies provided funding .

in august and september 2017 , hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria made landfall in texas , florida , the u.s. virgin islands , and puerto rico , affecting over 28 million people and causing significant damage to public transit infrastructure ( see fig .

1 ) .

fema funding was made available through presidential disaster declarations .

in february 2018 , 6 months after the first hurricane made landfall , congress appropriated funds to fta's public transportation emergency relief program for the 2017 hurricanes .

fta announced on may 31 , 2018 , that it would allocate about $233 million of appropriated emergency relief funds to 52 transit agencies for response , recovery , and rebuilding projects , with approximately 85 percent of the funds ( $198 million ) going to puerto rico .

most of puerto rico's funds , and around half the funds fta allocated for response , recovery , and rebuilding ( $116 million ) , will be distributed to san juan's rail transit service provider , tren urbano ( see fig .

2 ) .

fta allocated emergency relief funding to transit agencies based on preliminary cost estimates that the agencies submitted to fta in damage assessment reports .

transit agencies developed these preliminary cost estimates through field surveys , which are meant to determine the general type and extent of damages .

as shown in table 1 , fta allocated funds for various purposes including repairs to rail stations and bus terminals , repair and replacement of vehicles , and repairs to transit buildings and facilities .

as previously noted , after fta allocates funds , transit agencies must submit grant applications with detailed information about each eligible project activity and expense .

as of october 2019 , 19 transit agencies had submitted grant applications to fta , and fta approved and obligated funding for each of the 19 applicants .

fta officials told us they are working with the remaining transit agencies on submitting and finalizing their grant applications .

uncertainty regarding whether fta will receive an appropriation can lead to fta grantees' applying to fema for funding since fema is the federal government's primary agency for disaster response and recovery and can fund transit .

this situation increases the importance of fema and fta coordination .

fta did not receive an appropriation until roughly 6 months after the first hurricane's landfall .

fta grantees , unaware of when or whether fta would receive an appropriation , could apply during this period to fema's public assistance program for funding .

indeed , more than half of fta grantees that responded to our survey ( 25 of 44 ) reported some interaction with fema's public assistance program by the time of our survey ( see fig .

3 ) .

fourteen reported reaching the quality assurance step on a grant application — the final step before receiving funds from fema .

six transit agencies received fema funds .

once fta received an appropriation , fta and fema instructed transit agencies to work with fta , rather than fema , on funding requests .

as a result , some transit agencies that initially worked with fema had to begin a new application with fta .

fourteen fta grantees in our survey reported spending more than 3 months working on their fema application ; however , 10 stated that they could use the work from the fema application toward their fta emergency relief application .

in addition , most of the transit agencies we interviewed anticipated this issue , noting that fta or fema officials explained the situation to them before fta received an allocation .

after congress appropriated funds to fta for the 2017 hurricanes , fta and fema initiated their communication and coordination agreements , including the moa and the communications protocol , which define coordination activities between the two agencies .

federal agencies , such as fta and fema , that administer programs as a result of a major disaster or emergency , cannot provide funding for losses that have been covered by insurance or other programs , but are not prohibited from awarding funds to any entity that could receive funding from another agency so long as that entity has not yet received these funds and promises to repay any duplicate assistance .

fta's and fema's communications protocol also states that it may be appropriate for an agency to receive funding from both fta and fema in a situation where the grantee provides both public transportation services and services other than public transportation .

thus , fta's and fema's moa states that the agencies will coordinate to avoid duplicate funding and to ensure a streamlined reimbursement process .

when implementing coordination activities such as fta's and fema's moa and communications protocol , federal internal control standards state that management should design control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks , such as the risk of providing duplicate funding .

fta and fema officials informed us of , and provided documentation of , their coordination efforts , such as biweekly conference calls , and email correspondence among staff .

for example , when congress appropriated funds to fta , fema provided fta a list of agencies that had applied to fema for funding .

in addition , when fta reviewed grant applications , fta staff emailed fema staff to inquire whether applicants had already requested funding from fema .

to avoid delays in processing applications , fema and fta established an agreement that if fema did not respond to such requests in 5 days , then fta could proceed with processing the application .

based on our document reviews , we found that fta staff also emailed fema staff a copy of the final award .

finally , transit agencies applying to fta for funding were required to certify whether they had received any transit funding from fema and that they would reimburse fta for any federal funds that duplicated funding provided by fema .

while fta and fema took steps to coordinate , both agencies approved about $35,000 in funding to one applicant for the same expenses .

in june 2019 , we found a case in which fema and fta both approved roughly $6,000 to repair a light pole at a bus stop in collier county , florida .

specifically , although fema had obligated funds to collier county for the light pole in january 2019 , fta awarded funds for the same light pole in april 2019 .

one month prior to fta's award to collier county , we notified fta that collier county had indicated in our survey that it had been in contact with fema .

subsequently , fta staff twice emailed fema staff to inquire as to whether collier had requested funds from fema , but fema staff did not respond .

per their agreement , fta moved the application forward after receiving no response from fema within the 5-day timeframe .

fta awarded the funding to collier county in april 2019 .

after we notified fta and fema that they both appeared to have awarded funds for the same expense , fema de - obligated the funds for collier county .

in addition , fema conducted an additional review and found that both agencies had also approved $29,000 in funding for repairs to a transit facility in collier county .

fema officials stated they were in the process of de - obligating those funds as well .

although both agencies awarded funds to collier county , the county had not yet executed the fta grant or drawn down any of the funds .

fta and fema officials noted that both agencies can face challenges in identifying transit expenses submitted to both agencies .

for example , fta may be unaware of transit agencies receiving fema funds if these agencies are not direct recipients of such funds , but rather receive funds through a larger entity such as a city , county , or state government .

thus , although fema provides fta with a list of entities that applied for fema funds , the list may only show a county's name , rather than the name of a transit agency .

in addition , while fta also asks applicants whether they have received fema funds , applicants may be unaware of the status of their fema reimbursement .

for example , officials from collier county's public transit department told us they were unaware that fema had obligated funding for their transit expenses until may 2019 ( one month after the fta award ) , because it took several months for the funding from fema to be processed at the state and county level .

while fta officials shared proposed and final awards with fema , we identified 10 cases , including collier county , in which fema officials did not respond within the established 5-day time frame .

when we asked why fema did not respond within the 5-day time frame , fema regional staff stated that the responsible person had since left that office .

however , officials noted challenges they face identifying transit expenses contained within applications sent to fema by larger entities that may contain hundreds of pages , while at the same time processing a large number of applications related to the hurricanes .

specifically , in order to identify transit expenses within an application , fema staff may need to search these hundreds of pages using various transit - related word searches .

for example , according to fema officials , collier county currently has a total of 126 active ongoing and obligated projects and 86 inactive projects that were either withdrawn or determined ineligible .

after we notified fta and fema that they had approved funding to collier county for the same expense , both agencies took steps to limit the potential for duplicate funding in future awards .

as noted above , fema conducted an additional review of applications for which fema had not responded to fta's inquiries within the 5-day time frame and identified the $29,000 for transit facility repairs that fta and fema both approved for collier county .

in addition , fta officials updated their internal grants guidance to indicate that fta staff should not process an application if fema has not responded and fta has reason to believe there may be a potential for duplicate funding ( for example , the recipient notifies fta that it had previously worked with fema to reimburse transit expenses ) .

in such cases , fta may only proceed after fema has replied in writing that they have not identified any expenses in the fta grant that are also in a fema grant , or , if fema does identify duplicate funding , after one agency removes such expenses from their grant to the recipient .

in 2014 , we noted that evaluating and reporting the results of collaborative efforts can identify areas for improvement and recommended that fta and fema establish specific guidelines to monitor , evaluate , and report the results of collaborative efforts .

fta and fema implemented this recommendation and committed to jointly monitoring , evaluating , and reporting on the effectiveness of the agencies' collaboration following future events in which both agencies provide funding .

in addition , fta and fema took action to address the duplicate award of funding we identified in our review .

nonetheless , fema staff continue to face challenges identifying transit expenses within applications submitted by larger entities , and fta may be unaware of whether transit entities are included in such applications .

without identifying and implementing systematic measures to detect duplicate expenses , fta and fema are at risk of awarding funds for the same expenses .

given that fta may not receive an appropriation until months after a disaster , transit agencies will continue to submit applications to fema when it is unclear whether congress will provide funding to fta .

this underscores the importance of fta's and fema's coordination to avoid providing duplicate funding .

fta and fema have taken important steps to coordinate , including establishing an moa and communications protocol that outline how fta and fema staff should share information .

although fema and fta both approved a relatively small amount of funding for the same expenses in collier county , the issues that contributed to this outcome involve a risk of providing duplicate funding in the future .

fta took steps to strengthen its processes after we identified this duplicate funding , and fema conducted additional retroactive reviews to identify any additional duplicate funding .

however , fema will continue to face challenges in identifying transit expenses when they are included in the application of a larger entity such as a city , county , or state government .

moreover , fta may continue to be unaware when transit entities are included in fema applications .

fema and fta have committed to monitor , evaluate , and report the results of collaborative efforts on an ongoing basis .

without identifying and addressing the factors that contributed to duplicate funding in the federal response to the 2017 hurricanes , fta and fema will continue to face the risk that both agencies will approve funding for the same expense in the future .

we are making two recommendations , including one to dot and one to dhs .

the secretary of transportation should direct the administrator of fta to identify and develop controls , such as methods to more easily identify transit expenses within applications submitted by larger entities , such as a city , county , or state government , to address the risk of duplicate funding .

 ( recommendation 1 ) the secretary of homeland security should direct the administrator of fema to identify and develop controls , such as methods to more easily identify transit expenses within applications submitted by larger entities such as a city , county , or state government , to address the risk of duplicate funding .

 ( recommendation 2 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to dot and dhs for review and comment .

we received written comments from dot and dhs that are reproduced in appendixes i and ii .

in comments , reproduced in appendix i , dot concurred with our recommendation .

dot described some of the steps that fta has taken to coordinate with fema , which we note in our report , such as updating its procedures to ensure that an fta grant does not contain any expenses for which the applicant may have previously requested reimbursement .

we continue to believe fta would benefit from identifying additional internal controls to address the risk of duplicate funding , particularly since fta and fema may still face challenges identifying entities that have applied to both agencies for funding .

in comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dhs concurred with our recommendation .

dhs stated that fema is enhancing its public assistance grants manager system to address the risk of duplicate funding we identified in our report .

this includes implementing a new functionality for data exporting , sorting , and filtering to better identify transit - related damages and improved tracking to identify projects that have received fta funding .

dhs estimates these improvements will be completed september 30 , 2020 .

dot and dhs both provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of transportation , the secretary of the department of homeland security , the administrator of fta , the administrator of fema , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

in addition to the contact named above , steve cohen ( assistant director ) ; crystal huggins ( analyst in charge ) ; matt cook ; christopher currie ; danielle ellingston ; susan irving ; kathryn godfrey ; janet mckelvey ; cheryl peterson ; brenda rabinowitz ; malika rice ; amy rosewarne ; rebecca shea ; joe thompson ; matthew valenta ; and elizabeth wood made key contributions to this report .

