i am pleased to be here today to discuss the state of social security administration ( ssa ) field office services .

ssa's approximately 1,300 field offices are a vital component of ssa's operations , serving approximately 42 million customers in fiscal year 2007 .

employing slightly less than half of the agency's 64,000 employees , field offices serve as ssa's primary points for face - to - face contact with the public .

people visit their local field offices to apply for social security cards and for social security benefits , to request replacement benefit checks , and for a host of other services .

ssa has served the public for over 70 years .

recent staffing reductions are increasingly challenging field offices' ability to meet the demand for services .

my remarks today will address ( 1 ) the effect that staffing reductions may be having on field office operations and ( 2 ) the challenges ssa faces in meeting field service delivery needs in the future .

my written statement is based on our ongoing work for this committee , and we will provide you a full report later this year .

to conduct our work , we interviewed ssa headquarters officials responsible for operations , budget , and strategic and human capital planning and obtained relevant documentation .

we interviewed managers and staff in 21 field offices and two social security card centers to gain their perspectives on the effect of staffing reductions .

we selected a wide variety of the field offices based on the size of the populations they served , their geographic location , the number of staff , and customer wait times .

table 7 lists the field offices we visited and their beneficiary populations .

to gain further perspectives on the effect of field office staffing reductions , we interviewed officials in two ssa regional offices and three area offices .

to assess field office waiting times , ssa provided us summary data .

as we are currently in the process of completing our work , we have not yet validated ssa's waiting time data .

our work is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in summary , ssa field offices largely met work demands despite operating with fewer staff and an increased demand for services , but the lower staffing levels may have contributed to adverse effects .

field offices were able to minimize the impact of staffing reductions on work because staff productivity increased by 4.9 percent .

ssa and its field offices used various strategies to manage its work with fewer staff .

field offices shared work among offices and redirected staff from their usual responsibilities to meet critical needs .

ssa also encouraged customers to make greater use of internet and other electronic services to conduct their business .

additionally , ssa deferred work that it deemed a relatively low priority , such as conducting reviews of beneficiaries' continuing eligibility .

deferring these reviews , however , means that beneficiaries who no longer qualify for benefits may still receive payments — which may decrease ssa's chances of recovering the erroneous payments .

despite ssa efforts to manage the staffing reductions , customers are experiencing longer waiting times and poor telephone service , according to ssa data .

between fiscal years 2002 and 2006 , ssa reported that the average waiting time for field office service increased by 40 percent from about 15 minutes to 21 minutes , and in fiscal year 2007 , more than 3 million customers waited for over 1 hour to be served .

further , ssa's 2007 field office caller survey found that 51 percent of customer calls to field offices went unanswered .

these factors may have contributed to a 4 percent drop in ssa's overall customer satisfaction rating from fiscal year 2005 to 2007 .

in addition , staff reported high levels of stress and a lack of time for training .

as the oldest of the nation's approximately 80 million baby boomers are now reaching the age of retirement eligibility , increases in retirement and disability filings and a significant retirement wave of ssa's most experienced staff may pose difficult challenges for ssa to meet future service delivery needs without a clear plan for addressing them .

ssa estimates that retirement and disability filings will increase the agency's work by about 1 million annual claims by 2017 .

further , ssa will experience an agencywide retirement wave in the coming years , and projects that 44 percent of its staff will retire by 2016 .

the retiring employees will be among the agency's most experienced who account for decades of institutional knowledge .

however , with an increase in its fiscal year 2008 funding , ssa is planning to hire an additional 2,350 staff in its regional and field offices this fiscal year , almost all of whom will go to field offices .

agency officials stated , however , that it typically takes 2 to 3 years for staff to gain the experience they need to function independently .

ssa is using various strategies to recruit new staff , including programs to hire and retain older workers to fill knowledge gaps .

ssa is currently working to finalize its annual strategic plan that is expected to describe the strategies for addressing these challenges .

almost all americans have sought the services of ssa at some point in their lives , and for many , their first experience is applying for a social security number ( ssn ) .

ssa offers a range of services , which includes providing financial assistance to eligible individuals through the following three major benefit programs: old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) provides benefits to retired workers and their families and to survivors of deceased workers ; disability insurance ( di ) provides benefits to eligible workers who have qualifying disabilities , and their eligible family members ; and supplemental security income ( ssi ) provides income for aged , blind , or disabled individuals with limited income and resources .

in fiscal year 2007 , these three benefit programs provided a combined total of approximately $613 billion to about 54 million beneficiaries .

ssa projects that the benefit payments and number of beneficiaries for the three programs will increase in fiscal years 2008 and 2009 ( see tables 1 and 2 ) .

besides paying benefits through these three programs , ssa issues social security cards , maintains earnings records , and performs various other functions through a network of field office and headquarters operations using an administrative budget of over $10 billion .

ssa's field operations consist of field offices , which serve as the agency's primary points for face - to - face contact , perform a full range of services , including making eligibility determinations for social security benefits ; social security card centers , which issue ssns ; teleservice centers , which offer national toll - free telephone service ; and program service centers , which make entitlement decisions for benefits , as well as assist in answering toll - free calls .

table 3 shows the type of work that is performed by various ssa field components .

field offices , which served approximately 42 million customers in fiscal year 2007 , are a vital component for delivering ssa services to the public .

field offices are located in communities across the united states , the virgin islands , puerto rico , and guam , and deliver services through face - to - face contact , over the phone , and through the mail .

field offices range in size from large urban offices with 50 or more employees to very small offices in remote areas called resident stations .

in august 2007 , there were approximately 1,271 field offices and 37 resident stations .

resident stations have more limited services and are staffed by one or two individuals in their homes or in a separate office ( other than an ssa field office ) .

field offices also offer services to the public through about 1,200 contact stations .

these stations provide very limited functions and are staffed with one ssa field office employee who travels to certain locations , such as a hospital , once a month .

additionally , ssa has begun using video conferencing to take claims and provide other services to customers in remote locations in north dakota , wyoming , and south dakota .

ssa is planning to expand the video network to provide additional sites and services .

while ssa field offices take applications and determine if claimants meet basic , nonmedical eligibility requirements for di and ssi disability claims , state disability determination services ( dds ) that are under contract with ssa make medical eligibility determinations for these claims .

ssa's hearing offices and appeals council make decisions on appeals of these determinations .

appendix ii describes the functions of each of these entities in the medical disability determination process for di and ssi claims .

ddss also conduct continuing disability reviews for di and ssi beneficiaries to ensure that they are still medically eligible for payments .

in addition to field offices , ssa offers customers a variety of other options for conducting their business .

individuals may call ssa's toll - free helpline to file for benefits or to obtain general information .

they may also use the internet to file for benefits or visit a social security card center to request a social security card .

figure 1 shows the various options by which customers may conduct their business with ssa .

despite operating with fewer staff from fiscal year 2005 to 2007 and an increased demand for services , field offices largely met work demands ; however , staffing reductions may have contributed to some adverse effects .

ssa and its field offices used various strategies to manage work demands , such as sharing work among offices , redirecting staff to serve critical needs outside of their usual responsibilities , encouraging customer use of the internet and telephone services , and deferring certain work .

despite these efforts , many field office managers and staff stated that they cannot keep up with their work .

reduced field office staffing may have contributed to customers waiting longer to be served , and customer calls to field offices are not always being answered .

these factors may have contributed to a 4 percent drop in ssa's customer satisfaction rating between fiscal years 2005 and 2007 .

in addition , staff are experiencing high stress levels , lacking sufficient time for training , and facing other adverse effects according to field office managers and staff .

despite a 7.1 percent staffing decline during fiscal years 2005 to 2007 , the amount of work that field offices produced decreased by only 2.5 percent .

as a result , the average amount of work produced by field office staff increased by 4.9 percent between fiscal years 2005 and 2007 ( see table 4 ) .

the field office staffing reduction comprised nearly 60 percent of ssa's overall reduction ( from 65,112 to 61,594 between fiscal years 2005 and 2007 ) .

ssa officials attribute the staffing reductions to inadequate appropriations and are concerned about growth in work required for other federal agencies .

table 5 shows the commissioner's and the president's budget requests and ssa's final appropriations for fiscal years 2002 to 2008 .

the table also shows the recent staffing decline .

the table does note that ssa received a $500 million budget increase in 2005 to manage the implementation of the medicare prescription drug program and hire associated staff .

in addition , other work that ssa conducts on behalf of other federal agencies has grown .

for example , new state laws requiring federal government verification of work authorization are resulting in additional work and field office visits associated with the department of homeland security's e - verify program .

despite the staffing reductions , field offices served are serving a growing volume of visitors .

comparing the first 3 months of calendar years 2006 to 2008 , visitor volume increased by almost 450,000 ( about 4 percent ) .

ssa field managers and staff told us that they also expect visitor volume to increase with the retirement of the baby boomers .

as figure 2 shows , from fiscal years 2005 to 2007 , ssa processed more oasi claims ; post - entitlement actions ( other than for continuing eligibility reviews ) ; enumerations ; and medicare actions .

during the same time period , ssa processed fewer di and ssi claims ( nonmedical determinations only ) ; continuing disability reviews ; and ssi redeterminations .

ssa attributes the high volume of post - entitlement actions to the growth in beneficiary populations .

ssa is shifting work among field offices based on their workloads in an effort to increase overall efficiency .

if a field office has work demands that it cannot immediately cover , that office can request that some work be transferred to another office .

offices that have a particular expertise in a certain type of work make themselves available , as they can process it more quickly .

field managers told us , however , that sometimes they are reluctant to share work because the office that receives and processes the work receives numerical credit , which helps an office justify a greater staff level for the future .

managers are also using claims processing personnel to fill in as necessary to perform the duties typically done by lower - graded employees , and in some cases , even office managers take on the duties of their employees .

such duties include answering the telephone , providing initial services to arriving customers , processing requests for new or replacement social security cards , and conducting some administrative duties .

while all field office personnel recognize the need to serve visitors , many also told us that such work is taking away from time spent processing claims and managing the office .

ssa is encouraging customers to use automated services to help field offices accomplish their work .

however , many field staff said that real gains in the use of automated services will only likely be achieved by future generations of customers .

ssa's vision for its “eservice” program is that the public , businesses , and government agencies will be able to conduct all business through secure , electronic channels — thereby increasing the efficiency with which the agency can serve the public .

ssa reported that in 2007 the public performed 2.9 million electronic transactions , such as applying for disability benefits or requesting a change of address .

ssa's electronic services are available to the public over the internet and by telephone , using the voice recognition capabilities of ssa's toll - free number .

while field office staff and managers welcome automated tools that the public can use , some added that relatively few customers use them , and that due to erroneous or missing information in online forms , field staff can lose time having to contact the customers for clarification or more information .

while they believe that automated tools should continue to be developed , many managers and staff told us that these tools are not a sufficient to compensate for reduced staffing levels .

finally , with fewer staff available , ssa focused on field office work it considered essential to its “core workloads,” such as processing new claims for social security benefits and issuing social security cards , but deferred other types of work .

field office managers and staff told us that certain post entitlement actions are typically delayed or deferred , when an office is under stress , including changes of address , changes to direct deposit information , and reviews to determine beneficiaries' continuing eligibility for di and ssi benefits .

reviews of continuing eligibility , however , are key activities in ensuring payment accuracy .

ssa estimates that continuing disability reviews yield a lifetime program savings of $10 for every dollar invested , and ssi redeterminations yield a lifetime program savings of $7 for every dollar invested .

in recent years , ssa has not been able to conduct as many reviews as it had planned , citing budget limitations and an increase in core work ( see fig .

3 ) .

when reviews of benefits are delayed , some beneficiaries may continue to receive benefits when they no longer qualify .

while delays in these reviews relieve work pressure , some field managers and staff told us that such delays cause future challenges when staff attempt to obtain necessary documentation over multiple years , and overpayments accrue to the point that beneficiaries have difficulty repaying benefits for which they were not eligible .

despite ssa's efforts to manage work with reduced staff , managers responding to a survey conducted in february and march 2007 by the national council of social security management associations ( ncssma ) stated that many of them are finding it increasingly difficult to keep up with the work .

on average , the managers responding to the survey estimated that they would need a staffing increase of 16.7 percent to provide adequate public service .

in the offices we visited , most of the managers also told us that they did not have an adequate number of staff .

according to ssa officials , staffing imbalances resulted in a buildup of 1,000 workyears , for work that ssa was not able to complete by the end of fiscal year 2007 .

ssa projects that the buildup will grow to 4,800 workyears by the end of fiscal year 2009 ; however , officials said that they are re - evaluating this figure in light of increases in productivity and overtime .

staff reductions may have also led to longer customer waiting times .

between fiscal years 2002 and 2006 , the average waiting time to first contact for all customers increased by 40 percent from 15 to 21 minutes ( see fig .

4 ) .

nationally , 8 percent of customers — about 3 million people — waited more than 1 hour , which included 420,000 customers who waited more than 2 hours for service in fiscal year 2007 ( see table 6 ) .

we also found significant variation in waiting times among field offices for customers without appointments .

for example , for customers without appointments , more than 300 offices had average waiting times of less than 10 minutes , while 23 offices had average waiting times that exceeded 1 hour in fiscal year 2007 .

further , customers without appointments during that period waited more than 1 hour on average at four of the offices we visited .

in contrast , customers at the office in devils lake , north dakota , waited on average for less than 1 minute ( see table 9 ) .

we found that customers with appointments waited significantly less time than those without appointments .

for example , ssa reported that 1,214 offices had waiting times of less than 10 minutes for customers with appointments , while only two had waiting times of more than 1 hour .

insufficient staffing may have also been a factor in poor office phone coverage and other adverse effects on customer service .

ssa's 2006 field office caller survey found that 51 percent of customer calls to 48 randomly selected field offices went unanswered .

because ssa based its results only on customers who were ultimately able to get through to the field offices , the actual percentage of calls that went unanswered may have been higher .

in addition , staff at 13 of the 21 offices we visited characterized their phone service as inadequate , while 2 of these offices did not answer their offices' phones at all .

employees we interviewed also cited inadequate telephone service as a common customer complaint at 15 offices .

in 2007 , officials told us they initiated a pilot program called “forward on busy” in 25 field offices to address these deficiencies .

under the pilot , calls receiving a busy signal at field offices are automatically forwarded to a teleservice center .

ssa plans to expand the pilot to a total of 100 field offices .

in addition to poor phone service , staff at some of the offices we visited indicated that they now have less time to spend with customers .

this limited time potentially could lead to mistakes and limit the ability of staff to ensure that customers fully understand their options and benefits .

these factors may have contributed to a 4 percent drop in ssa's customer satisfaction rating between fiscal years 2005 and 2007 .

ssa has not established performance standards for customer waiting times and field office telephone service , nor does the agency measure customer service at individual field offices .

without such standards and measures , ssa has no systematic way of evaluating field office performance , or identifying offices that need improvement .

while ssa provides field offices with customer comment cards , at 10 of the 21 offices we visited , officials told us they did not use them , and where the cards were available , the results were not always systematically tabulated .

work demands and staffing reductions have increased the pressure placed on the field office staff , resulting in higher stress and lower morale , according to field office staff .

we asked 153 ssa employees at the 21 offices we visited to rate the stress that they experienced in attempting to complete their work in a timely manner , and 65 percent of those surveyed reported feeling stress to a “great” or “very great” extent on a daily basis .

the stress of expanding workloads and staffing constraints was felt most acutely by the office managers , 74 percent of whom described high levels of stress .

at many offices , staff indicated that mounting workload pressures have led to cutbacks in the amount of time allocated for training and mentoring new staff .

in addition , managers and staff told us that they often do not have time to take their breaks , including lunch .

some staff told us they feel they are letting down their colleagues and feel guilty about taking time off , regardless of whether they use credit hours or annual leave .

while these responses may not be indicative of the opinions of the overall field office workforce , they do suggest that increasing demands placed on ssa staff may be diminishing their job satisfaction , potentially with long - term implications for employee retention .

ssa officials acknowledged that growing workloads have seriously compromised agency morale and that they have tried to ease the stress on staff by authorizing the use of overtime .

retirement and disability filings by the nation's approximately 80 million baby boomers are projected to significantly increase ssa's workload , providing additional stress on the field office workforce .

ssa estimates a 13 percent rise in claims filed among its three major claims types over the next 10 years , rising from 9.4 million in fiscal year 2008 to 10.7 million in fiscal year 2017 ( see fig .

5 ) .

a growth of 22 percent in the number of beneficiaries , from about 49.6 million in calendar year 2007 to about 60.5 million in calendar year 2015 , is also projected .

by 2050 , there will be an estimated total of 95.6 million oasi and di beneficiaries ( see fig .

6 ) .

ssa's ability to meet its growing workload challenges will be more difficult with the anticipated retirements of many of the agency's most experienced field office workers .

today , 25 percent of all ssa employees are eligible to retire , and that figure will grow to 39 percent in the next 5 years .

based on the agency's projections , 44 percent of today's ssa workforce will retire by 2016 .

the peak of these retirements began in 2007 and is expected continue into 2009 , before starting to decline gradually ( see fig .

7 ) .

ssa's projections suggest that the ranks of ssa's supervisors will be most affected , with 71 percent eligible to retire in the next 10 years .

these will be the agency's most experienced staff , which will mean a loss of decades of institutional knowledge .

for 2008 in particular , ssa estimates that it will lose about 2,000 staff to full or early - out retirements .

field office managers and staff at many of the locations we visited stated that it typically takes 2 to 3 years for new employees to become fully proficient .

therefore , staff hired now may not reach full proficiency before the peak of the retirement wave .

also , new hires would benefit from being mentored by veteran employees before the latter retire .

as a result of the approximately $150 million that ssa was appropriated above its request in the president's budget for fiscal year 2008 , ssa will hire an additional 3,900 staff for operations .

this will include 2,350 new hires for regional and field office operations , almost all of whom will go to field offices .

ssa officials stated that the increase in staffing will put the agency back at its fiscal year 2005 staffing level .

ssa has used a variety of strategies to maintain adequate staffing .

ssa offers recruitment , relocation , and retention bonuses to individuals with needed skills and considers employees' private sector experience when computing annual leave .

ssa also offers workplace flexibilities to assist workers in balancing work and family .

additionally , ssa uses dual compensation ( salary offset ) waivers from the office of personnel management ( opm ) to respond to emergency conditions and to hire for certain hard - to - fill positions .

for example , ssa was granted a waiver to re - employ federal annuitants who retired under an early - out authority to provide relief in areas affected by hurricanes katrina and rita .

further , ssa has developed recruiting efforts that reach out to a broader pool of candidates .

for example , ssa began recruiting retired military and disabled veterans in 2002 because of its commitment to helping veterans .

ssa currently lacks a plan to address the mounting service delivery challenges that it faces , though officials told us that they are currently working to finalize the agency's annual strategic plan , which is expected to address these issues .

we recommended , as early as 1993 and most recently in 2000 , that the agency develop a plan to meet its responsibilities in the context of resource constraints and other challenges .

at that time , we suggested that the plan take into account changing customer needs and expectations ; the views of oversight bodies and interest groups ; and other future challenges , such as growing workloads .

we also specified that the plan should spell out , for the future , who will be providing what type of services and where these services will be made available .

in the absence of this kind of overarching strategy , ssa may be unable to effectively marshal its key resources to meet the challenges described above .

recent staffing declines may have been a factor in reducing field offices' ability to complete all of their work while providing quality customer service .

in managing staffing reductions , customers are waiting longer to be served , their calls to field offices frequently go unanswered , certain stewardship activities are being deferred , and staff are stressed .

projected increases in claims for benefits from the nation's approximately 80 million baby boomers and a large retirement wave among ssa's most experienced staff will place additional pressure on field offices , and ssa may find it increasingly difficult to manage without a clear plan for addressing these challenges .

ssa is currently working to finalize its fiscal year 2008 annual strategic plan .

strategic planning for service delivery and staffing before ssa's workload grows beyond available resources is essential .

in a time of budgetary constraints , thinking creatively about service delivery and how best to operate efficiently and effectively will be important aspects of ssa's planning effort .

the time for ssa to prepare itself for the future is running out and without a clear direction ssa will not be prepared to meet its service delivery challenges .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time .

for further information regarding this testimony , please contact barbara d. bovbjerg at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or bovbjergb@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include blake ainsworth ( assistant director ) , mary a. crenshaw , paul wright , matthew lee , and charlie willson .

we provided ssa with a draft of our testimony for their comment .

in their response , ssa said that the testimony understated the connection between the stress that field offices are under from increased work demands and the agency's funding shortfalls .

ssa stated that its current business model is non - sustainable and that past underfunding has forced the agency to shift resources from less visible — though vital — areas to process the most critical workloads .

ssa also said that it is using its current strategic plan and operational plan to meet its many challenges .

in order for its plans to succeed , ssa stated that it must be properly and timely funded on a sustained basis .

in response , we acknowledge the service delivery challenges that ssa faces , and believe that we have fairly characterized field office staffing declines as a significant factor in meeting work demands and the resulting adverse effects .

ensuring that ssa has the resources to meet future service deliver challenges is essential .

however , we continue to believe that ssa must employ a more strategic and creative approach to meet these challenges .

social security disability: better planning , management , and evaluation could help address backlogs ( gao - 08-40 , dec. 7 , 2007 ) .

social security administration: additional actions needed in ongoing efforts to improve 800-number service ( gao - 05-735 , aug. 8 , 2005 ) .

ssa customer service: broad service delivery plan needed to address future challenges ( gao / t - hehs / aimd - 00-75 , feb. 10 , 2000 ) .

ssa's management challenges: strong leadership needed to turn plans into timely , meaningful action ( gao / t - hehs - 98-113 , mar .

12 , 1998 ) .

social security administration: significant challenges await new commissioner ( gao / hehs - 97-53 , feb. 20 , 1997 ) .

social security administration: effective leadership needed to meet daunting challenges ( gao / hehs - 96-196 , sept. 12 , 1996 ) .

social security: sustained effort needed to improve management and prepare for the future ( gao / hrd - 94-22 , oct. 27 , 1993 ) .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

