i am pleased to be here today to discuss federal regulatory and guidance practices , focusing , at your request , on our 2015 report on guidance processes at select agencies , and our recently released report on rulemaking at the end of presidents' terms .

agencies use federal regulations and guidance to achieve national goals , such as improving the economy and protecting the health and safety of the public .

congress has often asked us to evaluate the implementation of procedural and analytical requirements that apply to agencies' rulemaking and guidance processes .

the importance of improving the transparency of those processes is a common theme throughout our body of work on federal regulation .

based on our work , this testimony discusses: ( 1 ) the extent to which the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , education ( education ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and labor ( dol ) adhered to office of management and budget ( omb ) requirements and internal controls when developing regulatory guidance and ( 2 ) agencies' compliance with the congressional review act ( cra ) for regulations promulgated during presidential transitions .

we consistently found opportunities to improve the transparency and effectiveness of regulatory and guidance practices .

my statement is based on work that we have issued on regulatory and guidance processes prepared at the request of congress .

we made 12 recommendations to agencies on the topics that i plan to address today , eight of which have been implemented to date .

we conducted our work for these reports in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

a more detailed discussion of prior reports' objectives , scope , and methodology , including our assessment of data reliability , is available in the reports cited in the related products list at the end of this statement .

first , i will discuss our 2015 report on guidance processes at usda , education , hhs , and dol , specifically ( 1 ) how these agencies decide whether to issue regulations or guidance and ( 2 ) the extent to which they adhere to omb requirements and internal controls when developing guidance .

agency guidance documents , even though they are not generally legally binding as regulations or statutes are , can have a significant effect , both because of their volume and because of their potential to prompt changes in the behavior of regulated parties and the general public .

guidance generally serves different purposes than those of regulations .

agencies also issue regulatory guidance that sets forth a policy on a statutory , regulatory , or technical issue , or an interpretation of a statutory or regulatory issue — as illustrated in figure 1 below .

the processes by which agencies issue guidance and regulations are governed by statutes , executive orders , and agencies' policies and procedures , with the aim of greater transparency and public participation , enhanced oversight , and reduced regulatory burdens .

agency officials considered a number of factors before deciding whether to issue guidance or undertake rulemaking .

among these factors at the four agencies included in our analysis , a key criterion was whether officials intended for the document to be binding ( in which case they issued a regulation ) .

omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) staff concurred that agencies understood what types of direction to regulated entities must go through the regulatory process .

officials from all four agencies also told us that they understood when guidance was inappropriate and when regulation was necessary .

they said that they consulted with legal counsel when deciding whether to initiate rulemaking or issue guidance .

for example , hhs's administration for community living officials told us that they considered a number of factors , including whether the instructions to be disseminated were enforceable or merely good practice .

specifically , when administration for community living officials noticed that states were applying issued guidance related to technical assistance and compliance for the state long - term care ombudsman program differently , they decided it would be best to clarify program actions through a regulation .

officials believed that a regulation would ensure consistent application of program requirements and allow them to enforce those actions .

they issued the proposed rule in june 2013 and the final rule in february 2015 .

in another example , officials at usda's food and nutrition service told us that the decision to issue guidance or undertake rulemaking depended on ( 1 ) the extent to which the proposed document was anticipated to affect stakeholders and the public , and ( 2 ) what the subagency was trying to accomplish with the issued document .

the agencies used guidance for multiple purposes and differed in the amount of guidance they issued .

the purposes of guidance included explaining or interpreting regulations , clarifying policies in response to questions or compliance findings , disseminating suggested practices or leadership priorities , and providing grant administration information .

guidance documents provide agencies valuable flexibility to help regulated agencies comply with agency regulations , and address new issues and circumstances more quickly than may be possible using rulemaking .

guidance documents that meet omb's definition of “significant” are subject to the regulatory practices and requirements established by omb .

omb defines a significant guidance document as guidance with a broad and substantial impact on regulated entities .

an economically significant guidance document is a significant guidance document that may reasonably be anticipated to lead to an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more , among other factors .

guidance that does not fall under the definition of “significant” is not subject to the omb bulletin , and those guidance procedures are left to agency discretion .

the four agencies we reviewed considered few of their guidance documents to be significant .

as of february 2015 , agencies listed the following numbers of significant guidance documents on their websites: education , 139 ; dol , 36 ; and usda , 34 .

we were unable to determine the number of significant guidance documents issued by hhs .

all four agencies told us that they did not issue any economically significant guidance .

oira staff told us they accepted departments' determinations of which types of guidance meet the definition of significant guidance .

agencies also varied in the amount of guidance they issued , ranging from 10 to more than 100 documents issued in a single year .

agency officials said that mission or the types of programs administered can affect the number of guidance documents issued .

for example , officials from dol's bureau of labor statistics told us they rarely issue guidance — about 10 routine administrative memorandums each year related to the operation of two cooperative agreement statistical programs .

in contrast , dol's occupational safety and health administration officials told us they have regularly issued guidance to assist with regulatory compliance , and could easily produce 100 new or updated products each year to provide guidance to regulated entities .

we found opportunities for agencies to improve regulatory guidance processes by strengthening compliance with omb requirements for significant guidance and the use of management controls for producing their guidance documents .

in 2015 , we made 11 recommendations to usda , hhs , dol and education to better ensure the adherence to omb requirements for approval and public access of regulatory guidance , to strengthen the use of internal controls in guidance processes , and to improve the usability of websites with online guidance , three of which remain open .

usda , dol and education have addressed recommendations concerning strengthening the application of management controls — internal controls — and improving their websites to ensure the public can easily find , access , and comment on online guidance .

these recommendations for hhs remain open as well as an additional recommendation concerning developing written procedures for agency approval of written guidance .

these actions would help to ensure appropriate review and use of these documents , and both could also facilitate opportunities for affected parties and stakeholders to provide feedback on those documents .

we found that agencies did not always adhere to omb requirements for significant guidance .

the omb final bulletin for agency good guidance practices establishes standard elements that must be included in significant guidance documents and directs agencies to ( 1 ) develop written procedures for the approval of significant guidance , ( 2 ) maintain a website to assist the public in locating significant guidance documents , and ( 3 ) provide a means for the public to submit comments on significant guidance through their websites .

education and usda had written procedures for the approval of significant guidance as directed by omb .

while dol had written approval procedures , they were not available to the appropriate officials , and dol officials noted that they required updating .

hhs did not have any written procedures .

we found that education , usda , and dol consistently applied omb's public access and feedback requirements for significant guidance , while hhs did not .

we also found opportunities for agencies to improve access to their guidance .

in april 2015 , we found that subagencies used different strategies to disseminate guidance and all relied primarily on posting the guidance on their websites .

usda , dol , and education posted their significant guidance on a departmental website as directed by omb ; at that time hhs did not , but has since posted such a page on its website in response to our recommendation .

on their websites , agencies used several approaches — including organizing guidance by audience or topic and highlighting new or outdated guidance — to facilitate access .

however , we identified factors that hindered online access , including long lists of guidance and documents dispersed among multiple web pages .

opportunities also exist for agencies to use the web metrics they already collect to improve how guidance can be accessed .

all agencies and their subagencies that we studied collected web metrics , and many used them to evaluate online guidance dissemination .

however , many of these subagencies did not use metrics to improve how they disseminated guidance through their websites .

beyond their websites , subagencies found other ways to disseminate and obtain feedback on issued guidance , including focus groups , surveys , and direct feedback from the public at conferences , webinars , and from monitoring visits .

for guidance that does not meet omb's definition of significant , we found opportunities for agencies to improve guidance development , review , evaluation , and dissemination processes by strengthening their adherence to internal controls .

wider adoption of these practices could better ensure that agencies have internal controls in place to promote quality and consistency of their guidance development processes , and to ensure that guidance policies , processes , and practices achieve desired results , and prevent and detect errors .

we recommended that agencies strengthen their application of internal controls to guidance practices by adopting practices , such as: determining appropriate level of review to manage risk: most subagencies in our study managed risk by determining appropriate levels of review .

agencies face multiple risks when going through the guidance production process , such as legal challenges that issued guidance is asserting binding requirements without having gone through the rulemaking process .

agencies can manage risk by involving agency management in decisions to initiate guidance , prioritize among proposed guidance , and determine the appropriate level of review prior to issuance .

maintaining written policies and procedures for the production of nonsignificant guidance: most subagencies we reviewed did not have written procedures for the production of non - significant guidance .

written procedures for guidance initiation , development , and review help ensure that actions are taken to address risks and enforce management's directives when an agency is developing regulatory guidance .

documented procedures are an important internal control activity to help ensure that officials understand how to adequately review guidance before issuance .

ensuring communication during the guidance development and review process: most subagencies we reviewed had methods to ensure communication during the guidance development and review process .

communication procedures provide an opportunity for subagencies to get feedback from agency management , other federal agencies , and the public before the guidance issues .

for example , officials told us that they conferred with other affected subagencies or federal departments to ensure consistency of their guidance during the development of guidance .

regularly evaluating whether issued guidance is effective and up to date: almost half of the subagencies we reviewed regularly evaluated whether issued guidance was effective and up - to - date .

agencies benefit from procedures to continually reassess and improve guidance processes .

without a regular review of issued guidance , agencies can miss the opportunity to revisit whether current guidance could be improved and thereby provide better assistance to regulated entities and grantees .

prior studies have indicated that agencies typically issue a larger number of regulations during the transition from the end of one presidential administration to the beginning of the next administration , relative to comparable periods earlier in the administration , a phenomenon often referred to as “midnight rulemaking.” the edward “ted” kaufman and michael leavitt presidential transitions improvements act of 2015 included a provision requiring us to review final significant regulations promulgated by executive departments during the 120-day presidential transition periods ( september 23 through january 20 ) at the end of presidents clinton , bush , and obama's administrations and compare them to each other and to regulations issued during the same 120-day period in nontransition years since 1996 .

among other objectives , we assessed the extent to which there was variation in ( 1 ) the number of regulations and their characteristics , such as the types of rulemaking procedures agencies used ; and ( 2 ) agencies' reported compliance with procedural requirements for promulgating the regulations , such as requirements in the congressional review act ( cra ) .

cra was enacted to better ensure that congress has an opportunity to review and possibly disapprove regulations , in certain cases , before they take effect .

during the transition periods at the end of each of the three administrations we reviewed , agencies published more economically significant and significant final regulations relative to comparable time periods earlier in each administration ( see figures 2 and 3 ) .

in particular , the clinton , bush , and obama administrations published on average roughly 2.5 times more economically significant regulations during transition periods than during nontransition periods .

but agencies more often , relative to nontransition periods , provided the public an opportunity to influence the development of the transition - period regulations by providing advanced notice of their issuance in the unified agenda , and opportunities to comment on proposed regulations before they were finalized .

in their published regulations , agencies generally reported complying with four of five procedural requirements for promulgating regulations during both transition and nontransition periods – the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) , the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act ( sbrefa ) , the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) , and the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) .

these laws require agencies to consider the impact of regulations on small entities , impose additional requirements on the environmental protection agency and the occupational safety and health administration to obtain input from small entities for rulemaking efforts that are expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities , require all agencies to minimize the burden on the public of information collections , and require agencies to prepare an assessment of the anticipated costs and benefits for any regulation that includes a federal mandate requiring nonfederal parties to expend resources without being provided funding to cover the costs , respectively .

agencies reported complying for nearly all economically significant regulations and the majority of significant regulations with these four laws .

agencies less often complied with one or more cra requirements .

over 25 percent of economically significant regulations did not comply with the cra ( see figure 4 ) .

we estimated that 15 percent of significant regulations published across all periods reviewed failed to meet at least one of the cra requirements we reviewed .

the most common cra deficiency for economically significant regulations was agencies' failure to provide congress the required time to review and possibly disapprove regulations , which we had also identified as a deficiency in previous work .

among the most active regulatory agencies for economically significant regulations , the departments of health and human services and transportation had higher rates of noncompliance than the government - wide percentages for both the transition and nontransition periods we reviewed .

however , noncompliance was not limited to these two agencies ; 17 of the 23 agencies that published economically significant regulations during the periods we reviewed had at least one noncompliant regulation .

though agencies are responsible for complying with cra , omb is responsible under executive order 12866 for oversight of agencies' rulemaking , consistent with law , and reviews regulations before publication , which provides an opportunity to identify and help agencies avoid potential noncompliance .

economically significant regulations for which omb completed its review within 3 months before the planned effective date were at high risk of not complying with cra , thus increasing the risk that agencies would not provide congress with the required time for its reviews .

we recommended that omb , as part of its regulatory review process , identify economically significant regulations at potential risk of not complying with cra and work with agencies to ensure compliance .

omb staff did not take a position agreeing or disagreeing with the recommendation .

one of the common themes in our work over several decades is the need for transparency of the regulatory review process and opportunities for increasing public participation and congressional oversight .

the potential effects of guidance underscore the need for consistent and well - understood processes for the development , review , dissemination , and evaluation of guidance .

further , we found that while there were increased opportunities for public participation for regulations promulgated at the end of presidents' terms , there are increasing instances of noncompliance with delay requirements under the congressional review act .

ensuring that agencies consistently provide congress with the required time to review , and possibly disapprove regulations , is important throughout a president's term , and particularly following a presidential transition when congress typically has a larger number of regulations to potentially review .

improvements made in transparency of the rulemaking process benefit not only the public , but congressional oversight .

chairman gowdy , ranking member cummings , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement .

once again , i appreciate the opportunity to testify on these important issues .

i would be pleased to address any questions you or other members of the committee might have at this time .

for questions about this statement , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2660 or nguyentt@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony were tim bober , tara carter , colleen corcoran , robert cramer , alix edwards , shirley a. jones , heather krause , barbara lancaster , michael o'neill , and andrew j. stephens .

federal rulemaking: omb should work with agencies to improve congressional review act compliance during and at the end of presidents' terms .

gao - 18-183 .

march , 13 , 2018 .

regulatory guidance processes: treasury and omb need to reevaluate long - standing exemptions of tax regulations and guidance .

gao - 16-720 .

september 6 , 2016 .

regulatory guidance processes: selected departments could strengthen internal control and dissemination practices .

gao - 15-368 .

april 16 , 2015 .

regulatory guidance processes: agencies could benefit from stronger internal control practices .

gao - 15-834t .

september 23 , 2015 .

federal rulemaking: agencies could take additional steps to respond to public comments .

gao - 13-21 .

december 20 , 2012 .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

