we are pleased to be here today to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) federal protective service's ( fps ) efforts to complete risk assessments of the over 9,000 federal facilities under the custody and control of the general services administration ( gsa ) and oversee its contract guards in the absence of its risk assessment and management program ( ramp ) , a web - enabled facility security assessment ( fsa ) and guard management system .

as we reported in july 2011 , fps had spent about $35 million and taken almost 4 years to develop ramp — $14 million and 2 years more than planned — but still could not use ramp to complete fsas because of several factors , including that fps did not verify the accuracy of the federal facility data used .

as a result , fps's director decided to stop using ramp to conduct fsas and instead pursue an interim tool to replace it .

fps also experienced difficulty using ramp to ensure that its guards met training and certification requirements , primarily because of challenges in verifying guards' data .

in june 2012 , fps also decided to stop using ramp to help oversee its contract guard program .

for fiscal year 2012 , fps has a budget of $1.3 billion , with over 1,200 full - time employees and about 12,500 contract security guards , to achieve its mission to protect federal facilities .

as part of the fsa process , fps generally attempts to gather and review facility information ; conduct and record interviews with tenant agencies ; assess threats , vulnerabilities , and consequences to facilities , employees , and the public ; and recommend countermeasures to federal tenant agencies .

fps's contract guards are responsible for controlling access to federal facilities , screening access areas to prevent the introduction of weapons and explosives , enforcing property rules and regulations , detecting and reporting criminal acts , and responding to emergency situations involving facility safety and security .

fps relies on the fees it charges federal tenant agencies in gsa – controlled facilities to fund its security services .

gao , highlights of a forum: strengthening the use of risk management principles in homeland security , gao - 08-627sp ( washington , d.c.: april 2008 ) .

objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

our preliminary results indicate that , in the absence of ramp , fps currently is not assessing risk at the over 9,000 federal facilities under the custody and control of gsa in a manner consistent with federal standards such as nipp's risk management framework , as fps originally planned .

according to this framework , to be considered credible a risk assessment must specifically address the three components of risk: threat , vulnerability , and consequence .

as a result , fps has accumulated a backlog of federal facilities that have not been assessed for several years .

according to fps data , more than 5,000 facilities were to be assessed in fiscal years 2010 through 2012 .

however , we were not able to determine the extent of the fsa backlog because we found fps's fsa data to be unreliable .

specifically , our analysis of fps's december 2011 assessment data showed nearly 800 ( 9 percent ) of the approximately 9,000 federal facilities did not have a date for when the last fsa was completed .

we have reported that timely and comprehensive risk assessments play a critical role in protecting federal facilities by helping decision makers identify and evaluate potential threats so that countermeasures can be implemented to help prevent or mitigate the facilities' vulnerabilities .

although fps is not currently assessing risk at federal facilities , fps officials stated that the agency is taking steps to ensure federal facilities are safe .

according to fps officials , its inspectors ( also referred to as law enforcement security officers ) monitor the security posture of federal facilities by responding to incidents , testing countermeasures , and conducting guard post inspections .

in addition , since september 2011 , fps's inspectors have collected information — such as location , purpose , agency contacts , and current countermeasures ( eg , perimeter security , access controls , and closed - circuit television systems ) at over 1,400 facilities — which will be used as a starting point to complete fps's fiscal year 2012 assessments .

however , fps officials acknowledged that this approach is not consistent with nipp's risk management framework .

moreover , several fps inspectors told us that they received minimal training or guidance on how to collect this information , and expressed concern that the facility information collected could become outdated by the time it is used to complete an fsa .

we reported in february 2012 that multiple federal agencies have been expending additional resources to conduct their own risk assessments , in part because they have not been satisfied with fps's past assessments .

these assessments are taking place even though , according to fps's chief financial officer , fps received $236 million in basic security fees from federal agencies to conduct fsas and other security services in fiscal year 2011 .

for example , officials we spoke with at the internal revenue service , federal emergency management agency , environmental protection agency and the u.s. army corps of engineers stated that they conduct their own risk assessments .

gsa is also expending additional resources to assess risk .

we reported in october 2010 that gsa officials did not always receive timely fps risk assessments for facilities gsa considered leasing .

gsa seeks to have these assessments completed before it takes possession of a property and leases it to tenant agencies .

however , our preliminary work indicates that as of june 2012 , fps has not coordinated with gsa and other federal agencies to reduce or prevent duplication of its assessments .

in september 2011 , fps signed an interagency agreement with argonne national laboratory for about $875,000 to develop an interim tool for conducting vulnerability assessments by june 30 , 2012 .

according to fps officials , on march 30 , 2012 , argonne national laboratory delivered this tool , called the modified infrastructure survey tool ( mist ) , to fps on time and within budget .

mist is an interim vulnerability assessment tool that fps plans to use until it can develop a permanent solution to replace ramp .

according to mist project documents and fps officials , among other things , mist will: allow fps's inspectors to review and document a facility's security posture , current level of protection , and recommend countermeasures ; provide fps's inspectors with a standardized way for gathering and recording facility data ; and allow fps to compare a facility's existing countermeasures against the interagency security committee's ( isc ) countermeasure standards based on the isc's predefined threats to federal facilities ( eg , blast - resistant windows for a facility designed to counter the threat of an explosive device ) to create the facility's vulnerability report .

according to fps officials , mist will provide several potential improvements over fps's prior assessment tools , such as using a standard way of collecting facility information and allowing edits to gsa's facility data when fps inspectors find it is inaccurate .

in addition , according to fps officials , after completing a mist vulnerability assessment , inspectors will use additional threat information gathered outside of mist by fps's threat management division as well as local crime statistics to identify any additional threats and generate a threat assessment report .

fps plans to provide the facility's threat and vulnerability reports along with any countermeasure recommendations to the federal tenant agencies .

in may 2012 , fps began training inspectors on mist and how to use the threat information obtained outside mist and expects to complete the training by the end of september 2012 .

according to fps officials , inspectors will be able to use mist once they have completed training and a supervisor has determined , based on professional judgment , that the inspector is capable of using mist .

at that time , an inspector will be able to use mist to assess level i or ii facilities .

according to fps officials , once these assessments are approved , fps will subsequently determine which level iii and iv facilities the inspector may assess with mist .

our preliminary analysis indicates that in developing mist , fps increased its use of gao's project management best practices , including alternatives analysis , managing requirements , and conducting user acceptance testing .

for example , fps completed , although it did not document , an alternatives analysis prior to selecting mist as an interim tool to replace ramp .

it appears that fps also better managed mist's requirements .

specifically , fps's director required that mist be an fsa - exclusive tool and thus helped avoid changes in requirements that could have resulted in cost or schedule increases during development .

in march 2012 , fps completed user acceptance testing of mist with some inspectors and supervisors , as we recommended in 2011.fps officials , user feedback on mist was positive from the user acceptance test , and mist produced the necessary output for fps's fsa process .

however , fps did not obtain gsa or federal tenant agencies' input in developing mist's requirements .

without this input , fps's customers may not receive the information they need to make well - informed countermeasure decisions .

fps has yet to decide what tool , if any , will replace mist , which is intended to be an interim vulnerability assessment tool .

according to fps officials , the agency plans to use mist for at least the next 18 months .

consequently , until fps decides what tool , if any , will replace mist and ramp , it will still not be able to assess risk at federal facilities in a manner consistent with nipp , as we previously mentioned .

our preliminary work suggests that mist has several limitations: assessing consequence .

fps did not design mist to estimate consequence , a critical component of a risk assessment .

assessing consequence is important because it combines vulnerability and threat information to evaluate the potential effects of an adverse event on a federal facility .

three of the four risk assessment experts we spoke with generally agreed that a tool that does not estimate consequences does not allow an agency to fully assess the risks to a federal facility .

however , fps officials stated that incorporating consequence information into an assessment tool is a complex task .

fps officials stated that they did not include consequence assessment in mist's design because it would have required additional time to develop , validate , and test mist .

as a result , while fps may be able to identify a facility's vulnerabilities to different threats using mist , without consequence information , federal tenant agencies may not be able to make fully informed decisions about how to allocate resources to best protect federal facilities .

fps officials do not know if this capability can be developed in the future , but they said that they are working with the isc and dhs's science and technology directorate to explore the possibility .

comparing risk across federal facilities .

fps did not design mist to present comparisons of risk assessment results across federal facilities .

consequently , fps cannot take a comprehensive approach to managing risk across its portfolio of 9,000 facilities to prioritize recommended countermeasures to federal tenant agencies .

instead , fps takes a facility by facility approach to risk management where all facilities with the same security level are assumed to have the same security risk , regardless of their location .

we reported in 2010 that fps's approach to risk management provides limited assurance that the most critical risks at federal facilities across the country are being prioritized and mitigated.such a comprehensive approach to its fsa program when it developed ramp and fps officials stated that they may develop this capability for the next version of mist .

fps recognized the importance of having measuring performance .

fps has not developed metrics to measure mist's performance , such as feedback surveys from tenant agencies .

measuring performance allows organizations to track progress toward their goals and , gives managers critical information on which to base decisions for improving their programs .

this is a necessary component of effective management , and should provide agency without such managers with timely , action - oriented information .

metrics , fps's ability to improve mist will be hampered .

fps officials stated that they are planning to develop performance measures for mist , but did not give a time frame for when they will do so .

gao , homeland security: the federal protective service faces several challenges that hamper its ability to protect federal facilities , gao - 08-683 ( washington , d.c.: june 11 , 2008 ) .

these challenges in 2011 , fps did not stop using ramp for guard oversight until june 2012 when the ramp operations and maintenance contract was due to expire .

in the absence of ramp , in june 2012 , fps decided to deploy an interim method to enable inspectors to record post inspections .

fps officials said this capability is separate from mist , will not allow fps to generate post inspection reports , and does not include a way for fps inspectors to check guard training and certification data during a post inspection .

fps officials acknowledged that this method is not a comprehensive system for guard oversight .

consequently , it is now more difficult for fps to verify that guards on post are trained and certified and that inspectors are conducting guard post inspections as required .

although fps collects guard training and certification information from the companies that provide contract guards , it appears that fps does not independently verify that information .

fps currently requires its guard contractors to maintain their own files containing guard training and certification information and began requiring them to submit a monthly report with this information to fps's regions in july 2011 .

to verify the guard companies' reports , fps conducts monthly audits .

as part of its monthly audit process , fps's regional staff visits the contractor's office to select 10 percent of the contractor's guard files and check them against the reports guard companies send fps each month .

in addition , in october 2011 , fps undertook a month - long audit of every guard file to verify that guards had up - to - date training and certification information for its 110 contracts across its 11 regions .

fps provided preliminary october 2011 data showing that 1,152 ( 9 percent ) of the 12,274 guard files fps reviewed at that time were deficient , meaning that they were missing one or more of the required certification document ( s ) .

however , fps does not have a final report on the results of the nation - wide audit that includes an explanation of why the files were deficient and whether deficiencies were resolved .

fps's monthly audits of contractor data provide limited assurance that qualified guards are standing post , as fps is verifying that the contractor - provided information matches the information in the contractor's files .

we reported in 2010 that fps's reliance on contractors to self - report guard training and certification information without a reliable tracking system of its own may have contributed to a situation in which a contractor allegedly falsified training information for its guards .

in addition , officials at one fps region told us they maintain a list of the files that have been audited previously to avoid reviewing the same files , but fps has no way of ensuring that the same guard files are not repeatedly reviewed during the monthly audits , while others are never reviewed .

in the place of ramp , fps plans to continue using its administrative audit process and the monthly contractor - provided information to verify that qualified contract guards are standing post in federal facilities .

we plan to finalize our analysis and report to the chairman in august 2012 , including recommendations .

we discussed the information in this statement with fps and incorporated technical comments as appropriate .

chairman lungren , ranking member clarke , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time .

for further information on this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 , or by e - mail at goldsteinm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony include tammy conquest , assistant director ; geoffrey hamilton ; greg hanna ; justin reed ; and amy rosewarne .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

