thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work on the department of state ( state ) bureau of diplomatic security's ( ds ) efforts to locate a consolidated training facility .

state has been in the process of looking for a site suitable for its ds training facility for more than a decade .

in 2011 , we reported that the lack of a consolidated training facility was a significant challenge to carrying out ds's mission .

ds currently provides training at 12 contracted and leased sites in seven states , which ds officials believe is inefficient and more costly than a consolidated facility would be .

in 2011 , state and the general services administration ( gsa ) identified fort pickett near blackstone , virginia , as the preferred site for a ds training facility , known as the foreign affairs security training center ( fastc ) .

the initial 2012 master plan for fastc would have consolidated training in hard skills ( eg , firearms , driving , and explosives ) and soft skills ( eg , classroom - based training in counterintelligence , cybersecurity , and law ) at fort pickett for an estimated cost of $925 million .

in 2013 , state reduced the scope of fastc to exclude facilities for soft - skills training and life support functions , such as dormitories and a cafeteria , ultimately decreasing the estimated cost of the current proposal to $413 million .

also in 2013 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) directed state to work with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to assess the viability of using the federal law enforcement training centers ( fletc ) in glynco , georgia , to accommodate ds's training .

in november 2013 , fletc submitted a business case to omb indicating that it could meet ds's requirements , including soft - skills training , for an estimated cost of $272 million .

following this assessment , ds , fletc , and omb could not agree on a path forward .

ultimately , omb deferred to state on the decision of where to locate its training facility .

in april 2014 , the administration reaffirmed the selection of fort pickett for fastc .

to date , state and gsa have obligated about $71 million of the estimated $413 million in capital costs toward fastc at fort pickett , including for the purchase of land in may 2015 .

my testimony summarizes our september 2015 report on the fastc and fletc proposals for accommodating ds training .

like that report , this testimony discusses ( 1 ) key site requirements critical to providing ds training and the extent to which the fastc and fletc proposals meet these requirements and ( 2 ) the estimated capital and recurring costs of these proposals and the extent to which the capital cost estimates conform to leading practices for reliable cost estimates .

for our september 2015 report , we reviewed documents on the requirements for ds's training facility and proposals to meet these requirements from state , dhs , and gsa .

we also reviewed the benghazi accountability review board ( arb ) report and reports by two panels established as a result of recommendations by the arb , including the independent panel on best practices .

we conducted site visits to fort pickett , fletc , and three of ds's current training venues , interviewed officials at state , fletc , gsa , and omb about the proposals , and spoke with officials from agencies that ds identified as its training partners , including the marine security guards , naval special warfare command , u.s. secret service , federal bureau of investigation , and central intelligence agency .

we focused on four requirements of the center that our analysis indicated were critical to providing basic and advanced ds training courses .

while we assessed the need for these site requirements to accommodate ds's existing and planned training , we did not assess whether specific ds training courses are necessary to accomplish ds's mission of providing a safe and secure environment for the conduct of u.s. foreign policy .

we did , however , confirm that ds currently conducts and plans to continue to conduct training that includes elements such as nighttime training , long - range firearms , and heavy explosives .

we identified the number of courses and students that use these elements , as well as the projected number of such courses at the future training center .

we observed a training exercise that involved several of these elements .

we also asked ds officials to explain why the elements were necessary and , to the extent possible , reviewed actual examples of incidents overseas that supported ds's identified need for specific training elements .

in some cases , we discussed these elements with ds's identified training partners as well as with fletc .

to assess the cost estimates for each proposal , we reviewed the september 2014 capital cost estimate for fastc and the november 2013 capital cost estimate for fletc .

we evaluated whether each cost estimate was generated according to best practices outlined in gao's cost estimating and assessment guide .

we reviewed data provided by state , gsa , and fletc regarding their cost estimation practices .

we also interviewed state , gsa , fletc , and contractor staff responsible for preparing the fastc and fletc cost estimates .

we reviewed cost data provided by state , fletc , and gsa to determine the recurring operations and maintenance , recapitalization investment , and staffing and associated costs for each proposal .

we also developed three scenarios to estimate the costs of sending students to each location , including costs for travel , lodging , meals and incidental expenses , and compensatory time for travel .

we discussed assumptions regarding these costs with state , fletc , and omb officials and subsequently developed our own assumptions using several data sources .

we provided our assumptions to state and fletc for review and confirmation , and we revised our assumptions based on their comments where appropriate .

additional details on our scope and methodology can be found in our september 2015 report .

we conducted the work on which this statement is based in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

ds currently provides training in hard skills to a diverse student population .

ds provides security familiarization training for foreign service and other civilian personnel and their families .

it also provides advanced courses for ds agents , such as the high threat operations course , an intensive 10-week course designed to provide agents with specialized training in a variety of tasks , including leadership , weapons , small unit tactics , air operations , and movement security procedures needed to operate in high - threat , high - risk posts .

in addition , through the antiterrorism assistance program , ds provides training to foreign security personnel in areas such as crisis response , explosive incident countermeasures , post - blast investigations , and armored vehicle driving .

ds has expanded its training over the last decade , and following the 2012 attack on the u.s. special mission compound in benghazi , libya , the independent arb recommended further security training for ds agents and all other foreign service personnel .

in june 2015 , ds projected that it would train nearly 6,300 students in hard skills in fiscal year 2015 , compared to 3,500 students in 2007 .

ds estimates that it will provide more than 9,000 students with over 20,000 weeks of training per year once its training facility is fully operational .

for our september 2015 report , we analyzed four of ds's requirements that we determined were critical in the selection of a site for ds's training facility and found that fort pickett fully met all four while fletc did not fully meet any .

consolidation .

building fastc at fort pickett would enable ds to consolidate at one location 10 of the 12 widely scattered hard - skills training venues it is currently using .

fletc can accommodate many of these venues on its glynco campus but would have to conduct some exercises , such as training in long - range weapons and heavy explosives , as well as some nighttime exercises , at the townsend bombing range , a marine corps training facility about 30 miles from glynco .

fletc did not include costs for using this facility in its 2013 proposal .

proximity to washington , d.c .

the independent panel on best practices , established as a result of the benghazi arb , recommended a consolidated training center , located in proximity to state's washington , d.c. , headquarters , given state's reliance on military units and other government agencies located nearby .

fort pickett is located about 160 miles from washington , d.c. , or nearly 3 hours by car one way , compared to fletc , which is approximately 640 miles from washington , d.c. , or 5 to 6 hours by airplane one way .

over 90 partner organizations conduct training at fletc ; however , ds's primary training partners , including the marine corps' security augmentation unit and its fleet antiterrorism security team , are based in virginia , and an official responsible for marine security guard training told us that the cost of transporting personnel and equipment to and from fletc would be prohibitive .

exclusivity of use .

the independent panel on best practices “strongly endorsed” state's efforts to develop a training facility that it could control , noting that agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. secret service , and the drug enforcement administration have adopted such a policy as a best practice .

at fort pickett , ds would control its training venues and have the flexibility to implement scheduling changes to respond to rapidly evolving security situations overseas .

fletc stated that ds would be assured of priority scheduling , but not exclusive use , for those facilities that would be built for ds and provided a detailed plan showing the facilities currently available and those that would be constructed for ds .

fletc officials stated that when ds was not using facilities prioritized for its use , other federal , state , and local agencies would be allowed to train at and benefit from the facilities .

24 / 7 availability .

ds conducts training during hours of darkness on about 190 days per year , including 140 nights that involve loud noises such as gunfire and small explosions .

we found that fort pickett , which covers about 42,000 acres and is set in a rural area , is available for nighttime training .

fletc , which is adjacent to the town of brunswick , georgia , does not conduct certain types of training at night , and fletc officials told us that exercises there currently end by 10:00 p.m .

according to fletc officials , ds could conduct such nighttime exercises at the townsend bombing range .

in our september 2015 report , we found that neither the fastc nor the fletc estimate for capital costs fully meets best practices for reliable cost estimates .

the fastc estimate fully or substantially meets three of the four characteristics — comprehensive , well documented , and accurate — and partially meets one characteristic of reliable cost estimates — credible ; the fletc estimate partially or minimally meets all four characteristics ( see table 1 ) .

fletc officials noted that their estimate was prepared in a short period of time based on incomplete information regarding state's requirements ; more complete information would have enabled them to develop a more comprehensive estimate .

our assessment of the reliability of these cost estimates focused on the processes used to develop the estimates rather than estimates themselves , enabling us to make a more direct comparison of their reliability .

in september 2014 , state and gsa estimated that acquisition and construction costs for the reduced - scope plan for fastc would be $413 million .

fletc's november 2013 proposal included a cost estimate comparable to the full - scope plan for fastc ; however , fletc officials said that because they did not have complete information regarding the reduced - scope plan for fastc , they were unable to develop a comparable cost estimate .

for example , these officials said that state did not tell them which venues had been removed from the plan and that they were unaware of some of ds's training exercises .

these officials said that they subtracted the costs of some facilities from the fletc full - scope estimate to arrive at a reduced - scope estimate of $243 million .

fletc has not refined its cost estimate since omb notified it that the administration had selected the fastc proposal in april 2014 .

in addition to capital costs for acquisition and construction of a ds training center , the analysis in our september 2015 report included projections for recurring costs for operations and maintenance ( o&m ) and for recapitalization investment — the costs of replacing broken systems and equipment .

our analysis also included recurring staffing and associated costs for each proposal .

using data provided by state , gsa , and fletc , we projected these costs over 10 , 25 , and 50 years .

we projected the capital and recurring o&m , recapitalization investment , and staffing costs to be $201 million more , in net present value , for fastc over 10 years , $266 million more for fastc over 25 years , and $372 million more for fastc over 50 years ( see table 2 ) .

finally , the government is expected to incur costs of sending students to training .

these recurring student costs include travel , lodging , meals and incidental expenses , and compensation for time spent traveling .

we projected these costs over 10 , 25 , and 50 years in three different scenarios for both the fastc and fletc proposals .

we estimated that the costs of sending students to fastc over 10 years would be $43 million to $121 million less , in net present value , than sending students to fletc .

the difference in student costs between fastc and fletc increases over time , from between $122 million and $323 million less for fastc after 25 years , to between $309 and $736 million after 50 years ( see table 3 ) .

chairman perdue , ranking member kaine , and members of the subcommittee , this completes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact michael j .

courts , director , international affairs and trade , at ( 202 ) 512-8980 or courtsm@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are thomas costa ( assistant director ) , robert ball ( analyst - in - charge ) , brian bothwell , juaná collymore , david dayton , grace lui , manuel valverde , and nancy zearfoss .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

