public transportation can be critical to those living in rural areas .

for people with limited ability to drive due to age , disabilities , or income constraints , rural public transportation offers mobility and access to jobs , education , and essential services , such as medical services and grocery shopping .

the u.s. census bureau's 2017 american community survey found that about 62-million people live in rural areas with populations of less than 50,000 residents .

we previously reported that the need for public transportation in rural areas is increasing ; this increase may be due , in part , to rural hospital closures , large numbers of older adults and veterans living in rural communities , and increasing transportation needs to access opioid treatment facilities .

federal funding is key for many rural and tribal transit systems to meet this need .

over the last 3 years , the federal transit administration ( fta ) , within the department of transportation ( dot ) , allocated about $2.1 billion in formula grants to support safe , comprehensive , and coordinated public - transportation systems in rural areas , including tribal lands .

according to officials , fta provided 38 percent of all funding , including 66 percent of all capital funding , for rural transit providers in fiscal year 2018 .

coordination of rural transportation across geographic jurisdictions and funding sources has the potential to reduce transportation cost and improve services .

we have found that coordination is important for rural transit systems due to the large service areas these systems cover , low population density , limited financial resources , and growing unmet needs in rural communities .

however , we also reported that coordination of transportation services among federal programs has been limited and that providing transit services in rural areas can be challenging , despite the potential for coordination to improve the quality and cost - effectiveness of transit services .

you asked us to examine efforts underway to coordinate rural transit systems and challenges encountered in doing so .

this report discusses the factors affecting rural transit coordination ; the types of coordination efforts selected rural and tribal transit providers have underway ; and the extent to which fta facilitates coordination of rural transit services , including steps to address any challenges transit providers face .

to address these objectives , we reviewed key fta documents and conducted a literature review of studies from january 2009 through april 2019 that examined rural transit coordination issues .

to identify factors affecting rural transit coordination , coordination efforts under way , and any actions fta can take to address coordination challenges , we selected and conducted semi - structured interviews with 43 stakeholders and rural transit agencies , including representatives from nine public - transit industry groups and five fta regional offices .

in addition , we interviewed officials from eight states — california , georgia , montana , new mexico , north carolina , north dakota , tennessee , and washington — and 21 transit providers ( 6 tribal and 15 rural ) in those states .

we selected these states on the basis of variation in the amount of fta's rural transit funding received , geographic representation , and the ability to conduct multiple site visits in a short period of time due to the long travel distances .

we also conducted three discussion groups with officials from state transportation agencies and rural and tribal transit providers during the community transportation association of america's 2019 annual conference .

discussion group participants included rural transit providers and state transportation agencies that were not part of our selected interviews but had received fta rural transit funding .

although the views of these selected stakeholders are not generalizable to those of all rural transit agencies and stakeholders , they represent a range of perspectives .

see appendix i for a list of the industry groups , fta regions , state transportation agencies , and rural and tribal transit providers we interviewed and discussion group participants .

to determine the extent to which fta facilitates coordination of rural transit services including addressing challenges transit providers face , we reviewed agency documents and interviewed dot and fta officials .

specifically , we examined studies , reports , and other documents issued by fta and the coordinating council on access and mobility ( coordinating council ) , which is a federal interagency coordinating body .

we also interviewed officials from the centers for medicare and medicaid services , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , which oversees medicaid , a federal program that provides a significant amount of federal transportation funding other than fta's programs .

we assessed fta's efforts to communicate on coordination - focused information against the office of management and budget's circular a - 130 , managing information as a strategic resource guidance pertaining to dissemination of information and standards for internal controls in the federal government — specifically , those controls related to agencies' communication with internal and external stakeholders .

we conducted this performance audit from december 2018 to january 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

according to fta's national transit database , about 1,500 rural transit providers , including tribal transit providers , supply vital mobility and connections to essential services for people living in rural communities .

rural transit providers generally have low budgets , few employees , and small vehicle fleets .

rural transit providers provide a variety of transit services , including: demand - response , which is scheduled in response to calls from passengers ; fixed - routes , which are buses operating according to a set schedule ; and deviated - fixed routes , which are fixed - routes that allow for minor route deviations in response to passenger calls .

service areas for rural providers may span dozens of square miles in remote areas — with long trips and only a few riders at any given time — or be located in smaller , more developed rural areas surrounding major cities .

dot primarily supports rural transportation through formula grants , some of which require states and rural transit providers to coordinate .

specifically , these rural transportation formula grants are apportioned to state departments of transportation based on various factors , and these state agencies then allocate funding to rural transit providers as sub - grantees .

sub - grantees can be regional or local governments , non - profit organizations , or federally recognized tribes , which provide public transit services in their communities .

dot also awards rural transit program funds directly to federally recognized indian tribes through the tribal transit program .

see table 1 for a description of the dot's primary formula - grant programs that support rural transit .

within dot , fta and its 10 regional offices administer these programs ; their responsibilities include: 1. grant funding , including targeted grants and contracts for coordination - related projects to enhance mobility and access nationwide ; 2. oversight of state transportation agencies and tribal - transit program grantees through state management reviews and tribal transit assessments ; 3. training and technical assistance to states and rural transit providers ; 4. policy interpretations and development to enhance mobility and access .

dot and fta also lead the coordinating council , which is charged with improving coordination across federal programs that fund transportation services for transportation - disadvantaged persons .

the coordinating council consists of 11 federal agency members , namely , the departments of agriculture , education , hhs , housing and urban development , interior , justice , labor , transportation , and veterans affairs ( va ) ; the national council on disability ; and the social security administration .

aside from dot , transportation is not the primary mission of these federal agencies .

however , each member agency has programs that provide funding for transportation to enable program beneficiaries to access the various health and human service programs within the agencies' primary missions , such as job training , education , or medical care .

for example , the hhs's medicaid program requires assurance from states that medicaid beneficiaries have access to necessary medical services ; this medical service includes arranging and providing funding for transportation to medical appointments and other health services when beneficiaries cannot transport themselves .

in 2012 , we found , among other things , that coordinating council member agencies were not effectively collaborating and recommended that the coordinating council strengthen its coordination efforts across federal programs .

in 2014 , we again identified the need to strengthen federal coordination efforts and recommended that the coordinating council develop both a strategic plan and a cost - sharing policy to promote and enhance federal , state , and local nonemergency medical transportation coordination activities .

for a full description of our prior recommendations and their implementation status , see appendix ii .

state and local stakeholders — including state transportation agencies , regional planning organizations , rural and tribal transit providers — and health and human service providers , coordinate rural transportation services when they share resources and responsibilities and plan activities to achieve common goals and for the overall benefit of the community .

coordination of rural transportation services can occur across geographic jurisdictions , funding sources , and various local , state , and federal programs .

coordination of transportation services has the potential to reduce transportation program costs by clustering passengers , using fewer one - way trips , and sharing the use of personnel , equipment , and facilities ; at the same time , people in need of transportation also often benefit from greater and higher quality services when transportation providers coordinate their operations .

various factors affect rural transit coordination , according to stakeholders we interviewed , participants from three discussion groups , and literature we reviewed .

factors that can affect coordination include availability of resources , alignment of different federal program requirements , availability of coordinating mechanisms , and the distances between transit providers .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

as discussed below , we found that these factors are often interrelated and can serve as both a motivating factor and a barrier to coordination .

the availability of resources was the most commonly cited factor affecting rural transit coordination in our literature review and interviews .

almost two - thirds of the stakeholders we spoke with ( 30 of 43 ) and participants in three discussion groups told us that it is difficult to coordinate transit services in rural communities with limited resources , such as funding , staff and time , and technology .

for example , a rural transit provider told us that while it provides public transit to a neighboring national park for its visitors during the summer season , insufficient funding from the national park combined with very limited access to fta's rural transit funds limits the providers' ability to effectively coordinate services .

we also reported in 2014 that smaller budgets and fewer employees can influence rural transit providers' ability to coordinate .

a 2018 survey of state and local transit and health and human services providers conducted by the national center for mobility management also noted that the availability of resources can be a key barrier to transportation coordination both in rural and non - rural areas .

resources specifically affecting rural transit coordination include: availability of matching funds .

the availability of matching state and local funds can affect coordination , as rural transit providers tend to rely on a variety of funding sources to provide transit services .

federal programs generally require a share of state or local funding to match federal funds .

approximately one - third of selected stakeholders ( 13 of 43 ) and participants in three discussion groups said that they face challenges identifying enough state or local funding to meet fta's matching fund requirements .

some rural transit providers ( 4 of 21 ) told us they have access to funds from different sources , but others ( 4 of 21 ) said that they are challenged with securing state or local matching funds .

for example , local , regional , or state taxes provide some funding streams for public transit , including rural transit providers , in california , georgia , new mexico , and washington .

although revenues from state or local taxes may be available as a funding source , rural transit providers still told us that identifying and coordinating state and local funding sources can be challenging .

we previously reported that constrained state and local budgets can make securing these funds difficult as rural transit competes for funding with other needs within a community , such as public safety .

technology and coordination: greater columbia call - center people for people , a rural transit provider in yakima , washington , uses technology to coordinate and operate the greater columbia 2-1-1 ( gc211 ) call center .

gc211 maintains a statewide database of community resources , including transportation options .

it is one of the state's seven regional 2-1-1 call centers that directs riders to social , health , and transportation resources .

staffing and time .

some stakeholders ( 12 of 43 ) said that rural transit providers do not have enough staff and time to pursue or engage in coordination efforts .

for example , three rural transit providers told us that staff sometimes take on multiple duties , such as bus driver and dispatcher in addition to grant and program manager , duties that affect their time and ability to coordinate .

representatives from a national transit planning association also told us that staffing constraints are an issue , particularly with rural transit providers because they are usually more understaffed than urban transit agencies .

technology .

access to technology can help coordinate trips and schedules across rural transit services .

about half of the rural transit providers ( 11 of 21 ) we interviewed stated that they use software and other technology to schedule trips and operate call centers to facilitate coordination efforts .

for example , people for people , a rural transit provider in yakima , washington , uses technology to coordinate and operate the greater columbia call - center .

 ( see sidebar ) .

however , a handful of stakeholders ( 4 of 43 ) mentioned that access to broadband , which is needed to enable technology and scheduling software , can be limited in certain areas , especially on tribal lands .

for example , an official from ebci transit , a tribal transit provider in north carolina , said ebci experienced poor cell phone service and other communication limitations , which affected its ability to schedule and coordinate trips .

our recent work on telecommunications found that tribal lands have significantly lower levels of broadband internet access relative to the country as a whole .

formal coordinating mechanisms: state - and regional - coordinating bodies as one of the regional coordinating bodies , the southwest georgia regional commission has played a central role in coordinating rural transit services through much of its region ; it currently provides public transit services in 13 counties to the general public as well as to riders with specific needs to access health and human services in 14 counties .

the availability of coordinating mechanisms can facilitate information sharing and coordination .

about half of the stakeholders ( 18 of 43 ) told us that they participate in some statewide , regional , or local coordinating bodies as part of a process to facilitate coordination .

for example , the georgia department of transportation works with regional commissions to coordinate rural transit throughout georgia .

 ( see sidebar ) .

in contrast , officials from the north carolina department of transportation told us that the state disbanded its coordinating council , which may be contributing to challenges in providing nonemergency medical transportation services .

we previously reported that state and local transportation agencies and aging network organizations used a variety of different mechanisms , such as state - , regional - , and local - planning bodies to coordinate transportation services for older adults .

half of the states we selected ( 4 of 8 ) have statewide - coordinating bodies .

for example , participants from one discussion group said that state requirements can facilitate coordination when the state statute requires rural transit providers applying for or receiving federal , state , or local assistance to coordinate with other state agencies , including the state's health and human services department , for funding and services .

rural transit providers also told us that they participate in regional - and local - coordinating bodies .

for example , all transit providers in montana are required to coordinate through local transportation advisory committees that plan and prioritize local transportation needs .

about one - third of the stakeholders ( 13 of 43 ) and participants in three discussion groups also mentioned knowledge - sharing forums — such as conferences and training organized by state transportation agencies , transit industry associations , and fta — as mechanisms to facilitate coordination .

for example , officials from pullman transit told us that these forums , such as the washington state transit association's annual conference , presented opportunities to share and learn about various federal transportation programs , coordinating efforts , and information on best practices .

we and others have reported that transit providers , as well as health and human service providers , may encounter substantial challenges trying to coordinate services across different programs when program requirements do not align .

for our current work , about one - third of stakeholders ( 13 of 43 ) and participants in three discussion groups told us that they face a wide array of barriers coordinating across differing federal laws , regulations , and program requirements .

the different federal program requirements can affect rural transit providers' ability to coordinate transit services as some federal programs are dedicated to specific groups of riders ( eg , older adults , people with disabilities , and low - income riders ) with specific needs ; such specification of groups makes it difficult to coordinate trips for different riders .

three rural transit providers stated that it is sometimes difficult to coordinate transportation to medical appointments for “blended riders” ( i.e. , senior citizens , veterans , and the general public ) in one trip .

for example , va's highly rural transportation grants require rural transit providers to serve only veterans , while medicaid's nonemergency medical transportation funds require serving only medicaid beneficiaries .

rural transit providers — which provide service to the general public within their service areas — are sometimes challenged with providing an efficient and coordinated transit service for va or medicaid beneficiaries to access their programs .

fta and the coordinating council's 2018 focus group report also identified federal program requirements , including trip purpose restrictions , as a barrier for coordination .

as discussed later in the report , the coordinating council has been charged with addressing this barrier , among others , and is currently examining whether and how federal program requirements could be better aligned .

coordination in rural areas can be both essential and challenging because rural transit passengers often need to travel long distances ( eg , 30-100 miles ) to reach critical services , such as doctor appointments or grocery shopping .

about a quarter of stakeholders ( 11 of 43 ) and participants in two of the discussion groups said that the long distance between transit providers in remote rural communities sometimes makes it difficult to find entities or other providers interested in or able to coordinate .

two rural transit providers also told us they have no neighboring transit provider to coordinate with due to the extremely remote rural locations .

for example , an official from turtle mountain transit in north dakota said it is challenging to coordinate with other neighboring tribal transit providers due to the long distance to the nearest tribal transit provider in spirit lake , which is about 100 miles away .

turtle mountain transit , like a number of other tribal transit providers , often serves large and fairly remote areas .

we previously reported that tribal lands can vary in size , and range from the smallest at less than one square mile to the largest , the navajo nation , which is more than 24,000 square miles or the size of west virginia , and extends into the states of utah , arizona , and new mexico .

despite encountering some of the factors that can make coordination difficult , all rural transit providers we interviewed told us that they currently coordinate trips or schedules with other local or regional stakeholders .

such coordination efforts include establishing common drop - off points or common schedules ( 21 of 21 ) , coordinating to provide access to health and human services ( 14 of 21 ) and using technologies , such as software , to facilitate coordination of transportation ( 11 of 21 ) .

rural transit providers told us that they coordinate with others because coordinating may help them meet increasing rural - transit service demand and improve service .

they mentioned that the benefits of their coordination efforts include: increased ridership or access , cost efficiency or reduced costs , and enhanced quality of services .

examples of coordination cited by our selected rural transit providers are summarized in table 2 below .

all of the rural transit providers we interviewed also told us they coordinated across various funding sources or shared other resources with nearby transit providers .

the most commonly cited coordination and resource - sharing activities included pursuing funding from several programs and raising local revenue for transit ( 18 of 21 ) ; participating in opportunities to share knowledge , such as training ( 11 of 21 ) ; sharing vehicles and related resources , such as maintenance capabilities ( 8 of 21 ) ; and sharing staff to achieve a common goal ( 5 of 21 ) .

four of our selected rural transit providers also stated that full consolidation of their transit services across multiple jurisdictions or providers resulted in cost savings .

specific examples of these activities cited by our selected rural transit providers are summarized in table 3 below .

as the lead agency of the coordinating council , fta has taken a number of steps in recent years , including those summarized below , to work with other coordinating council member agencies to enhance federal interagency coordination .

from january 2017 through june 2019 , fta and the coordinating council members were involved in more than 90 interagency - coordinating activities , according to the coordinating council's summary of recent activities posted on its website .

coordinating activities included interagency meetings , trainings , and webinars to share information and coordinate interagency efforts that support rural communities and improve transportation access to health and human services .

for example , in september 2018 , staff from fta and the department of agriculture held a webinar for federal , state , and local officials on the opioid crisis and increasing transportation in rural areas to improve access to treatment centers , the courts , and other services in rural west virginia .

in 2018 , fta and coordinating council members engaged in significant efforts to inform the strategic direction of the coordinating council .

from march through june 2018 , fta and some coordinating council members convened a series of focus groups with state and local stakeholders , including transit and health and human services providers to be informed of the current state of transportation services and identify leading practices and barriers to transportation coordination .

fta also obtained input from state and local transit and health and human services stakeholders via a survey that the national center for mobility management conducted from june through november 2018 to identify promising practices , barriers , and challenges around coordinated transportation .

working group efforts under way are addressing some of the challenges facing rural transit providers .

for example , the coordinating council's program analysis work group , which was convened in november 2018 , is currently examining all federal programs with transportation funding available and conducting program analyses to determine whether and how federal program requirements could be better aligned .

fta officials stated that the coordinating council plans to submit a report to congress with some proposed changes and recommendations for improved alignment of federal requirements by september 2020 .

while these coordinating activities are constructive and encouraging steps , the coordinating council's progress has been slow in other key areas .

in 2014 , we recommended that the coordinating council develop a strategic plan and cost - sharing policy to promote and enhance federal , state , and local nonemergency medical transportation coordination activities .

in addition , the 2015 fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ) required the council to publish a strategic plan by december 2016 that , among other things , identifies a strategy to strengthen interagency collaboration and that develops a cost - sharing policy in compliance with applicable federal laws .

the fast act also required the coordinating council to submit a final report containing the council's final recommendations to congress for enhancing interagency coordination .

however , the coordinating council did not issue the required strategic plan until october 2019 , about 3 years after the 2016 deadline .

we are currently evaluating this plan as part of our follow - up on the implementation status of our 2014 recommendations .

regarding the final report to congress on interagency coordination , fta officials told us that they plan to submit the final report to congress by september 2020 .

additionally , we previously reported on the long - standing challenge of the coordinating council executive committee , which is tasked with providing top management direction for the council , providing limited leadership and guidance that can have a broad effect on rural transportation .

specifically , we reported that the council executive committee had provided limited leadership , had not met since 2007 , and had not issued key guidance documents that could promote coordination .

accordingly , we recommended that the council meet and issue guidance documents .

according to fta officials , the executive committee met for the first time since 2007 in october 2019 and issued the strategic plan noted above .

as previously mentioned , we will continue following up on our prior recommendations ( see app .

ii ) .

fta also facilitates coordination of rural transit services by engaging directly with state and local stakeholders , including transit and health and human services providers .

fta has , for example , taken the following actions: it created a website that provides resources and information on planning and coordinating rural transportation services .

this website includes a self - assessment toolkit for state and local transportation agencies on “building a coordinated transportation system” and a link to case studies on coordination of state and regional councils .

fta staff provides ongoing training , resources , and technical support to state transportation agencies and transit and human services providers through its three technical assistance centers — the national rural transit assistance program , the national aging and disability transportation center , and the national center for mobility management .

fta and its three centers have been disseminating and sharing some coordination - focused information through their websites , training , and conferences .

for example , fta officials pointed us to the national aging and disability transportation center's webpage on “annual trends report and spotlight series” that posted best practices information on a non - profit agency that recruits and uses volunteers to transport older adults to social outings and medical appointments .

fta also annually awards competitive grants for innovative , coordinated health and transportation programs .

for example , fta awarded approximately $9.6 million in fiscal year 2019 to 37 projects that were selected as innovative projects for the transportation of disadvantaged populations that are designed to improve the coordination of transportation services and nonemergency medical transportation services .

fta has also bi - annually recognized rural transit providers with an fta administrator's award for outstanding rural - transit programs , selected in part based on coordination efforts .

fta officials told us that recipients of this award are expected to share their successful practices at the national rural transit assistance program conference , which is attended by many rural transit providers .

although fta has a number of efforts under way to facilitate coordination , we identified limitations with fta's current communication and information sharing approach .

more than a third of the stakeholders we spoke with ( 16 of 43 ) stated that communication and information sharing on coordination opportunities from fta have been limited .

fta officials told us that they disseminate and share some coordination - focused information through its three technical assistance centers , training , conferences , and regular meetings with state transportation agencies as its direct grantees and transportation industry associations .

however , about a quarter of the stakeholders ( 11 of 43 ) and participants in one discussion group told us that while they have attended fta trainings and conferences and have used fta's technical centers , the focus has been on grant management issues , such as compliance with drug and alcohol policy and procurement , and not on coordination opportunities .

stakeholders stated that they wanted more information on: ways to coordinate with other providers , how providers addressed coordination challenges , technologies that were used to facilitate coordination , and any quantifiable data and results on coordination .

additional information on leading coordination practices that fta can share with stakeholders include those that we previously identified , such as defining and articulating a common outcome that agencies can engage in to sustain coordination efforts .

in december 2014 , we recommended that fta and the coordinating council collect data to track and measure progress in achieving results , including the extent of coordination efforts under way .

fta officials told us that the council's recent adoption of their strategic plan includes goals and objectives that represents progress toward measuring the extent of coordination efforts at the federal level .

fta officials also told us that the council's final report to congress that will be submitted in september 2020 will report on the implementation status of the objectives in the strategic plan .

we have previously reported on the importance of information sharing on coordination across federal , regional , state , and local government entities .

office of management and budget guidance on using information as a “strategic resource” notes that making federal information “discoverable , accessible and useable” can fuel innovation .

further , according to standards for internal control in the federal government , agencies should communicate necessary and quality information externally so that external parties can achieve their objectives and periodically evaluate methods of communication , so that the agency has the appropriate tools to communicate quality information with external parties on a timely basis .

fta , however , has not clearly communicated and conveyed information on coordination opportunities and leading practices .

for example , while fta officials told us that they rely on their website to share information with stakeholders , more than a third of the stakeholders ( 17 of 43 ) told us that information on coordination opportunities and leading coordination practices are not clearly identifiable on fta's website or easily accessible .

two stakeholders , for example , said that while locating program requirement information , such as on procurement , was fairly easy , it was difficult to locate coordination - related information .

an official from a transit industry association also commented that “stakeholders would benefit if fta and the technical assistance centers make coordination resources and training more visible on their websites.” this visibility could include “having coordination as a standalone topic and / or creating a page ( s ) dedicated to coordination on their websites.” we also determined that coordination - related information was fragmented on fta's website and found it difficult to navigate fta's website to find leading practices information on coordination .

for example , fta officials referred us to its website on fta's access and mobility partnership grant ( also known as the innovative coordinated access and mobility grant ) for information on leading practices for transportation coordination .

in our review of this website , we found a description of projects that fta selected for the grant , the grant amount , and how the funds will be used .

we could not identify any information specifically on how these projects identified opportunities to coordinate or exhibited leading coordination practices .

we also examined fta's website that provides a self - assessment toolkit for building a coordinated transportation system , as we previously mentioned .

fta officials also mentioned that they developed the coordination council's webpage to present information targeted to coordination .

fta does not have a strategy for communicating and sharing information on coordination opportunities and leading coordination practices for its wide audience of rural and tribal providers , state transportation agencies , and other stakeholders .

fta officials told us that they develop individualized communication plans when they undertake any major activities and examine an approach to communicating and sharing information when they develop annual statements of work for their three technical centers and meet with stakeholders .

however , fta could not provide us with a documented strategy that outlines how it communicates and shares coordination - focused information with state and local stakeholders .

in light of the multiple means by which fta and the coordinating council are attempting to communicate information about coordinating rural and tribal transit services , a comprehensive plan or strategy that assesses what information state , local , and transit providers would benefit from receiving and how that information can be effectively communicated could help fta's information - sharing efforts have their intended effect .

without such a strategy , stakeholders are without valuable information that could aid them in identifying potential coordination opportunities , leading practices , and data to help inform and facilitate their coordination efforts .

coordination is important to help state transportation agencies , rural transit providers , and human health and service providers meet the increasing needs of those who rely on rural transit systems , particularly in light of limited resources .

fta has taken a number of steps to enhance and facilitate coordination , including having interagency meetings , trainings , and webinars to coordinate interagency efforts that support rural communities and improve transportation access to health and human services .

going forward , it will be critical for the coordinating council's executive committee to implement our prior recommendations on key coordination issues .

in addition , although fta , along with its three technical centers , has developed resources to facilitate coordination , its communication efforts have fallen short .

without a communication strategy to effectively reach state and local stakeholders , fta is missing opportunities to enhance communication and information sharing that can improve coordination among state transportation agencies and rural and tribal transit providers .

the administrator of fta should develop a communication plan that will effectively share information with state transportation agencies and rural and tribal transit providers on coordination opportunities and leading coordination practices in an accessible and informative way .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to the department of transportation ( dot ) and department of health and human services ( hhs ) for review and comment .

dot provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendix iii and summarized below .

dot and hhs also separately provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

in written comments , dot partially concurred with our recommendation .

dot provided examples of its communication efforts with stakeholders on coordination opportunities and practices and highlighted two recent initiatives to further support the coordination of rural transportation services .

for example , in october 2019 , dot established the rural opportunities to use transportation for economic success ( routes ) initiative to enable better coordination among agencies to address underserved rural areas and to collect input from stakeholders on the benefits rural transportation offers for safety and economic outcomes .

in partially concurring with our recommendation , dot wrote that it plans to direct each of its technical assistance centers to reorganize its web pages to centralize coordination information and best practices .

we acknowledge fta's efforts and highlighted the progress fta has made in communicating and facilitating coordination in this report .

we noted that fta has provided ongoing training , support , and resources through its technical assistance centers .

while dot's plans to have its technical assistance centers' web pages reorganized may help in communicating coordination opportunities with stakeholders , they fall short of a comprehensive communication plan .

such a plan would define a strategy for effectively communicating and sharing information with stakeholders and ensuring that methods of communication are reaching all intended stakeholders .

among other things , fta's plans to increase access to coordination information does not include reorganizing and centralizing coordination - related information on fta's web pages , a strategy that is different from these technical centers' web pages and one where many stakeholders can turn to and search for communication and information .

we believe that a comprehensive communication plan that includes fta's strategy for ongoing communication on coordination opportunities would enable fta to ensure that coordination information is reaching intended stakeholders to inform them of opportunities to enhance rural transit services .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of transportation , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions regarding this report , please contact at me ( 202 ) 512-2834 or flemings@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .

appendix i: rural transit stakeholders gao interviewed and discussion group participants industry groups community transportation association of america national association of development organizations national association of regional councils national center for mobility management national rural transit assistance program small urban , rural and tribal center on mobility federal transit administration ( fta ) regional office fta region iv ^ state transportation agencies caltrans - california department of transportation new mexico department of transportation north carolina department of transportation north dakota department of transportation washington state department of transportation rural transit providers ( including tribes' names , where appropriate ) carlsbad municipal transit system cskt transit ( confederated salish and kootenai tribes of the flathead reservation ) * ebci transit ( eastern band of cherokee indians ) *^ missoula ravalli transportation management association ^ morongo transportation department ( morongo band of mission indians ) * north central regional transit district pueblo of santa clara , new mexico * rocky boy's transit ( chippewa cree indians of the rocky boy's reservation , montana ) * southeast tennessee human resource agency ^ turtle mountain transit ( turtle mountain band of chippewa indians of north dakota ) * williston council for the aging legend: * = recipient of fta's tribal transit program funding .

^ = site visit to interview stakeholder .

state transportation agencies mississippi department of transportation vtrans - vermont agency of transportation rural transit providers ( including tribe names , where appropriate ) big woods transit ( bois forte band ( nett lake ) component of minnesota chippewa tribe , minnesota ) center for community the ride ( sitka tribe of alaska ) * choctaw tribal transit ( the choctaw nation of oklahoma ) * heart of iowa regional transit agency hualapai transit ( hualapai indian tribe of the hualapai indian reservation , arizona ) * oglala sioux transit ( oglala sioux tribe ) * salt river transit ( salt river pima - maricopa indian community of the salt river reservation , arizona ) * legend: * = recipient of fta's tribal transit program funding .

in addition to the individuals named above , heather macleod ( assistant director ) ; jennifer kim ( analyst - in - charge ) ; matthew bond ; delwen jones ; rosa leung ; theresa lo ; anna maria ortiz ; cheryl peterson ; malika rice ; kelly rubin ; pamela snedden ; lisa van arsdale ; and sarah veale made key contributions to this report .

