over the past several years , thousands of coast guard servicemembers have left the military with more soon to follow .

some of these new veterans may face significant challenges as they transition to civilian life , such as finding and maintaining employment .

to help them , one section of the vow to hire heroes act of 2011 ( vow act ) generally mandates the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to assure that all separating coast guard servicemembers participate in the transition assistance program ( tap ) to receive counseling , employment assistance , and information on federal veteran benefits , among other supports .

tap is designed to help all servicemembers , including those from the coast guard , successfully prepare for civilian life .

concurrently with the vow act , the prior administration initiated a redesign of tap which , among other changes , created a standardized curriculum sometimes referred to as transition gps ( goals , plans , success ) .

the redesign was led by an interagency task force , which included dhs .

the task force developed an extended , core curriculum for tap that covered employment , veterans' benefits , and financial planning , among other topics .

the redesigned tap also included additional 2-day classes for coast guard servicemembers interested in pursuing higher education , career technical training , or entrepreneurship .

in 2014 , gao issued an initial report on tap implementation .

you asked us to conduct a follow - up review of tap .

we developed two reports based on our audit work — a previously issued report that focuses on the department of defense's ( dod ) tap implementation , and this report that focuses on the coast guard's implementation of tap .

this report examines: 1 .

what is known about the reliability of transition assistance program data on participation levels and the factors that affect coast guard servicemembers' participation ? .

2 .

to what extent does the coast guard measure tap performance and monitor key areas of transition assistance program implementation ? .

to address these questions , we surveyed 12 coast guard installations with on - site tap managers and achieved a 100 percent response rate .

we reviewed coast guard data on tap participation for fiscal years 2012 to 2017 and interviewed coast guard officials in headquarters responsible for overseeing tap implementation for the coast guard .

we interviewed 3 of the coast guard's 13 tap managers — one in person and two by phone — selected for diversity in location of the regions they oversee .

we visited one coast guard installation where , in addition to interviewing the on - site tap manager , we interviewed additional tap staff as well as 25 coast guard servicemembers ( including both officers and enlisted personnel ) who had participated in the program .

we assessed the reliability of the coast guard's tap participation data and , based on interviews with agency officials knowledgeable about the data , determined these data were not sufficiently reliable due to limitations with the coast guard's data collection system , which does not have sufficient controls to ensure data are complete and accurate .

we discuss the issues with data reliability in our report .

we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , policies , documents , and publications .

information in this report is current as of the date gao received formal agency comments from dhs .

for more information on our methodology , see appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

coast guard staffing for the tap program reflects the organizational structure of its health , safety , and work - life directorate , which oversees tap policy .

the coast guard's tap managers are assigned to 13 installations where health , safety , and work - life offices are located .

one or two tap managers are assigned to each of the coast guard's nine districts , which often span multiple states and territories , and these tap managers oversee operations both for the installation where they work and for units stationed throughout the region ( see fig .

1 ) .

for example , the tap manager assigned to coast guard base cleveland oversees tap implementation both for that installation and for coast guard units serving in coast guard district 9 — a region that encompasses portions of eight states and the great lakes area .

the program manager in coast guard headquarters manages coast guard's transition assistance program .

the coast guard protects and defends over 100,000 miles of u.s. coastline and inland waterways , and consequently , tap - eligible coast guard servicemembers sometimes work in small , widely dispersed units assigned to remote locations , including on coast guard vessels .

one aspect of the coast guard's mission — a first responder for maritime search and rescue in united states waters — can require coast guard servicemembers to respond to emergency situations at a moment's notice .

the coast guard , which is overseen by dhs , not dod , generally oversees tap implementation for its servicemembers .

federal law requires dod and dhs to require eligible servicemembers under their respective command to participate in tap , with some exceptions .

in response to this statutory requirement , dod has promulgated regulations and developed issuances which require that servicemembers complete the component parts of the tap program , and that commanding officers ensure that servicemembers under their command complete these parts , with some exceptions .

in contrast , according to coast guard officials , coast guard has not promulgated any regulations to implement tap .

further , coast guard issued its most recent commandant instruction in 2003 , approximately 8 years prior to tap redesign in 2011 .

however , coast guard issued policy guidance in 2014 that made some limited updates to the commandant instruction .

coast guard officials also said the coast guard plans to issue a new tap commandant instruction in may 2018 .

under the redesigned tap , coast guard servicemembers — like their dod counterparts — begin tap by attending pre - separation or transition counseling where they are briefed on tap requirements and available transition resources .

pre - separation or transition counseling can be delivered by tap managers , uniformed career counselors , or online ( see fig .

2 ) .

coast guard servicemembers are able to participate in tap either through the coast guard or at a dod installation , if space is available .

during or at the end of pre - separation or transition counseling , participants register for and attend tap courses .

the core curriculum includes three required courses — the department of labor ( dol ) employment workshop , unless exempt , and department of veterans affairs ( va ) benefits briefings i and ii — and other courses that focus on aspects such as translating military skills and experiences into credentialing for civilian jobs and preparing a financial plan .

participants may also elect to attend additional 2-day classes either at a coast guard or dod installation or online through the joint knowledge online platform , according to agency officials .

these additional 2-day classes include accessing higher education , career technical training , and entrepreneurship .

federal law requires the coast guard to permit servicemembers who elect to take these additional 2-day classes to receive them .

federal law establishes a time frame within which servicemembers with anticipated separation or retirement dates should begin the program .

according to federal law , retirees with anticipated separation dates are expected to begin tap as soon as possible during the 24-month period preceding that date , but not later than 90 days before separation .

similarly , servicemembers with anticipated separation dates who are not retiring are expected to begin as soon as possible during the 12-month period preceding that date , but not later than 90 days before separation .

servicemembers who learn that they will separate or retire from the military fewer than 90 days before their anticipated separation or retirement date are expected to begin tap as soon as possible within their remaining period of service .

as we previously reported , officials from multiple federal agencies collaborate to deliver and assess tap .

the tap interagency governance structure includes senior officials from dod , va , dol , dhs , the department of education , the u.s. office of personnel management , and the small business administration ( sba ) , who participate in tap senior steering group meetings at least every month and tap executive council meetings each quarter .

further , officials tasked to particular interagency working groups focus on specific elements of tap ( eg , curriculum or performance measures ) , meet more frequently ( typically at least once a month ) , and generally communicate weekly , according to agency officials .

the tap program manager for the coast guard told us that he participates in several of the working groups .

one such working group is the performance management working group that oversees the interagency tap evaluation plan , which includes monitoring performance measures related to tap requirements , indicators of post - program outcomes , and formal evaluations sponsored by interagency partners .

while dod tracks tap - specific performance measures , other interagency partners track indicators of how well veterans fare after leaving military service .

for example , dod tracks performance measures prior to servicemembers' separation , such as tap participation and credential attainment rates , while other agencies track post - separation indicators , such as unemployment rates among veterans ages 18 to 24 .

the performance management working group also reviews the formal evaluation efforts led by individual agencies and provides feedback to help shape their efforts in accordance with the tap evaluation plan .

the coast guard does not have complete or reliable data on participation levels in tap .

according to coast guard officials , a major reason why the data are not reliable is that the coast guard lacks an up - to - date commandant instruction that specifies when to record tap participation data .

consequently , the data are updated on an ad - hoc basis , according to agency officials , and may not be timely or complete .

for example , one tap manager said she updates the list of tap participants for her installation only once every few months because of her other duties .

according to federal internal control standards , management should use quality information — including current and timely information — to achieve the entity's objectives and to communicate quality information to external parties .

given the lack of timely and complete data , we determined the coast guard's tap data were not sufficiently reliable for an analysis of participation in tap classes .

because it lacks policies and procedures governing reliable data collection , including when data should be entered and by whom , the coast guard cannot determine to what extent its servicemembers attend tap , although federal law mandates that dhs ensure all tap - eligible servicemembers participate in the program .

in addition , the data collection system currently used to track tap participation is not sufficient to ensure reliable data .

for example , according to coast guard staff , tap staff enter tap participation data into a shared spreadsheet that all tap managers can edit .

specifically , staff record the names of servicemembers they identify as tap - eligible and whether these individuals completed required portions of tap .

coast guard officials said they are in the process of adopting a new data system , in october 2018 , to more reliably track tap participation and that they expect to fully adopt this system – dod's tap - it enterprise system — after a new commandant instruction is finalized , in may 2018 .

in november 2016 , dod launched the new system to collect tap - related data for servicemembers in the army , navy , air force , and marine corps .

in addition to standardizing data collection and improving data completeness and accuracy , the tap - it enterprise system is expected to track information related to the time frames of servicemembers' participation .

according to a senior dod official , the military services will not be able to use the system to generate unit - level or installation - level reports until october 2018 .

according to our survey , the most common factor affecting tap participation , cited at 11 of the 12 coast guard installations we surveyed , pertained to servicemembers assigned to geographically remote locations .

the next three most commonly cited factors – each cited by 7 of the 12 installations surveyed — relate to the timing of tap participation: rapid separation from the military , not being sufficiently aware of the need to attend tap , and starting the transition process too late to attend .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

headquarters - based tap officials identified additional factors that may affect servicemember participation , such as separating from the coast guard reserves or retiring with no plans to work after leaving the military .

however , the coast guard lacks participation data to verify whether participation rates for these groups are in fact lower than for other coast guard servicemembers .

coast guard installations we surveyed did not indicate that unit commanders or direct supervisors affected participation in tap's required courses or additional 2-day classes .

however , coast guard servicemembers and tap officials we spoke with said unit commanders or direct supervisors sometimes prevented participation .

all three tap managers we spoke with ( of 12 nationwide ) told us that while commanders generally allowed servicemembers to register for tap courses , they occasionally required them to return to their duties before completing the courses .

we observed this during a tap class at a coast guard installation we visited when a servicemember's commander ordered her to return to the unit during tap training and she missed a briefing she wanted to attend .

two of three tap managers we interviewed also said commanders sometimes required servicemembers under their command to wait to take tap classes until close to their separation date because of mission priorities .

two of three tap managers interviewed said that commanders in the coast guard face unique challenges in ensuring tap participation .

they said commanders in all branches of the military must balance competing demands , including their primary mission and the training needs of the personnel they oversee .

they said it can be particularly difficult for coast guard commanders to juggle these priorities because coast guard servicemembers are sometimes assigned to very small units or called to return to duty for emergency situations during scheduled tap classes .

one tap manager said that a commander in a remote location had collaborated with her to provide a classroom - based tap class for transitioning coast guard servicemembers within the commander's unit , but rescue efforts occurred during the class which resulted in most of those servicemembers returning to their vessel to respond to the emergency .

in addition , all three tap managers we spoke with said there are limited resources for holding tap in a classroom setting .

consequently , classroom - based tap may not be offered frequently in remote locations , making rescheduling difficult .

one tap manager said that her installation typically offers three or four tap classes a year and because classes are so infrequent , servicemembers are encouraged to start tap as soon as possible prior to separation .

coast guard staff we interviewed said that juggling competing priorities affected the coast guard's ability to implement tap .

both the frontline and headquarters staff who oversee tap implementation said they oversee at least three other programs in addition to tap at their installation and throughout their regions , including the coast guard's relocation and spousal employment programs .

the coast guard relies on online delivery of tap information and classes for servicemembers who are rapidly separating and assigned to remote and geographically dispersed units , according to our survey results and several coast guard staff we interviewed .

for example , all 12 installations we surveyed cited servicemembers facing rapid separations as a reason for accessing tap training online , and 11 cited servicemembers being remotely stationed as a reason .

coast guard staff also said online tap was used for servicemembers interested in attending additional 2-day classes .

the three tap managers we interviewed also identified several reasons why installations had to rely on online tap classes .

for example , one manager corroborated our survey results , saying that many coast guard servicemembers worked in small units assigned to remote and geographically dispersed locations , making it difficult to convene a sufficient number of transitioning coast guard servicemembers to meet minimum class size requirements .

in addition , all three managers said they used the online version of tap for remotely stationed coast guard servicemembers because the coast guard lacked the resources for them to attend classes in person .

although they preferred that servicemembers participate in live , classroom - based tap classes , all of the managers acknowledged that the online version of tap played an integral role in ensuring that more servicemembers could participate in the program .

however , two of them noted that while classroom delivery of tap classes provided an interactive learning environment that allowed participants to ask questions and learn from their peers , online participants generally clicked quickly through the slides and had difficulty understanding the information being presented .

two managers told us that they regularly used the online version to deliver parts of the tap curriculum .

for example , one tap manager said she required participants to complete the crosswalk of military and civilian occupations class online before attending required classes in person .

two managers noted that additional 2-day classes were available online , and one noted that some servicemembers attended these classes in a classroom setting either on a coast guard base or a dod installation .

finally , all three tap managers said that many participants in online tap classes would benefit from participating in a real - time virtual version of tap led by live facilitators .

two managers told us that having a remote facilitator delivering tap in real time would give participants more opportunity to ask questions and better understand and absorb class content .

despite these challenges , tap managers and separating coast guard servicemembers we interviewed provided generally positive feedback about the tap program .

all of the 25 coast guard servicemembers we spoke with said that the information they received during the courses was useful and they liked the instructors .

one coast guard servicemember praised the classroom courses for being interactive , and several coast guard servicemembers said they wanted the opportunity to retake tap before or shortly after they separated from the coast guard .

however , many said the volume of information presented in a short period of time could be overwhelming and was like “trying to drink from a firehose. .

the coast guard has not set a formal performance goal for tap participation , according to a coast guard official , and as previously discussed , does not have complete , reliable data .

without reliable information , the coast guard cannot effectively monitor tap implementation or measure program performance .

dhs is mandated to ensure that all tap - eligible servicemembers of the coast guard participate in tap before leaving military service .

however , without effective monitoring of program participation , the coast guard cannot know to what extent its servicemembers receive the required training they need to prepare for civilian life .

according to federal internal control standards , management should consider external requirements — such as the laws with which the entity is required to comply — to clearly define objectives in specific and measurable terms .

in addition , establishing goals can help agencies define expected performance and articulate results .

a coast guard official said the coast guard's long - term goal is for full compliance with tap requirements , but in the interim , the coast guard uses dod's 85 percent vow compliance goal as an informal benchmark against which to gauge the coast guard's tap performance .

however , the coast guard has not communicated a specific , measurable goal to tap staff implementing the program , or to coast guard commanders who oversee separating and retiring coast guard servicemembers , according to a coast guard official .

establishing and communicating a formal goal could help the coast guard define expected performance .

the official also told us that , like dod , the coast guard tracks the elements of tap mandated under the vow act — transition or pre - separation counseling , va benefits i and ii , and the dol employment workshop .

the coast guard does not monitor the ( 1 ) timeliness of participation in tap , and ( 2 ) access to additional 2-day classes .

a coast guard official said the coast guard does not currently monitor tap beyond tracking whether separating servicemembers participate in the required courses , and currently lacks the capacity to undertake additional monitoring efforts .

however , he said additional monitoring would be possible once the coast guard completed the move to the dod tap - it enterprise data system .

according to a coast guard official , the coast guard does not currently monitor the timeliness of tap participation although federal law prescribes time frames for servicemembers to begin tap participation .

generally , separating servicemembers who are not retiring are to begin tap participation no later than 90 days before their separation date .

without a systematic method for monitoring timeliness , the coast guard cannot know whether its servicemembers begin the program on time or account for the timeliness of tap participation .

as a result , the coast guard cannot know whether its servicemembers are starting tap early enough to complete the training they need to adequately prepare for their transition to civilian life .

the coast guard does not track which of its servicemembers participate in the additional 2-day classes , according to a coast guard official we interviewed , even though federal law requires that dhs ensure those who elect to participate are able to receive the training .

by not tracking which coast guard servicemembers participate in 2-day classes or requiring transition staff to document when servicemembers ask to attend , the coast guard cannot determine the extent to which servicemembers who wished to attend these courses were able to do so , as required by law .

coast guard commanders and tap managers do not have clearly defined roles and responsibilities in implementing tap because of the lack of an up - to - date commandant instruction , according to tap staff we interviewed .

as previously discussed , the coast guard's last commandant instruction on tap was issued in 2003 , approximately 8 years prior to tap's redesign .

according to federal internal control standards , to achieve the entity's objectives , management should assign responsibility and delegate authority to key roles throughout the entity .

without an up - to - date commandant instruction , tap managers and commanders may be unclear on who is ultimately responsible for ensuring servicemembers attend tap .

moreover , two tap managers also told us that an up - to - date commandant instruction might lead some commanders to place higher priority on ensuring tap participation .

coast guard officials said the coast guard was in the process of revising the tap commandant instruction and anticipated issuing the new instruction in may 2018 .

the coast guard lacks the ability to share data with commanders , limiting its ability to monitor tap participation and ensure servicemembers attend the program .

according to a coast guard official , the coast guard's current data collection system also cannot generate installation or unit - level participation rates to share with commanders who oversee transitioning and retiring servicemembers .

federal internal control standards state that management should share quality information throughout an organization to enable personnel to perform key roles , and we have previously reported that by regularly sharing useful performance information with leaders at multiple levels of an organization , agencies can help leaders make informed decisions .

without this information , individual unit commanders or the commanders' supervisors cannot determine whether coast guard servicemembers under their command completed tap or identify whether there is a need for corrective actions to ensure they do so .

as we mention earlier in this report , the coast guard plans to adopt dod's tap - it enterprise system , which according to officials , could help the coast guard ensure eligible servicemembers participate in the program .

according to a coast guard official , once the system is fully implemented by the coast guard , commanders will be required to verify and document whether coast guard servicemembers under their command completed tap , potentially making commanders more vested in the process .

we previously reported that a senior dod official said that the tap - it enterprise system may be able to generate unit - and installation - level reports for the four dod - led military services by october 2018 , and a coast guard official said he would work with dod to identify whether this capability could also extend to the coast guard .

once data reliability improves , sharing installation and unit - level tap performance information with coast guard commanders could support monitoring efforts .

the performance measures tracked by the tap interagency working group do not reflect tap implementation broadly across all five military services , according to a coast guard official we interviewed .

the coast guard does not currently share tap data it collects with dod or other members of the interagency performance working group .

while the benefits of interagency data sharing cannot be realized without the coast guard first improving the quality and completeness of its tap data , we have identified leading practices for interagency collaboration , including that members of interagency working groups identify and share relevant agency performance data .

moreover , federal internal control standards call for management to communicate quality information to external parties .

because the coast guard does not share tap data , the performance measures tracked by the interagency group do not reflect coast guard servicemembers' experiences and thus do not provide a complete picture of tap implementation across the five military services .

more specifically for the coast guard , without such data sharing , future tap evaluations may not be able to assess the effectiveness of tap delivery , hindering the coast guard's ability to make program adjustments to better prepare its servicemembers to successfully transition to life after military service .

coast guard officials said migrating to dod's tap - it enterprise system will facilitate information sharing with interagency partners and that improving data completeness and reliability is a top priority for 2018 .

given the sacrifices servicemembers have made to serve their country , it is imperative they are afforded every chance to adequately prepare for civilian life before leaving military service .

in order to make a successful transition , servicemembers need to be well - positioned to get a job or make an informed decision about whether to pursue additional education or start a small business .

as such , the transition assistance program ( tap ) serves a critically important function — to give servicemembers the tools and information they need to successfully transition to life outside the military .

federal law requires that the coast guard ensure all eligible servicemembers participate in the program , but thousands of coast guard servicemembers may have transitioned without the support provided by tap .

reliably tracking participation has proven to be a challenge for the coast guard , in part because it lacks a current commandant instruction that defines the roles and responsibilities of staff responsible for implementing tap and ensuring complete and reliable data are collected .

in preparing to issue an updated commandant instruction , the coast guard has taken a positive step toward addressing the limitations of its current tap data , and will be better positioned to ensure compliance with vow act requirements using reliable data .

in addition to collecting reliable data , the coast guard could further demonstrate its commitment to meeting tap requirements by establishing formal performance goals that measure the extent to which coast guard servicemembers participate in tap .

by establishing interim performance goals , the agency would be able to show its progress towards achieving full compliance .

moreover , communicating performance goals to unit and installation commanders could enhance accountability and might spur progress toward meeting federal program requirements .

by expanding its monitoring efforts beyond tracking participation in tap's required classes , the coast guard could enhance its ability to ensure other tap requirements are met and that its servicemembers are able to access additional transition resources .

monitoring the timeliness of participation would help ensure coast guard servicemembers have adequate time to complete tap before leaving the military .

further , by monitoring requests to participate in additional 2-day classes and 2-day class attendance , the coast guard would be in a better position to identify whether servicemembers who wish to attend the classes are able to do so , to determine whether more classes are needed , and to communicate this information to the interagency partners responsible for delivering these classes .

commanders can also play a key role in bolstering tap participation .

having an up - to - date written commandant instruction that explicitly describes commanders' roles and responsibilities could enhance commanders' ability to ensure tap's proper implementation and compliance with vow act requirements .

moreover , once data quality improves , providing commanders a mechanism to readily determine whether servicemembers under their command have completed tap could help them monitor the program to ensure that all tap - eligible servicemembers receive the resources they need to successfully transition to civilian life .

finally , once more reliable data on coast guard servicemember participation are available , sharing this information with interagency partners could improve tap implementation on a broader scale .

sharing reliable data , such as participation figures for the coast guard , would give tap interagency partners a more complete picture of implementation across all five military services .

sharing such information would also enhance the interagency group's ability to evaluate how well tap serves the entire population of servicemembers .

improving the reliability of the coast guard's tap data will be essential for the benefits of data sharing to be realized .

to ensure that all eligible coast guard servicemembers are provided the opportunity to complete the transition assistance program ( tap ) , we recommend the commandant of the coast guard take the following seven actions: issue an updated commandant instruction that establishes policies and procedures to improve the reliability and completeness of tap data by including when and by whom data should be recorded and updated .

 ( recommendation 1 ) establish a formal performance goal with a measurable target for participation rates in vow act - mandated portions of tap .

 ( recommendation 2 ) monitor the extent to which coast guard servicemembers participate in tap within prescribed time frames .

 ( recommendation 3 ) monitor the extent to which coast guard servicemembers who elect to participate in additional 2-day classes are afforded the opportunity to attend .

 ( recommendation 4 ) issue an updated commandant instruction that defines the roles and responsibilities of the personnel who administer the program and ensure servicemembers' participation .

 ( recommendation 5 ) once reliable data are available by installation or unit , enable unit commanders and the higher - level commanders to whom they report to access tap performance information specifically for the units they oversee so that they can monitor compliance with all tap requirements .

 ( recommendation 6 ) once reliable data are available , share tap information with dod and other interagency partners , such as data on participation in required tap courses and additional 2-day classes .

 ( recommendation 7 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to the departments of homeland security , defense , education , labor , and veterans affairs , the office of personnel management , and the small business administration for their review and comment .

the formal written response of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is reproduced in appendix ii .

in addition , dhs provided technical comments from coast guard officials that we incorporated into the report as appropriate .

the other agencies did not provide any comments .

in its written comments , dhs agreed with all seven of our recommendations .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or brownbarnesc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

this report examines ( 1 ) what is known about the reliability of transition assistance program ( tap ) data on participation levels and the factors that affect coast guard servicemembers' participation , and ( 2 ) the extent to which the coast guard measures tap performance and monitors key areas of tap implementation .

to address these questions , we surveyed coast guard installations with full - time tap operations ; reviewed coast guard data on tap participation for fiscal years 2012 to 2017 ; visited one coast guard installation and interviewed tap managers from two additional coast guard installations selected for diversity in location , among other reasons ; and interviewed coast guard officials responsible for overseeing tap implementation for the coast guard .

we also reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , policies , documents , and publications .

information in this report is current as of the date gao received formal agency comments from dhs .

our survey of coast guard installations with full - time tap operations asked about how tap was being implemented .

the survey included questions about the accessibility of tap components , challenges coast guard servicemembers faced in attending the components , and the level of commander support for participation .

our survey targeted front - line tap managers , who could draw on the expertise of tap course facilitators , transition counselors , career counselors , and other key tap staff as necessary .

after drafting the survey questions , we pretested them with a tap manager to ensure ( 1 ) the questions were clear and unambiguous , ( 2 ) terminology was used correctly , ( 3 ) the survey did not place an undue burden on agency officials , ( 4 ) the information could feasibly be obtained , and ( 5 ) the survey was comprehensive and unbiased .

we revised the content and format of the survey based on the feedback we received .

we initially sent the survey to tap managers at all 13 coast guard installations at which tap staff were located .

we removed one installation when we later found that the tap manager position was vacant and revised the total to 12 coast guard installations .

the survey was accessible online from october 31 , 2016 , through january 18 , 2017 , through a secure server that recipients were able to access using unique usernames and passwords .

we sent an email announcement to tap staff at all 13 coast guard installations at which tap staff are located on october 24 , 2016 .

we sent a second email on october 31 , 2016 to notify participants the survey was available online , and provided their unique passwords and usernames .

we sent two follow - up e - mails ( november 14 , 2016 and november 28 , 2016 ) to those who had not responded .

finally , we contacted all remaining nonrespondents by telephone starting december 5 , 2016 .

the survey was available online until we reached a 100 percent response rate .

to increase our understanding into how tap was being implemented at installations and supplement our survey findings , we visited one coast guard installation and interviewed tap managers from two additional installations .

we selected the installations based on several factors , including the size of the installation , proximity to department of defense ( dod ) installations , and diverse locations in the united states .

 ( see table 1. ) .

at coast guard base elizabeth city in north carolina , the installation we visited , we interviewed the tap manager , uniformed career counselors , and senior installation leadership .

during our interviews with tap managers at all three installations , we asked about the extent to which coast guard servicemembers participate in tap's required and additional 2-day classes , including whether the servicemembers attended classes online or in a classroom setting , challenges to ensuring coast guard servicemembers participate in tap , and the extent to which they monitor coast guard servicemembers' participation in tap .

at coast guard base elizabeth city , we also interviewed 25 coast guard servicemembers ( both officers and enlisted personnel ) to get their perspective on how well tap worked and any challenges they had participating .

to help guide the interviews with the coast guard servicemembers , we asked them to complete a short questionnaire that asked about their experiences with the tap program .

we also interviewed tap staff at coast guard headquarters to learn about tap policy , monitoring efforts , and performance measures for the service overall .

for example , we asked what policies and procedures guide installations' tap implementation ; what performance measures the coast guard uses to monitor tap ; how performance results are reported and shared with different levels of coast guard leadership ; and to what extent the coast guard uses results from tap participant satisfaction assessments .

we also asked whether the coast guard plans to shift to dod's new tap - it enterprise system and how using the new system could affect its monitoring efforts in the future .

in evaluating the coast guard's performance measures , we focused on measures related to servicemembers' transition experiences before leaving the military .

we did not gather information on post - program evaluations and outcomes because they were determined to be outside the scope of this review .

we reviewed dhs data on tap participation for fiscal years 2012 to 2017 .

to assess the reliability of the coast guard's tap participation data , we interviewed agency officials knowledgeable about the data .

we determined these data were not sufficiently reliable due to limitations with the coast guard's data collection system .

specifically , the system lacks adequate controls to ensure tap data are complete and accurate .

we conducted this performance audit from february 2016 to april 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in addition to the contact named above , meeta engle ( assistant director ) , amy macdonald ( analyst - in - charge ) , james bennett , holly dye , david forgosh , ying long , jonathan mcmurray , jean mcsween , andrew sherrill , benjamin sinoff , and timothy young , made significant contributions to this report .

also contributing to this report were susan aschoff , jessie battle , ramona burton , melinda cordero , elizabeth curda , dawn hoff , ben licht , serena lo , sheila mccoy , almeta spencer , christopher schmitt , james whitcomb , and jill yost .

transitioning veterans: dod needs to improve performance reporting and monitoring for the transition assistance program , gao - 18-23 .

washington , d.c.: november , 8 , 2017 .

transitioning veterans: improvements needed in dod's performance reporting and monitoring of the transition assistance program , gao - 18-225t .

washington , d.c.: november 8 , 2017 .

department of defense: transition assistance program ( tap ) for military personnel , gao - 16-302r .

washington , d.c.: december 17 , 2015 .

veterans' employment: need for further workshops should be considered before making decisions on their future , gao - 15-518 .

washington , d.c.: july 16 , 2015 .

military and veteran support: dod and va programs that address the effects of combat and transition to civilian life , gao - 15-24 .

washington , d.c.: november 7 , 2014 .

veterans affairs: better understanding needed to enhance services to veterans readjusting to civilian life , gao - 14-676 .

washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2014 .

transitioning veterans: improved oversight needed to enhance implementation of transition assistance program , gao - 14-144 .

washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2014 .

military and veterans' benefits: enhanced services could improve transition assistance for reserves and national guard , gao - 05-544 .

washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2005 .

military and veterans' benefits: observations on the transition assistance program , gao - 02-914t ( july 18 , 2002 ) .

