i am pleased to be here today to discuss airport funding as you begin considering reauthorization of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) .

u.s. airports are important contributors to our economy , providing mobility for people and goods both domestically and internationally , and often contributing to the economic success of the communities served .

since 2007 , when we last reported on airports' funding and its sufficiency to meet airports' planned development costs , aviation activity has slowed or even declined at many airports , while activity has become more concentrated at larger airports .

this has affected the demands on infrastructure at these airports , as well as their finances .

also , federal support for airport development has declined during this period .

in response , airports have leveraged their expected future revenues and have sought to increase their non - aviation revenues to finance past or current development .

to meet future planned development costs , airports have sought an increase in the cap on passenger facility charges ( pfc ) , which are added to ticket prices along with federal taxes .

however , airlines strongly oppose an increase because higher ticket prices could reduce passenger demand and therefore airline revenues .

my statement today focuses on funding for airport development .

specifically , this statement discusses trends in ( 1 ) aviation activity at airports since 2007 , ( 2 ) costs of airports' planned development , and ( 3 ) federal funding and airports' revenues that may be available to finance development costs .

this statement draws from our body of work , completed from june 2007 through june 2014 examining airport and aviation - industry trends .

specific products from this work are cited throughout the statement .

the products cited contain explanations of the methods we used to conduct this work .

we have updated this work through june 2014 with interviews with key faa and trade association officials and updated faa airport funding data from 2005 through 2013 .

we also reviewed the president's 2015 budget proposal for faa and obtained updated information about faa program activities based on public sources .

in addition , we have ongoing work examining airports' funding and planned development , alternative pfc collection methods , and faa's airport privatization pilot program , on which we plan to issue reports later this year .

the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the united states has the largest , most extensive aviation system in the world with over 19,000 airports ranging from large commercial transportation centers transporting millions of passengers annually to small grass airstrips serving only a few aircraft each year .

of these , nearly 3,400 airports are designated as part of the national airport system and thus are eligible for federal assistance .

the national airport system consists of two primary types of airports — commercial service airports , which have scheduled service and board 2,500 or more passengers per year , and general aviation airports , which have no scheduled service and board fewer than 2,500 passengers .

faa divides commercial service airports into primary airports ( boarding more than 10,000 passengers annually ) and commercial service nonprimary airports .

the 389 primary airports are arranged into various types of hub airports — large , medium , and small hub , and nonhub — based on passenger traffic ( see fig .

1 ) .

passenger traffic is highly concentrated: 88 percent of all passengers in the united states boarded at the 62 large or medium hub airports in 2012 .

more than 2,500 airports in the national airport system are designated as “general aviation” ( ga ) airports .

these airports range from large business aviation and cargo - shipment centers that handle thousands of operations a year to small rural airports with fewer operations per year but which provide vital access to the national transportation system for their communities .

since 1946 , the federal government has sponsored a grant program to fund airport development .

today , those monies come from airport improvement program ( aip ) grants .

aip is supported by the airport and airway trust fund ( trust fund ) , which is funded in part by airline ticket taxes and fees .

general aviation flights also contribute to the trust fund through a tax on noncommercial jet fuel .

airports in the national airport system may receive aip entitlement grants based on the number of passengers and amount of cargo carried and may also compete for aip discretionary grants .

faa selects grantees for discretionary grants according to national priorities and objectives .

aip grants can only be used for eligible projects , generally those that enhance capacity , safety , or environmental concerns , such as runway construction and rehabilitation , airfield lighting , and airplane noise mitigation .

aip appropriations totaled $3.35 billion in fiscal year 2013 .

the grants require a local match ranging from 5 to 25 percent , depending on the size of the airport and type of project .

49 u.s.c .

§ 47102 ( 3 ) .

types of projects as aip grants , but are also allowed to pay interest costs on debt issued for those projects .

the $4.50 maximum pfc was last increased in 2000 .

collections totaled $2.8 billion in calendar year 2013 .

according to faa , 388 commercial service airports were approved to collect pfcs as of april 2014 .

airports also fund development projects from revenues generated directly by the airport .

airports generate revenues from aviation activities such as aircraft landing fees and terminal rentals , and non - aviation activities such as concessions , parking , and land leases .

aviation revenues are a traditional method for funding airport development ; however , because department of transportation ( dot ) regulations generally limit aviation charges to the recovery of historical airport costs — rather than replacement costs — they may not fully fund new investment .

generally , the level of aviation activity — whether commercial passenger and cargo or general aviation business and private aircraft — drives airport development and the monies that finance it .

while only three new major airports have been built in the united states over the last three decades , billions of dollars have been invested in building new capacity and maintaining and upgrading existing airport infrastructure during that time .

in addition , according to the most recent faa forecast , air traffic demand is projected to increase 2.7 percent per year from 2014 through 2034 .

funding for both aip and pfcs is linked to passenger activity .

in this way , congress aims to direct funds to where they are needed most .

similarly , airport - generated revenues are also tied to aviation activity and the number of passengers who use airport - related services .

these revenues are typically used to finance the issuance of local debt such as tax - exempt bonds , which for larger commercial airports constitutes more than half of their funding .

because of the size and duration of airport development — for example , planning , funding and building a new runway can take more than a decade and several hundred million dollars to complete — long - term debt is used to help finance these types of projects .

while almost all airport sponsors in the united states are states , municipalities , or public authorities , there is a significant reliance on the private sector for finance , expertise , and control of airport assets .

for example , the majority of airport employees are employed by private sector entities , such as vendors and baggage handlers , and private companies also own and operate some airports .

under congressional authorization , since 1996 , faa has piloted an airport privatization program that relaxes certain restrictions on the sale or lease of airports to private entities .

since 2007 , economic pressures — including record - high fuel prices and the recession of 2007 through 2009 — helped spark a wave of consolidation across the airline industry .

for instance , delta acquired northwest in 2008 , united and continental merged in 2010 , southwest acquired airtran in 2011 , and us airways and american airlines received u.s. district court approval for their proposed merger in april 2014 .

as part of this restructuring and a more general focus on capacity decisions , u.s. airlines have reduced the number of flights they offer passengers in certain markets .

we found in june 2014 , based on our analysis of dot data , that there were 1.2 million fewer scheduled domestic flights at large , medium , and small hub , and nonhub airports in 2013 than during 2007 .

the greatest reduction in scheduled flights occurred at medium hub airports , which decreased nearly 24 percent from 2007 through 2013 , compared to a decrease of about 9 percent at large hub airports and about 20 percent at small hub airports over the same time period .

medium hub airports also experienced the greatest percentage reduction in air service as measured by available seats ( see fig .

2 ) .

however , because airlines are now better able to match capacity to demand , planes are fuller than they have ever been .

as a result , passenger boardings did not fall as much as either the number of flights or available seats .

according to our analysis of dot's data from 2007 through 2012 , passenger boardings decreased approximately 17 percent at medium hub airports and about 2 percent at large hub airports , but increased more than 4 percent and about 3 percent at small hub and nonhub airports , respectively .

in addition , this april , we testified before this committee that air service to small communities has declined since 2007 due , in part , to higher fuel costs , airline consolidation , and reduced demand both from declining populations in those communities and as a result of some passengers' opting to drive to larger markets with more attractive service ( i.e. , larger airports in larger cities ) .

a 2013 massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) study of domestic air service trends reported similar results and found that the prolonged economic downturn , high fuel prices , and capacity restraint contributed to a reduction in service .

the study also concluded that airlines have been cutting back on capacity to medium hub and small hub airports far more than at the nation's large hub airports .

kamala i. shetty and r. john hansman , current and historical trends in general aviation in the united states , massachusetts institute of technology international center for air transportation ( aug. 2012 ) .

faa estimates that the annual costs of planned airport development projects that are eligible for aip grants will average about $8.5 billion ( 2011 dollars ) from fiscal years 2013 to 2017 .

in 2012 , faa estimated $42.5 billion ( 2011 dollars ) in total 5-year costs of eligible development for fiscal years 2013 – 2017 .

this figure was down 18 percent from the estimated $52.3 billion ( 2009 dollars ) costs for fiscal years 2011 — 2015 or $10.5 billion annually .

faa attributed the decline to several factors , including airport sponsors choosing to defer projects due to reductions in aviation activity , having identified other funding sources for projects , and projects' having been completed .

in developing the estimate , faa reviewed approximately 23,000 existing projects at the five categories of commercial airports , ga airports , reliever airports , and new airports and adjusted , deferred , or removed from consideration approximately 3,700 projects ( 16 percent ) .

faa estimated that eligible development costs for all airport categories decreased between the two time periods , with the largest nominal decreases for large hubs ( $2.7 billion , a 15 percent decrease ) and medium hubs ( $2.3 billion , a 31 percent decrease ) ( see fig .

3 ) .

based on faa's estimates , the largest category of eligible planned development is to bring existing airports up to current design standards ( 28 percent ) , followed by reconstruction ( replacement or rehabilitation of airport facilities , mostly pavement and lighting systems ) ( 25 percent ) , and increasing airfield capacity ( 23 percent ) .

compared to fiscal years 2011 – 2015 , faa's estimates of planned development for fiscal years 2013 – 2017 decreased across every development category except capacity , which saw a slight increase of 2.5 percent ( see fig .

4 ) .

while large hubs were the only airport category that experienced an increase in the cost of planned capacity projects ( from about $6.8 billion to about $8.1 billion , a 19 percent increase ) , this increase was greater than the corresponding decrease for all other airport categories ( from about $2.7 billion to about $1.7 billion , a 37 percent decrease ) .

faa is currently compiling the estimated planned development costs for the fiscal years 2015 – 2019 period , due to be published in fall 2014 .

aci - na also estimated airports' costs of planned development for the fiscal years 2013 – 2017 period for projects eligible for federal funding as well as those not eligible .

the total estimated costs of planned development for fiscal years 2013 – 2017 are $68.2 billion ( 2012 dollars ) or approximately $13.6 billion per year on average .

this is about a 10 percent decline from aci - na's prior estimate of $75.6 billion ( 2010 dollars ) for the prior fiscal years 2011 – 2015 estimating period .

aci - na attributed the decline to several factors , including the recent recession and challenging economic conditions , airline consolidation and capacity reductions , and projects' having been completed or postponed beyond 2017 .

aci - na's estimates of eligible development decreased between the two time periods for all airport categories except medium hubs , which saw a 5 percent increase .

the largest decreases were for large hubs ( $2.3 billion , a 6 percent decrease ) and small hubs ( $2.1 billion , a 27 percent decrease ) .

in addition , there are other differences in the way faa and aci - na estimate airport planned development costs .

first , while faa's estimates cover projects for every airport in the national system , aci - na surveyed its member airports in the u.s. ( 117 of which responded , consisting mostly of large , medium , and small hub airports ) and then extrapolates a total based on cost - per - boarding calculations for large , medium , and small hub airports that did not respond .

second , faa data are based on planned project information taken from airport master plans and state system plans , minus projects that already have an identified funding source , while aci - na includes all projects , whether funding has been identified or not .

third , faa data includes only the portion of a project that is eligible for aip , while aci - na estimates the total value project cost .

fourth , aci - na and faa estimated planned development costs for the same 5-year time period , but the estimates were made at different times — the aci - na survey was completed in 2012 , while faa's estimate is based on information available through 2011 .

lastly , faa's estimates use 2011 dollars , whereas aci - na's estimates use 2012 dollars .

aci - na's estimates for these categories of airports are drawn directly from faa's estimate .

regarding aip grants , annual appropriations decreased from about $3.5 billion for fiscal years 2007 through 2011 to about $3.4 billion for fiscal years 2012 through 2014 .

in addition , the actual amount of aip grants awarded annually has decreased 9.6 percent since 2007 from $3.3 billion in fiscal year 2007 to $3 billion in fiscal year 2013 .

excluding grants to ga airports , aip grants on a per - passenger basis have also decreased , from $3.80 per passenger in 2007 to $3.40 per passenger in 2012 .

since then congress transferred $253 million in unobligated funds from aip to faa operations to reduce furloughs for air traffic controllers in legislation passed in march 2014 .

airport association representatives told us that these funds had been reserved for airport development .

the president's 2015 budget calls for a reduction in aip appropriations to $2.9 billion .

the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century of 2000 legislates that if aip appropriations fall below $3.2 billion and that provision is not changed , aip entitlement grants will be reduced by half ; the funds from the entitlement grant reductions would instead flow to aip discretionary grants giving faa greater decision - making over which airport projects receive funding .

with regard to pfcs , the federal pfc cap of $4.50 has not increased since 2000 and thus has not kept pace with inflation .

according to faa data , pfcs collections peaked in 2006 at $2.93 billion and then fell during the recession before rebounding to $2.81 billion in 2013 .

according to faa , as of ( april 2014 , 388 commercial service airports ( including of the largest 100 airports by passenger boardings ) imposed a pfc .

according to faa , more than 90 percent of pfc collections go to large and medium hub airports , but large and medium hub airports collecting pfcs must return a portion of their aip entitlement grants , which are then redistributed to smaller airports .

in addition , we have found that many airports' future pfc collections are already committed to pay off debt for past projects , leaving them little future pfc collections for new development .

for example , at least 50 airports have leveraged their pfcs through 2030 or later , according to faa data .

the president's 2015 budget and airports have requested an increase in the pfc cap to $8 — which they say takes into account inflation that has occurred since 2000 and eliminating aip entitlements for large hub airports .

fees , including pfcs , arguing that if an increase in taxes or fees is passed onto the consumers through an increase in ticket prices , it could reduce demand for air travel .

for example , in december 2013 , congress approved allowing the transportation security administration to raise the security fee currently applied to each ticket from $2.50 to $5.60 and to eliminate the cap on the number of fees that can be collected on a flight itinerary .

airlines opposed that increase based on concerns that it would hurt travel demand .

we concluded in 2012 that a $3.00 increase in the security fee to $5.50 would reduce passenger boardings by about 1 percent based on a review of passenger demand literature .

we are currently assessing the impact of increases in the amount of the pfc on passenger demand , airport investment , and aviation users and plan to report our findings later this year .

airport trade associations aci - na and the american association of airport executives have made prior proposals to raise the pfc cap to $8.50 with periodic adjustments for inflation .

smartphones that could be used to collect pfcs separately from the ticket .

we found that none of these alternatives was better than the current method .

specifically , we determined that each of the alternatives negatively affected the passenger experience and the transparency of fees relative to the current method .

although support for airport development from aip and pfcs has declined in recent years , so have planned development costs .

in addition , we have not yet determined how much funding has recently been generated by the other major source of revenues for airport development — municipal bond proceeds , backed primarily by airport revenues .

therefore , the extent to which the gap between airport funding and planned airport development costs has changed since we last reported on this in 2007 is unknown .

as discussed above , for the 2013 through 2017 period , the total estimated annual costs for airports' planned development projects is about $13.1 billion , $8.5 billion of which is eligible for aip grants and pfcs .

however , annually only about $6 billion in support has been available from aip grants and pfc collections .

the remaining $7 billion in annual planned development will need to be funded by locally generated revenues or deferred .

in 1998 , 2003 , and 2007 , we found a funding gap between the 5-year airport planned development costs and historical funding .

in 2007 , the total gap was $1 billion annually .

this gap has been most acute for smaller airports that we are currently assessing may have less access to capital markets .

whether this gap has grown or declined in light of declining federal funding and planned development and will report our findings to this committee later this year .

gao , airport finance: observations on planned airport development costs and funding levels and the administration's proposed changes in the aip , gao - 07-885 ( washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2007 ) ; airport finance: past funding levels may not be sufficient to cover airports' planned capital development , gao - 03-497t ( washington , d.c.: feb. 25 , 2003 ) ; and airport financing: funding sources for airport development , gao / rced - 98-71 ( washington , d.c.: mar .

12 , 1998 ) .

to help fund airport development , some commercial service airports have increasingly relied on non - aviation revenues .

according to aci - na , non - aviation revenue has grown , on average , over 4 percent each year since 2004 , compared to a 1.5 percent increase in passenger boardings over the same period .

in 2012 , according to faa data , non - aviation revenue accounted for approximately 45 percent of airports' total operating revenues .

parking and ground transportation accounted for the greatest portion ( 41 percent ) of passenger - related non - aviation revenue , followed by terminal concessions ( 20 percent ) and revenue from rental car facilities ( 20 percent ) ( see fig .

5 ) .

in addition to traditional commercial activities to generate non - aviation revenue , some airports have developed unique commercial activities with stakeholders from local jurisdictions and the private sector to help develop airport properties into retail , business , and leisure destinations.an increasing range of unique developments on airport property have contributed to non - aviation revenues , including high - end commercial retail and leisure activities , hotels and business centers , medical facilities , and specialized cargo handling and refrigerated storage facilities , among other developments ( see fig .

6 ) .

for example , miami international airport was named one of the world's top - 10 airports for retail shopping , and the $1.7 billion international terminal at los angeles international airport , which is currently under construction , will contain 140,000 square feet of premier dining , retail , and club lounges .

by acting more like businesses than public utilities , airports have increasingly become more competitive with one another , providing services , including hotels and conference space , to attract and retain business travelers who might otherwise stay in a downtown hotel off airport property .

for example , dallas / fort worth international airport owns a grand hyatt hotel inside terminal d , denver international airport is building an attached westin hotel , and hartsfield - jackson atlanta international airport is considering an airport hotel inside or connected to its domestic terminal .

also , in an effort to generate revenue by leasing cold storage space to freight forwarders and businesses that transport low - volume , high - valued goods , including pharmaceuticals , produce , and other time - sensitive or perishable items , airports in denver , miami , and indianapolis have built — or plan to build — cold storage facilities on airport property .

in addition , airports can fund airport improvements with private sector participation .

public - private partnerships , involving airports and developers , have been used to finance airport development projects without increasing the amount of debt already incurred by airports .

faa's noise land disposal program , for example , allows airports to sell or lease land that had been used in the past for noise abatement purposes and is no longer needed for noise abatement .

faa also allows airports with excess available land to use the land for certain types of commercial airport operators must development , pending approval by the faa.obtain faa's concurrence prior to leasing airport land or facilities to private developers to help ensure , among other things , that the developer's plans will be compatible with airport operations and that the airport receives fair market value for the use of its property .

the ability to lease airport land has allowed some airport operators to generate revenue through temporary leases of airport property for manufacturing , warehousing , and freight - forwarding operations while also reserving the land for future aviation needs .

for example , solar farms have been built on airport land in indianapolis and denver ; officials at dallas / fort worth international airport have leased a portion of the airport property for oil extraction ; and land at alliance airport near ft. worth , texas , has been leased for agricultural uses , such as cattle grazing and a golf course ( see fig .

7 ) .

in addition , miami international airport entered a $512 million public - private partnership to develop 33 acres of airport property .

the developer will finance construction and pay rent and a percentage of the revenues to the airport in return for a 50-year lease .

privatization of airports is another option that some public sector airport owners have considered to obtain private capital for airport improvement and development , among other things .

however , faa's airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) , which was established in 1996 to reduce barriers to airport privatization has not led to many privatizations .

only one airport — san juan luis muñoz marín international airport in puerto rico – has been privatized , and currently there is only one active applicant in the program .

nonetheless , airports are using the private sector to finance airport development or manage airports outside of the appp .

for example , the port authority of new york and new jersey has recently received responses for its request for proposals for the private sector to demolish old terminal buildings and construct , partially finance , operate , and maintain a new central terminal building for laguardia airport in new york city in return for a share of terminal revenues .

in addition , gary / chicago international airport in gary , indiana , outside chicago has entered into a public - private partnership with a private sector firm to both operate the airport and economically develop off - airport property .

we are currently examining airport privatization and the appp and plan to report our findings later this year .

in conclusion , this year commemorates one century since the first commercial airline flight , and in that relatively short time span , commercial aviation has grown at an amazing pace to become a ubiquitous and mature industry in the united states .

while commercial aviation still has many exciting prospects for its second century , it also faces many challenges , chief among these are ensuring that airports can continue to accommodate millions of flights and hundreds of millions of passengers every year .

maintaining and upgrading this vital infrastructure will require the combined resources of federal , state , and local governments , as well as private companies' capital and expertise .

effectively supporting this development involves focusing federal resources on the faa's key priorities of maintaining one of the world's safest aviation system and providing adequate system capacity , while allowing maximum flexibility for local airport sponsors to maximize local investment and revenue opportunities .

in deciding the best course for future federal investment in our national airport system , key considerations for congress will be to balance the interests of all aviation stakeholders , including airports , airlines , and most importantly passengers and shippers , to help ensure a safe and vibrant aviation system .

chairman lobiondo , ranking member larsen , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time .

for further information about this testimony , please contact gerald l. dillingham at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or dillinghamg@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

key contributors to this testimony include paul aussendorf ( assistant director ) , amy abramowitz , jessica bryant - bertail , jonathan carver , ben emmel , john healey , david goldstein , greg hanna , david hooper , delwen jones , jennifer kamara , maureen luna - long , faye morrison , eleni orphanides , justin reed , melissa swearingen , and pamela vines .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

