for more than 100 years , three fossil fuel sources — coal , oil , and natural gas — have made up at least 80 percent of total u.s. energy consumption , according to the department of energy's ( doe ) energy information administration .

furthermore , in 2017 , about 63 percent of u.s. electricity generation was from fossil fuels — including coal , oil , and natural gas — and fossil fuels made up about 95 percent of transportation fuels in the united states .

while fossil fuels are associated with some negative environmental impacts — such as carbon dioxide ( co at its source and storing it underground , converting carbon - containing material ( i.e. , coal ) into synthesis gas composed primarily of carbon monoxide and hydrogen , and recovering methane from gas hydrates .

within doe , the office of fossil energy ( fe ) carries out federal r&d programs on advanced fossil energy technologies , among other things .

fe's primary mission is to ensure reliable fossil energy resources for clean , secure , and affordable energy while enhancing environmental protection .

in addition , the national energy technology laboratory ( netl ) — overseen by fe — implements a broad spectrum of energy and environmental r&d programs ; has expertise in coal , oil , and natural gas ; and performs contract and project management , among other things .

in addition , the laboratory coordinates and oversees r&d projects for fe .

in addition to its r&d programs , doe administers the title xvii loan guarantee program ( lgp ) for innovative energy technologies through its loan programs office .

one of the goals of the lgp is to encourage commercial use in the united states of new or significantly improved energy - related technologies .

title xvii of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) , as amended , authorizes doe to provide loan guarantees for certain energy projects in several categories , including advanced fossil energy technology .

under the lgp , to encourage such innovative energy projects , the federal government agrees to reimburse lenders for the guaranteed amount of loans if the borrowers default .

if borrowers default on the loans , the federal government can be exposed to substantial financial risks .

you asked us to review doe's funding for advanced fossil energy projects .

this report describes 1 ) doe's funding for advanced fossil energy r&d projects that started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 and the types of projects and recipients that received funding , and 2 ) doe's loan guarantees , if any , for advanced fossil energy projects from fiscal year 2006 through august 2018 .

for the purposes of this report , we use the term funding to mean obligations .

to address the first objective , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and doe guidance .

we analyzed doe advanced fossil energy r&d project data for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

we focused our review on 794 advanced fossil energy r&d projects that received funding through netl because the 794 projects represent all of the advanced fossil energy r&d projects in our scope started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

we used fiscal year 2010 as the start date because doe officials told us that doe's current data management system came into use for the r&d projects that started in fiscal year 2010 .

we used fiscal year 2017 as the end date because that was the most recent complete year for which data were available .

doe provided us with a spreadsheet that included key project information — such as the name of the recipient of the r&d funding and the project start date — as well as obligations data for each project started during the period of our review by summing the obligations for the project from each year .

we reported on doe's funding for these r&d projects ; doe generally provided financial assistance for these projects through grants or cooperative agreements .

because advanced fossil energy r&d financial assistance for the small business innovation research and small business technology transfer programs , as well as for the doe national laboratories , are not obligated through netl , we excluded these projects from our scope .

to assess the reliability of the funding data , as well as the specific project information for the 794 r&d projects , we interviewed data specialists at doe headquarters , fe , and netl and reviewed doe internal guidance for the maintenance of agency data .

we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we also reviewed doe websites and documentation , including fact sheets , and interviewed officials from fe and netl .

to characterize the recipients of advanced fossil energy r&d funding , we coded each recipient into one of three categories: university , industry or other .

we developed definitions for making the coding determination for each recipient ; more information on this process , including the full definitions , is in appendix i .

to describe the status of doe's advanced fossil energy loan guarantees , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and guidance , as well as past gao reports describing doe's administration of the loan program .

we analyzed information that doe provided on applications for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects under the lgp and other related information for fiscal year 2006 through august 2018 .

we used fiscal year 2006 as the start date because it was the first year that doe issued an advanced fossil energy project solicitation — an announcement of opportunities for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects — and we used august 2018 as the end date in order to provide the most up - to - date information possible .

we also reviewed the advanced fossil energy project solicitations issued by doe during this timeframe .

to assess the reliability of the summary information , we interviewed lgp staff who maintain the information for advanced fossil energy applications , and reviewed doe documentation .

we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

in addition , we interviewed officials from the loan programs office who work on the lgp .

for further details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i .

we conducted this performance audit from march 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

this section provides an overview of 1 ) doe's administration of its advanced fossil energy r&d program , and 2 ) doe's loan guarantee program ( lgp ) .

within doe , fe carries out doe's program for fossil energy r&d , which includes federal research , development , and demonstration efforts on advanced power generation ; power plant efficiency ; water management ; and carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) technologies .

ccs is a process that involves capturing man - made co at its source and storing it permanently underground .

the program for fossil energy r&d also includes the development of technological solutions for the development of u.s. unconventional oil and gas domestic resources , such as from shale formations .

fe also oversees the operations , infrastructure , and r&d at netl , among other things .

netl officials told us that netl has dual roles: it serves as project manager for advanced fossil energy r&d projects that receive federal assistance , and , as a doe national laboratory , it also conducts applied research .

fe and netl collaborate on the selection and administration of the awards for advanced fossil energy r&d projects , according to doe officials .

doe's efforts to administer its program for advanced fossil energy r&d take place across a spectrum of activities , including providing financial assistance for large demonstration projects .

in the 1980s and early 1990s , doe's fossil energy r&d program primarily focused on reducing emissions of harmful pollutants from coal - fired power plants , particularly sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide .

for example , doe began its large demonstration projects of advanced coal technologies in the mid - 1980s ; this work focused on r&d to mitigate acid rain and to reduce the pollutants released from coal combustion .

more recently , doe has provided funding for advanced fossil energy r&d to reduce coemissions by developing beneficial uses for cofrom coal - fired power plants , and to improve methods for ccs , among other things .

as we have previously reported , ccs is a key technology that shows potential for reducing co specifically , ccs technologies separate and capture co from other gases produced when combusting or gasifying coal , compress it , then transport it to underground geologic formations such as saline aquifers — porous rock filled with brine — or oil and natural gas reservoirs , where the captured co in large quantities: the boundary dam plant in canada and the petra nova plant in texas .

both plants retrofitted ccs technology to existing plants .

a third fossil - fueled , electricity - generating operation , the kemper county energy facility in mississippi , was scheduled to begin ccs operations in 2016 , but cost overruns and delays in construction and operations led to the suspension of the plant's ccs component in june 2017 .

each of these power plants using ccs systems may be described as a first - of - its - kind venture , using technologies developed at a pilot scale ramped up to commercial scale .

it is not unusual for projects in the demonstration phase of the r&d process to experience higher - than - anticipated costs , delays , and other challenges , according to a 2017 congressional research service report .

doe generally uses announcements of opportunities for federal financial assistance to competitively solicit potential applicants of advanced fossil energy r&d projects .

according to doe officials , the department sets priorities for its advanced fossil energy r&d funding each year based in part on the amount appropriated for fe r&d and on fe's r&d plans , as well as any direction that congress may have specified for certain types of technology r&d .

doe's advanced fossil energy r&d projects typically lasted for multiple years .

doe sets milestones for technical progress for each year of a project to ensure that funding recipients accomplish a specific r&d objective or set of objectives , according to doe officials .

the recipient may submit some form of report on its progress on the r&d as well as accomplishments to doe for review and approval to continue .

doe officials told us they review the progress of the recipient at each phase and the project continuation is subject to the recipient's technical progress , the recipient's compliance with all of the other terms — including any financial terms — of the agreement , and the availability of doe's funds , based on congressional appropriations .

the lgp was originally designed to address a fundamental impediment to innovative and advanced energy projects: securing enough affordable financing to survive the period between developing innovative technologies and commercializing them .

as we have previously reported , these projects have risks , such as technology risk — the risk that the new technology will not perform as expected — and execution risk — the risk that the borrower or project will not perform as expected .

because the risks that commercial lenders must assume to support new technologies can put the cost of private financing out of reach , companies may not be able to commercialize innovative technologies without the federal government's financial support .

federal loan guarantee programs such as the lgp can help companies obtain financing because the federal government agrees to reimburse the lender for the guaranteed amount if a borrower defaults .

section 1703 of epact authorizes doe to provide loan guarantees for projects that avoid , reduce , or sequester air pollutants or man - made emissions of greenhouse gases and employ new or significantly improved technologies as compared to commercial technologies in service in the united states at the time the guarantee is issued .

epact describes several categories of projects that are eligible for guarantees under the program , including , among others , renewable energy systems , efficient end - use energy technologies , advanced nuclear facilities , advanced fossil energy technology , and ccs technologies .

doe's loan programs office , which administers the lgp , had issued three loan guarantees under section 1703 supporting nuclear technologies as of august 2018 , but none supporting advanced fossil energy or any other technologies .

doe provided $2.66 billion in funding for 794 advanced fossil energy r&d projects started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

these 794 projects included 9 later - stage large demonstration projects and 785 other advanced fossil energy r&d projects .

doe provided $1.12 billion in funding to nine large projects aimed at demonstrating the commercial viability of ccs technologies .

doe provided $1.54 billion in funding to 785 other r&d projects for both coal and oil and gas technologies , mostly to universities and industry , located in 46 states and the district of columbia .

for nine large demonstration projects started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 , doe provided $1.12 billion in funding .

these projects received that funding from appropriations from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) and supported efforts to reduce the financial and technical risks of commercial ccs , according to a 2017 report by the congressional research service .

six demonstration projects researched ccs technologies using coal , while three used other fuels , namely methane , ethanol , and petcoke .

recipients were generally required to provide a certain percentage of the cost of each r&d project , called cost share .

specifically , to receive funding , recipients of funding for the nine large demonstration projects agreed to pay at least $610 million in cost share for the demonstration projects .

three of those demonstration projects remained active at the end of fiscal year 2017 .

four projects had their support withdrawn by doe , and two were withdrawn by the recipient .

these projects ended due to several factors such as a lack of technical progress , the closure of the recovery act appropriations account on september 30 , 2015 , and changing economic conditions — such as decreased natural gas prices which resulted in changes in the relative prices of coal and natural gas .

the nine large demonstration projects represented over 40 percent of the $2.66 billion in advanced fossil energy r&d funding for the 794 projects ( see fig .

1 ) .

of the $1.12 billion in funding for the advanced fossil energy demonstration projects , doe provided $616 million in funding for three large demonstration projects that started in fiscal year 2010 and that remained active as of the end of fiscal year 2017 .

petra nova parish holdings of texas has a demonstration project underway that has retrofitted an existing coal - fired power plant in texas with post - combustion carbon capture technology , according to doe documentation .

the objective of this project is to demonstrate the ability to capture 90 percent of the co according to doe documentation , doe's involvement with the project is scheduled to conclude in december 2019 .

the petra nova project captured and stored its first 1 million metric tons of co in november 2017 , according to doe officials .

archer daniel midlands of illinois had a demonstration project underway to capture co per year using dehydration and compression processes and sequester it in the mt .

simon sandstone formation ( a saline reservoir ) in illinois .

doe provided $141 million in funding for the project from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

doe's involvement with the project is scheduled to conclude in september 2019 , according to doe documentation .

during calendar year 2017 , the project captured and stored over 500,000 metric tons of co emitted from two large steam - methane reformers , which produce hydrogen from methane , for its demonstration project in texas .

the captured gas is compressed and sent via pipeline to oil fields in eastern texas to be used for enhanced oil recovery and thereby sequestered , according to doe documentation .

doe provided $284 million in funding for the project from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

doe's involvement under this demonstration project's award concluded the last day of fiscal year 2017 .

doe provided $1.54 billion in funding for 785 other advanced fossil energy r&d projects started from fiscal year 2010 through 2017 .

for these 785 r&d projects , doe provided: on average , $2.0 million per project ; a median of $0.8 million per project ; less than $5 million to 91.8 percent ( 721 ) of the 785 projects ; and less than $1 million to 58.1 percent ( 456 ) of the projects .

for projects started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 , total funding for projects by fiscal year started ranged from less than $100 million to more than $300 million ( see fig .

2 ) .

as noted earlier , recipients of doe's r&d funding were generally required to provide cost share to support the cost of each r&d project .

for 661 of the 785 projects , the initially agreed - upon dollar amount to be covered by recipients was $617 million in cost - share .

recipients did not provide a cost - share for the remaining 124 of the 785 projects , which were predominantly grants without cost share requirements , according to doe officials .

according to doe data , doe provided the largest amount of funding for projects started in 2010 because doe received a supplemental appropriation for fossil energy r&d through the recovery act .

doe provided funding for 72 of the coal technologies research projects — totaling $237 million — using appropriations from the recovery act , according to doe data .

of the 785 r&d projects for which doe provided funding , most advanced fossil energy projects researched coal technologies rather than oil and gas , and recipients of the funding were generally universities and industry groups that were distributed across the country .

of the 785 projects , 698 ( about 89 percent ) involved coal technologies , receiving $1.40 billion ( about 91 percent ) of the $1.54 billion in funding doe provided for the projects .

the remaining projects and funding supported r&d for oil and gas technologies , according to doe's categorization of the projects by fuel type ( see table 1 ) .

within each fuel type , projects researched various technology types , such as r&d on coal gasification systems and the mitigation of methane emissions from natural gas infrastructure .

the funding for the 785 r&d projects ranged from $5,000 for a research conference ( oil and gas ) to $125 million for a research facility focused on next - generation ccs technologies ( coal ) .

so that it does not change phases , but rather undergoes drastic density changes over small ranges of temperature and pressure .

such cycles have shown the potential for increased heat - to - electricity conversion efficiencies , high power density , and simplicity of operation compared to existing steam - based power cycles .

$5,000 for a research conference to $29 million for the university of texas at austin's active project on the deep - water characterization and scientific assessment of gas hydrates .

specifically , doe identified the following four categories as oil and gas - related research areas: gas hydrates: the development of technologies to find , characterize , and recover methane from gas hydrates through field testing , numerical simulation , and laboratory experimentation , among other things .

for example , doe provided the university of california - san diego $350,000 in funding for a 3-year active project to characterize the baselines and changes in gas hydrate systems .

natural gas infrastructure: the monitoring of the u.s. natural gas pipeline network , which includes more than 300,000 miles of interstate and intrastate transmission pipelines .

for example , doe provided the university of pittsburgh $1.2 million in funding for a 3-year active project on multi - functional fiber sensors for pipeline monitoring and methane detections .

onshore unconventional resources: the production of hydrocarbons―primarily natural gas―from shale formations .

for example , doe provided the ground water protection council , of oklahoma , $13 million for an 8-year project for data management and regulatory approaches related to hydraulic fracturing and geologic sequestration of co the r&d projects in this area included research on geologic uncertainty prediction of oil and gas , and improvement of subsea systems reliability through automation and advanced technology .

the recipients of the funding for the 785 advanced fossil energy r&d projects were mostly universities and industry groups that were located in 47 states and the district of columbia .

of these recipients , approximately 51 percent were universities ; 43 percent were industry groups ; and 5 percent were other entities , including other federal agencies , such as the u.s. geological survey ( see table 2 ) .

while university recipients received funding for a majority of projects , industry recipients received a majority of the funding ( see table 3 ) .

recipients were located in 47 states and the district of columbia .

the three states with the highest number of projects with recipients located in their states were texas ( 100 ) , california ( 61 ) , and ohio ( 53 ) .

the three states where recipients received the most funding were texas ( about $169 million ) , alabama ( about $161 million ) , and california ( about $152 million ) ( see fig .

3 ) .

although doe issued three solicitations for applications for advanced fossil energy loan guarantees — most recently in fiscal year 2014 , for up to $8 billion in loan guarantees — doe had not guaranteed any loans for advanced fossil energy as of august 2018 .

specifically , the 2006 and 2008 advanced fossil energy solicitations were for projects that involved coal - based power generation and that would incorporate ccs , coal gasification , or other beneficial uses of carbon , among other things .

however , neither solicitation resulted in any loan guarantees , in part because during this timeframe of the late 2000s , natural gas prices fell , causing a shift in the market , which led to such coal - related projects no longer being economically competitive , according to doe officials .

according to the fiscal year 2014 solicitation , applicants could use any fossil fuel — including coal , oil , or natural gas — that would reduce , avoid , or sequester greenhouse gases .

in response to the 2014 advanced fossil energy solicitation , doe officials told us that doe had received 19 applications total .

according to doe officials: five fossil energy applicants were actively moving through the process of review as of august 2018 .

for example , in january 2018 , one applicant issued a press release stating that it was pursuing a $1.9 billion loan guarantee to support the development of infrastructure for a proposed underground storage facility for natural gas liquids and intermediates .

nine fossil energy applicants had been idle or not following up with the loan programs office .

three applicants did not meet certain eligibility requirements .

two companies withdrew their applications — one in 2014 , and one in 2018 .

of the five advanced fossil energy applicants actively in the process of doe review , doe offered a conditional commitment to guarantee up to $2 billion in loans to one applicant — lake charles methanol — in december 2016 .

as we have previously reported , a conditional commitment is one where doe commits to issue a loan guarantee if the applicant satisfies specific requirements .

according to information on the doe website , the lake charles methanol plant in louisiana would produce methanol from the gasification of petcoke , and capture and transport the co to texas for enhanced oil recovery .

according to doe documentation , the lake charles project planned to leverage the work and experience gained from the earlier doe demonstration project by leucadia energy .

we provided a draft of this report to doe for review and comment .

doe provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of energy , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii .

in this report , we describe 1 ) the department of energy's ( doe ) funding of advanced fossil energy research and development ( r&d ) projects started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 and the types of projects and recipients that received funding , and 2 ) doe's loan guarantees , if any , for advanced fossil energy projects from fiscal year 2006 through august 2018 .

you asked us to review doe's funding for advanced fossil energy projects .

to address the first objective , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and doe guidance .

we analyzed doe advanced fossil energy r&d project data for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

we focused our review on advanced fossil energy r&d projects that received funding through the office of fossil energy's ( fe ) national energy technology laboratory ( netl ) because the 794 projects represent all of the advanced fossil energy r&d projects in our scope started from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 .

we used fiscal year 2010 as the start date because doe officials told us that doe's current data management system came into use for the r&d projects that started in fiscal year 2010 .

we used fiscal year 2017 as the end date because that was the most recent complete year for which data were available .

doe provided us with a spreadsheet that included key project information — such as the name of the recipient of the r&d funding and the project start date — as well as obligations data for each project started for the period of our review ( fiscal years 2010 through 2017 ) , by the fiscal year during which the project was started , by summing the obligations for the project from each year .

we reported on doe's funding for these r&d projects ; doe generally provided financial assistance for these projects through grants or cooperative agreements .

in addition , netl's in - house r&d work was outside of the scope of our review .

to assess the reliability of the funding data , as well as the specific project information for the 794 r&d projects , we interviewed data specialists at doe headquarters , fe , and netl and reviewed doe internal guidance for the maintenance of agency data .

we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

we also reviewed doe websites and documentation , including fact sheets , and interviewed officials from fe and netl .

to characterize the kinds of groups that received advanced fossil energy r&d funding , we developed the following definitions for coding each recipient: university: any institution of higher education , such as a public or non - profit private college , junior college , or university .

federal financial assistance means assistance that non - federal entities receive or administer in the form of grants , property , cooperative agreements , food commodities , direct appropriations , or other assistance , and can also include loans , loan guarantees , interest subsidies , and insurance , depending on the context , but does not include amounts received as reimbursement for services rendered to individuals in accordance with omb - issued guidance .

2 c.f.r .

§ 200.40 .

see also 31 u.s.c .

§ 7501 ( 5 ) .

a grant agreement is generally defined as a legal instrument of financial assistance between a federal awarding agency and a non - federal entity that is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value from the federal awarding agency to the non - federal entity to carry out a public purpose authorized by law , and not to acquire property or services for the federal awarding agency's direct benefit or use .

2 c.f.r .

§ 200.51 .

a cooperative agreement is distinguished from a grant in that it provides for substantial involvement between the federal awarding agency and the non - federal entity in carrying out the activity contemplated by the federal award .

2 c.f.r .

§ 200.24 .

for purposes of our report , we use the term awards to refer to both grants and cooperative agreements .

organized primarily for profit .

industry includes some organizations that were founded as non - profit corporations but call themselves “companies” and / or describe “serving clients.” other: any entity not associated with a university or industry .

other includes groups such as other federal government agencies , as well as non - profit corporations and other entities which we could not identify conclusively as either industry or universities .

we used these three categories , and their definitions , to guide us in the coding process .

after developing these definitions , three analysts independently coded each recipient as a university , industry , or other .

our method was to examine the identifying information on each recipient's website and decide which category best described the entity .

we also had an independent analyst check the coding category that we had assigned to each recipient and verify that we had made a reasonable coding decision .

to describe the status of doe's advanced fossil energy loan guarantees , we reviewed relevant laws , regulations , and guidance , as well as past gao reports describing doe's administration of the loan program .

we also reviewed summary information that doe provided on applications for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects .

we analyzed information that doe provided on applications for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects under the loan guarantee program ( lgp ) and other related information for fiscal year 2006 through august 2018 .

we used fiscal year 2006 as the start date because it was the first year that doe issued an advanced fossil energy project solicitation — an announcement of opportunities for loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy projects — and we used august 2018 as the end date in order to provide the most up - to - date information as possible .

we also reviewed the advanced fossil energy project solicitations doe issued during this timeframe .

to assess the reliability of the summary information , we interviewed lgp staff who maintain the information for the advanced fossil energy applications , and reviewed doe documentation .

we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

in addition , we interviewed officials from the loan programs office who work on the lgp .

we conducted this performance audit from march 2017 to september 2018 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

in addition to the contact named above , karla springer ( assistant director ) , rebecca makar ( analyst - in - charge ) , tc corless , cindy gilbert , carol henn , kirk menard , patricia moye , sheryl stein , and sara sullivan made key contributions to this report .

also contributing to this report were carolyn blocker , marcia carlsen , nirmal chaudhary , jaci evans , ryan gottschall , keesha luebke , and john yee .

