during our review of the navy's space and naval warfare ( spawar ) systems command's fiscal year 2001 budget request , we found that many information technology systems were being procured and fielded in relatively large quantities — sometimes exceeding 50 percent of the total — during low - rate initial production and before completing operational testing .

the primary purpose of low - rate initial production is to produce enough units for operational testing and evaluation and to establish production capabilities to prepare for full - rate production .

limiting initial production affords the opportunity to confirm the stability and soundness of a new system before producing larger quantities .

commercial and department of defense ( dod ) best practices have shown that completing a system's testing prior to producing significant quantities will substantially lower the risk of costly fixes and retrofits .

for major weapons systems , there are statutory provisions that limit the quantities of systems produced during low - rate initial production to the minimum quantity necessary and require justification for quantities exceeding 10 percent of total production .

although these provisions do not apply to non - major systems , dod and navy acquisition regulations encourage these programs to make use of the low - rate initial production concept where appropriate .

given the risks associated with acquiring high percentages of production quantities before completing operational testing , we reviewed the acquisitions of information systems at spawar to determine ( 1 ) why information systems were being procured and fielded in large numbers before operational testing , ( 2 ) what effects this practice was having on spawar and the fleet , and ( 3 ) what the navy is doing to mitigate the risks associated with this practice .

spawar is one of the navy's three major acquisition commands .

spawar provides information technology systems to naval forces on land , at sea , and in space and integrates all information products , including those developed by other systems commands and agencies outside the navy .

the spawar workforce is over 7,300 personnel , and the fiscal year 2000 budget was $3.7 billion — about $2.7 billion to develop and procure systems and about $1.0 billion to operate and maintain them .

specifically , spawar develops , acquires , and manages battle management systems ( for example , software applications and undersea , terrestrial , and space sensors ( for example , underwater sensors , navigation and weather systems , and satellites ) ; information transfer systems ( for example , communications systems , radios , antennas , and switches ) ; and information management systems ( for example , local area networks and routers ) .

as of october 2000 , spawar was managing 21 programs that involved low - rate initial production .

these programs had cumulative low - rate initial procurements ranging from 5 to 100 percent of the total inventory objective — 7 systems were above 50 percent .

the estimated total production costs for the eight systems we analyzed in detail ranged from $31 million to $525 million .

as weapon system programs move through the phases of the acquisition process , they are subject to review at major decision points called milestones .

major defense acquisition programs , known as acquisition category i , and major systems programs , known as acquisition category ii,as well as non - major systems programs , known as acquisition category iii and iv , follow the same general process .

dod and navy acquisition policies state that program risks shall be assessed at each milestone decision point before approval is granted for the next phase .

the policies add that test and evaluation shall be used to determine system maturity and identify areas of technical risk .

major milestones in dod's systems acquisition process include milestone 0 , when the determination is made about whether an identified mission need warrants a study of alternative concepts to satisfy the need .

if warranted , the program is approved to begin the concept exploration and definition phase .

milestone i , when the determination is made about whether a new acquisition program is warranted .

if so , initial cost , schedule , and performance goals are established for the program , and authorization is given to start the demonstration and validation phase .

milestone ii , when the determination is made about whether continuation of development , testing , and preparation for production is warranted .

if so , authorization is given to start the engineering and manufacturing development phase .

approval of this phase will often involve a commitment to low - rate initial production , which is defined as the minimum quantity needed to ( 1 ) provide production - representative articles for operational testing and evaluation , ( 2 ) establish an initial production base , and ( 3 ) permit orderly ramp - up to full - rate production upon completion of operational testing and evaluation .

operational test and evaluation is a key internal control to ensure that decisionmakers have objective information available on a weapon system's performance to minimize risks of procuring costly and ineffective systems .

operational testing and evaluation uses field tests under realistic conditions to determine the operational effectiveness and suitability of a system for use in combat .

dod acquisition regulations generally provide that programs successfully complete these tests before starting full - rate production .

milestone iii , when operational test and evaluation has been completed , a determination is made about whether to proceed to full - rate production and field the system .

over the years , we have found instances in which dod used the low - rate initial production decision phase to purchase significant numbers of major and non - major systems without successfully completing operational testing and evaluation .

often , these systems later experienced significant effectiveness and / or suitability problems .

in 1994 , we reported that dod had made large buys of weapon systems during the low - rate initial production phase and prior to completion of operational test and evaluation , which resulted in operational problems .

for example , we reported that the navy procured 100 percent of a system's inventory objective during low - rate initial production and later found that the system lacked critical hardware and software capabilities .

in another case , the navy procured 100 percent of a system's inventory objective during low - rate initial production and later terminated the program when it failed operational testing and evaluation .

a recent defense science board report found that weapons systems are still being fielded without adequate testing to assure their effectiveness and utility to operating units .

we conducted this review because buying systems before completing operational testing has inherent risks , and spawar's practice of buying high percentages of a system's total inventory objective during low - rate initial production raised these risk concerns .

spawar officials cited three primary reasons for high - percentage buys during low - rate initial production .

first , to meet navy initiatives , spawar must provide the fleet with large quantities of information technology systems as quickly as possible .

second , many information systems consist of evolving technology that quickly becomes obsolete .

third , additional low - rate initial production buys are approved due to delays in conducting the operational test and evaluation .

the main reason that spawar officials cited for high - percentage buys during low - rate initial production is the need to provide as many information technology systems to the fleet as quickly as possible to meet several navy initiatives .

the navy's current vision for the 21st century , forward from the sea , involves innovations in technology to rapidly transform the navy into a 21st century force .

spawar provides or contributes to many of the operational capabilities that support the vision .

officials in the chief of naval operations' fleet and allied requirements division stated that the fleets put pressure on spawar to provide information systems faster .

these officials , as well as spawar officials , contend that if spawar does not provide systems to the fleet quickly , then the fleet will bypass the chief of naval operations and spawar and procure some systems with fleet funding .

if the fleet buys the systems , spawar cannot control the configuration of these systems , which can eventually result in interoperability problems with systems that spawar procures .

an official in the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy responsible for communications and space systems also agreed that there is pressure on spawar to meet fleet demands .

he said that the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics stated about 3 years ago that the pace of developing systems was too slow and called for shortening the development cycle by incorporating evolutionary development and acquisition .

through evolutionary development and acquisition , systems are continuously improved , as new technology becomes available .

according to the spawar commander , another reason for quickly providing systems to the fleet is that information systems consist of rapidly advancing technology , which can become obsolete within 18 months .

he said that procuring and fielding a large percentage of a system's inventory objective while still in low - rate initial production quickly provide the fleet with better information systems and provide important operational data so that any system performance problems can be quickly fixed .

officials in the navy fleet and allied requirements division said that the 18-month obsolescence cycle is the main reason that the fleet would rather have a system now with 75 to 80 percent of its full capability as opposed to waiting until the system has all of its capability .

however , officials in the chief of naval operations' office of test , evaluation , and technology requirements disputed that rapidly advancing technology is a legitimate reason for making high - percentage buys during low - rate initial production and before completing operational testing .

these officials concluded that making high - percentage buys during low - rate initial production circumvents the operational testing and evaluation process and increases the risk that systems will not work as intended when fielded .

high - percentage buys during low - rate initial production also were the result of delays in conducting the operational test and evaluation .

according to the spawar commander , the pass or fail nature of operational testing contributed to delays .

rather than fail a test and risk program reduction or termination , operational tests were delayed until there was a good probability that the system would pass the tests .

as tests were delayed , additional low - rate initial production buys were approved .

six of the eight systems we analyzed had additions to the original low - rate initial production quantities .

the spawar commander said that making high - percentage buys of a system while still in low - rate initial production is low risk when proven commercial technology items are being procured and they are relatively low - cost items — when compared to the cost of ships and aircraft .

further , if problems arise after the low - rate initial production systems are fielded , the cost to fix them is not significant .

however , spawar officials agreed that none of the eight systems we analyzed are entirely commercial and that all of them have military requirements that must be tested in a realistic operational environment .

the dod director of operational test and evaluation agreed that low - rate initial production items can be used in an operational environment to learn about problems and fix them , but he said that procuring large quantities of a system before operational test and evaluation is a risky strategy .

we analyzed eight spawar systems and found seven of them had a combination of problems that adversely affected fleet operations — all had performance problems , all had interoperability problems , and six had suitability problems .

a performance problem is the inability of a system to effectively and efficiently perform its assigned mission .

an interoperability problem is the inability of systems to work together effectively to provide services to and accept services from other systems .

a suitability problem involves a system not satisfactorily meeting one or more requirements , including reliability , maintainability , logistics support , or training .

these problems may delay progress in achieving the navy's vision for using information technology to attain and maintain network - centric warfighting knowledge and decision - making superiority .

the last of the eight systems had not been installed when we analyzed the eight systems .

table 1 illustrates the types of problems identified for seven of the eight systems .

two of the systems — the digital wideband transmission system and the command and control processor — illustrate how interoperability , performance , and suitability problems impact fleet operations .

the digital wideband transmission system is a radio transmission system supporting voice , video , and data communications .

it is required on all aircraft carriers and amphibious ships and at training facilities .

spawar approved 100 percent of the total inventory objective to be bought under low - rate initial production ; however , the system does not work due to a number of problems with the antenna , power amplifier , and radio frequency control .

the system also created , and was affected by , electromagnetic interference , which caused severe interoperability problems .

for example , the interference caused a complete loss of global positioning system navigation capability .

furthermore , in order for the digital system to work , an air - search radar had to be shut down .

consequently , the navy turned off the system the first time it was used during an amphibious ready group deployment in the pacific , replaced it with a legacy system , and placed the digital system in an inoperative status for 9 months .

by november 2000 , spawar had installed 78 percent of the systems in the fleet , but it will cost $4.3 million to fix the problems for this $40-million program — $1.2 million for engineering work and $3.1 million for retrofit costs .

spawar is currently developing and testing improvements to system performance .

the command and control processor acquires information from other communications systems , stores the information , and reformats it for use by the aegis combat system on aircraft carriers and naval combat surface ships .

although spawar originally approved a small purchase of the processor during the low - rate initial production , three subsequent low - rate initial production increases bought the total to 41 percent of the inventory objective .

from 1995 to 2000 , there were 263 problems noted with the system , mostly involving software , during battle group system integration tests .

the processor has severe suitability problems because it breaks down unpredictably up to 12 hours at a time ( due to software problems ) and freezes up , which eliminates the system's capability to provide current situational awareness .

also , on an aircraft carrier that we visited , operators said that the processor would not integrate with other systems , even though it is designed to do so .

to prevent the breakdowns , spawar developed a workaround procedure , which involves resetting the system every 2 hours instead of every 24 hours .

in addition , the breakdowns and workarounds put more pressure on operators and maintainers during combat or hostile situations .

some of spawar's 13 other systems with a high percentage of low - rate initial production buys also had operational effectiveness and suitability problems .

the pacific fleet experienced 46 problems with the navy extremely high frequency satellite communications system from 1995 to 2000 .

the problems involved hardware and software , interoperability , and training .

for example , in february 2000 , system performance was degraded due to a part failure .

in april 2000 , spawar reported that the problem had been solved .

however , about a month later , the system had problems again , resulting in no response from the satellite and time - tracking errors being returned .

the system was again placed in a degraded status and , as of august 2000 , the problem was still unresolved .

the pacific fleet also experienced problems with the high frequency radio group , mainly due to system performance problems and training shortfalls .

for example , on a ship visit in october 2000 , ship communications personnel said that the system had broken down several times for a duration of 1 week to 1 month at a time .

they said that , when it breaks down , the operators must tune in the radio frequency manually , but ship operators have not been trained to do this because they were used to relying on the system to tune into a particular frequency automatically .

the pacific fleet also identified several other problems with the radio group , including a ship that experienced 15 failures of a system switch within 11 months .

the spawar commander said that the command did not have adequate controls and oversight , at the time of most of these low - rate initial production decisions , to either mitigate or manage risks associated with procuring and fielding large percentages of systems during low - rate initial production .

he said the need for more discipline in the acquisition process contributed to the interoperability , performance , and suitability deficiencies we identified .

he further noted , however , that some problems are part of the cost of doing business with new systems and are worth the risk to provide systems to the fleet quickly .

according to the spawar commander , the most meaningful measure of success is whether the systems are meeting their operational requirements , and he said that spawar's systems are meeting theirs based on a performance parameter called operational availability .

however , according to the dod director of operational test and evaluation and the chief of naval operations' office of test , evaluation , and technology requirements , operational availability is only one of a number of key performance measures , and an overall assessment of system performance should not be based solely on that parameter .

the navy and spawar have taken or plan to take a number steps to mitigate the risks of large low - rate initial production procurements .

to add more discipline and rigor to the low - rate initial production decision process , the command now requires program managers to use a standardized checklist and report template as part of reviewing and approving low - rate initial production purchase requests .

spawar has also established an acquisition reform office to serve as a focal point and command - wide disseminator of lessons learned and process improvements .

the reform office is currently developing a “rules of the road” acquisition guidebook for spawar program managers .

further , in discussions of our findings and observations during this review , the commander called for the development of risk management guidance for information systems and agreed to suggested improvements in documenting and justifying low - rate initial production decisions .

the spawar commander said better risk management guidance would improve low - rate initial production decisions on information systems , especially when milestone decision authorities and program managers rotate in and out over time .

the commander stated that he and the program managers primarily use their acquisition knowledge , wisdom , and experience when making risk management decisions .

in discussions with navy and spawar officials , we noted that the acquisition decision memorandums , used to document and support milestone decisions , did not always include the low - rate initial production quantity being approved , the cumulative number of low - rate initial production items that had been approved , or the cumulative low - rate initial production percentage .

we also noted that , at spawar , the justification for approving low - rate initial production purchases was not always documented .

the navy and spawar officials agreed to document in the acquisition decision memorandum the justification for all low - rate initial production approvals , as well as the current inventory objective and the cumulative number of units bought under low - rate initial production .

spawar also agreed to include in its quarterly program status report when cumulative low - rate initial production approvals reach 50 percent or more of the current inventory objective .

recognizing that other navy activities can benefit from the low - rate initial production decision checklist and report template , we recommended that this guidance be distributed throughout the navy .

the navy subsequently distributed the guidance dod - wide .

finally , the navy and spawar agreed to supplement acquisition training for program managers and staff by incorporating risk management tools into existing courses .

in seeking to provide new information systems to the fleet as quickly as possible , spawar officials procured and fielded relatively large quantities of systems during low - rate initial production and before completing operational testing .

our subsequent review of seven of these systems found that six had experienced operational problems that negatively impacted the fleet .

the spawar commander noted that controls and oversight , at the time of most of these decisions , were not adequate to either mitigate or manage risks associated with procuring and fielding large percentages of systems during low - rate initial production .

he said the need for more discipline in the acquisition process contributed to deficiencies we identified .

since that time , navy and spawar officials have taken or have plans to take a number steps to mitigate the risks of large low - rate initial production procurements .

in addition , they have agreed to implement , and in one case have already implemented , process improvements we suggested during the course of this review .

given these actions , we are not making any recommendations in this report .

in commenting on our draft report , the navy agreed and stated that the actions taken and planned by it and the spawar command are expected to improve the navy's low - rate initial production decision process .

the navy's comments appear in appendix i .

to acquire information about the number and status of spawar low - rate initial production programs , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the spawar acquisition reform office ; selected spawar program offices ; the office of the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) ; the office of the deputy assistant secretary of the navy ( command , control , communications , computers , and information / electronic warfare / space ) ; the office of the deputy director defense procurement strategies ; the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) ; and the office of the chief of naval operations .

to obtain detailed information about the impact of the high percentage of spawar low - rate initial production procurements , we selected and reviewed 14 programs , representing 70 percent of all spawar low - rate initial production programs .

of these 14 programs , we examined 8 programs in detail looking at operational , logistic , interoperability , and training issues to determine how well these programs were performing .

to obtain information about the operational testing , evaluation , interoperability , and fielding of low - rate initial production systems , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the office of the director of navy test , evaluation , and technology requirements ; the office of the navy commander operational testing and evaluation force ; the office of the program manager for battle group systems integration testing ; and the office of the director of operational test and evaluation , office of the assistant secretary of defense .

to obtain information about the operation , performance , interoperability , maintenance , repair , retrofit , suitability , and training regarding low - rate initial production systems in the fleet , we visited the naval surface force command , pacific ; the naval air command , pacific ; and the naval submarine command , pacific , squadron eleven .

we also visited specific ships in each command , including the u.s.s .

benfold ( ddg - 65 ) , the u.s.s .

pearl harbor ( lsd - 52 ) , the u.s.s .

john c. stennis ( cvn - 74 ) , and the u.s.s .

salt lake city ( ssn - 716 ) .

in addition , we held discussions with spawar program officials and officials from spawar's in - service engineering activity , fleet support engineering team , and installations and logistics directorate .

to obtain information about the laws , regulations , procedures , and guidance governing the procurement of information technology systems in low - rate initial production , we interviewed officials and obtained documentation from the office of the commander , space and naval warfare systems command ; the office of the chairman deskbook working group ( dod 5000 rewrite ) ; the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development and acquisition ) ; and the office of the assistant deputy under secretary of defense ( systems acquisition ) .

we also reviewed selected laws and regulations governing low - rate initial production , including title 10 of the u.s. code , the dod 5000 series acquisition regulations ( the1996 and revised 2000 version ) , and secretary of the navy instruction 5000-2b governing acquisition and procurement of low - rate initial production and commercial - off - the - shelf technology .

we conducted our review from june 2000 through may 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the honorable donald h. rumsfeld , secretary of defense ; and the honorable mitchell e. daniels jr. , director of the office of management and budget .

copies will be made available to others upon request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4821 if you have any questions regarding this report .

key contributors to this report were cristina chaplain , joe dewechter , dorian dunbar , stephanie may , gary middleton , sarah prehoda , richard price , and william woods .

