the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ) elevated the importance of diversity at the federal home loan bank ( fhlbank ) system , which provides liquidity for its member institutions to use in support of housing finance and community lending .

for instance , hera required that each fhlbank create an office of minority and women inclusion ( omwi ) or designate an office to perform duties required of the omwi .

hera also created the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) as the regulator of the fhlbanks and required that all board directors be elected rather than appointed by the banks' regulator .

academic researchers and others have highlighted the importance of diversity among board directors , which they say can help better address risks and complex issues or contribute to more diverse leadership .

in 2015 , we reported that while fhlbanks took steps to increase board diversity , female and minority representation on their boards was limited .

in another 2015 report , we found that women's representation on boards of u.s. publicly traded companies had been increasing , but we estimated that complete gender balance could take decades .

you asked us to review the diversity and inclusion efforts at fhlbank boards .

this report examines the ( 1 ) extent to which fhfa has taken steps to encourage board diversity at fhlbanks ; ( 2 ) trends in diversity composition ( gender , race , and ethnicity ) for the boards of individual fhlbanks ; and ( 3 ) challenges fhlbanks face and practices they use in recruiting and maintaining a diverse board .

to address these objectives , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations related to fhlbank boards , including fhfa regulations on director elections and diversity reporting requirements .

to obtain information on steps fhfa has taken to encourage fhlbank board diversity , we also reviewed other fhfa documentation , such as fhfa's template for the banks' annual reports and its 2016 – 2018 annual analysis related to the bank boards .

we also interviewed fhfa staff to learn about the agency's efforts to encourage board diversity , including regulation amendments and guidance .

to describe trends in fhlbanks' board diversity , we analyzed gender and race / ethnicity data self - reported by board directors in the banks' annual reports to fhfa as of the end of 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 .

at the time of our review , the most recently available data on board directors' race / ethnicity were from the banks' 2017 annual reports .

to provide more recent data on board directors' gender , we also compiled a list of board directors who started or continued their terms on the fhlbank boards in 2018 , based on information from the banks' 2017 form 10-k filings with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) .

we then confirmed with each bank our compiled list of board directors , as of october 17 , 2018 .

we also requested and analyzed the gender and race / ethnicity data voluntarily reported by each bank's board chair and vice chair as of october 17 , 2018 , and requested the names of the chairs and vice chairs of their board committees as of october 26 , 2018 .

because some directors did not self - identify their gender in 2015 – 2017 annual reports , we also used information in the fhlbanks' 2014 – 2017 form 10-ks to derive data on the gender of the banks' board directors as well as directors in board leadership positions as of october 2018 .

for example , if directors were referred to as “mr.” in the form 10-ks , we counted them as male .

if they were referred to as “ms.,” we counted them as female .

however , we were not able to derive data on the race / ethnicity for board directors who did not self - identify their race / ethnicity in 2015 – 2017 annual reports because the banks' form 10-ks did not include such information .

we assessed the reliability of the data from the banks' annual reports and form 10-ks through electronic testing , a review of documentation , and interviews with knowledgeable agency staff .

we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for describing the overall trends and composition of gender and race / ethnicity at the fhlbank boards , except the data for directors who did not self - identify their race / ethnicity , as discussed later in the report .

we also compared the most recently available demographic information on fhlbank board directors with the demographic composition of senior management in the financial services industry and the overall private sector ( excluding financial services ) , based on data from the employer information report ( eeo - 1 ) of the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) .

in our analysis , we included workforce from all sites of multi - establishment companies ( companies with multiple locations ) .

consequently , the analysis included in this report may not match the analysis found on eeoc's website , which excludes workforce from sites of multi - establishment companies with less than 50 employees .

senior management in the financial services industry represents a pool of comparable candidates that could provide directors for fhlbank boards .

we assessed the reliability of the data from the eeo - 1 report through electronic testing , a review of documentation , and interviews with knowledgeable agency staff , and determined them to be sufficiently reliable for comparing the composition of gender and race / ethnicity in the financial services sector and the overall private sector with that at the fhlbank boards .

in addition , we requested and reviewed the forms and questions each fhlbank used to collect gender and race / ethnicity information from their board directors .

we also reviewed information on the methods the banks used to distribute and collect these data collection forms , and any instructions or guidance fhfa provided to the banks on collecting this information .

we reviewed relevant fhfa regulations on collecting and submitting board directors' gender and race / ethnicity information .

furthermore , we compared the banks' data collection processes with federal internal control standards to identify opportunities for improvements to the banks' processes , as discussed later in the report .

to obtain information on the challenges fhlbanks face and practices they use to recruit and maintain a diverse board , we reviewed the banks' documentation related to board director elections and diversity considerations , such as board election materials and skills assessments .

we also interviewed fhfa and fhlbank staff and a nongeneralizable sample of external stakeholders knowledgeable about diversity .

we selected the external stakeholders based on their knowledge of diversity and referrals from those we interviewed .

in addition , we interviewed 10 board directors and one bank president , who each represent their fhlbank on a system - wide task force on board diversity ( the bank presidents conference board diversity task force ) .

we also selected the board chairs of six fhlbanks ( atlanta , boston , des moines , pittsburgh , san francisco , and topeka ) to conduct a more in - depth review .

we selected these banks to achieve variation in board diversity composition ( share of women and minority directors ) , asset size , and geographic locations .

appendix i contains a more detailed description of our scope and methodology .

we conducted this performance audit from july 2018 to february 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the fhlbank system comprises 11 federally chartered banks .

the fhlbanks represent 11 districts and are headquartered in atlanta , boston , chicago , cincinnati , dallas , des moines , indianapolis , new york city , pittsburgh , san francisco , and topeka ( see fig .

1 ) .

each fhlbank is cooperatively owned by its members – – such as commercial and community banks , thrifts , credit unions , and insurance companies .

as of december 31 , 2017 , the number of member institutions in each district varied widely , as did the total amount of assets each fhlbank held ( see table 1 ) .

each fhlbank has a board of directors made up of member directors and independent directors .

as shown in figure 2 , the federal home loan bank act ( as amended by hera ) and its regulations set forth a number of requirements for fhlbank board directors .

as of october 2018 , each fhlbank board had 14 – 24 directors , for a total of 194 directors ( see table 2 ) .

of the 194 , 108 were member directors and 86 were independent directors , including 24 public interest directors .

each board elects a chair and vice chair who serve 2-year terms .

as of october 2018 , of the 11 board chairs , six were member directors and five were independent directors , including two public interest directors ( see table 3 ) .

each fhlbank has a president who reports to the bank's board of directors , but no representatives from bank management may serve on the boards .

to implement requirements in hera , in december 2010 fhfa issued the minority and women inclusion rule to set forth minimum requirements for fhlbank diversity programs and reporting .

among other things , the 2010 rule required each bank to create its own office of minority and women inclusion ( omwi ) or designate an office to perform duties related to the bank's diversity efforts , and establish policies related to diversity and inclusion , including policies on nominating board directors .

the 2010 rule also requires fhlbanks to submit an annual report to fhfa on their diversity efforts .

fhfa also evaluates the quality of corporate governance by board directors as part of its on - site annual examinations and off - site monitoring of fhlbanks .

for example , fhfa's examination includes reviewing the bank boards' responsibilities , board and committee meeting minutes , and the boards' oversight of the banks' operations and corporate culture .

our previous work on diversity includes reports on federal reserve banks' board diversity , fhlbank board governance , women on corporate boards , and diversity in the financial services sector .

in 2011 , we found limited diversity among the boards of the 12 federal reserve banks .

we recommended that the board of governors of the federal reserve system encourage all reserve banks to consider ways to help enhance the economic and demographic diversity of perspectives on boards , including by broadening potential candidate pools .

the recommendation was implemented in december 2011 .

in a 2015 report on fhlbank board governance , we found that fhfa and fhlbanks had taken steps to increase board diversity , including creating regulations that encouraged the banks to consider diversity in board candidate selection and developing processes to identify and nominate independent directors .

in a 2015 report on women on corporate boards , we found that while the share of women on boards of u.s. publicly traded companies had increased , reaching complete gender balance could take many years .

we identified factors that might hinder women's increased representation on boards , including boards not prioritizing recruiting diverse candidates and low turnover of board seats .

in addition , in 2017 we reported that representation of women and minorities at the management level in the financial services sector showed marginal or no increase during 2007 – 2015 .

since our 2015 report on fhlbank board governance , fhfa has taken additional actions to encourage diversity on fhlbank boards , including adding a requirement for the banks to report board demographics , clarifying expectations for board elections outreach , requesting the creation of a system - wide board diversity task force , and allowing some banks to add an independent director .

fhfa has a limited role in overseeing fhlbanks' board diversity , according to fhfa staff , because that is not part of the agency's statutory responsibilities .

while fhfa reviews the list of independent director nominees for fhlbank boards to ensure that the nominees meet all eligibility and qualification requirements , board directors are not fhlbank employees .

rather , they form the oversight body of each bank .

in contrast , fhfa has a larger role in monitoring diversity efforts related to the workforce and suppliers of the banks .

for example , the agency's annual examination manual contains a section that covers such efforts .

fhfa oversight of diversity efforts also includes reviewing the fhlbanks' annual reports on diversity efforts , which the banks are required to submit under hera .

in adopting its minority and women inclusion rule of 2010 to implement this requirement , fhfa stated that it would analyze and include information from the banks' annual reports in the agency's own annual report to congress .

the banks' annual reports initially included data related to their workforce and supplier diversity efforts .

in may 2015 , fhfa amended the 2010 rule and added two reporting requirements for the annual reports: ( 1 ) data on gender and race / ethnicity of board directors ( which the directors would voluntarily self - report ) , and ( 2 ) information on the banks' outreach efforts ( such as to promote diversity when nominating and soliciting director candidates ) .

fhfa stated in its 2015 amendments that it intended to use the director data to analyze future trends in board diversity and the effectiveness of each bank's policies and procedures to encourage board diversity .

fhfa also clarified expectations on fhlbank diversity efforts in a 2016 amendment to its regulation related to bank board directors as well as in guidance and communications to fhlbanks .

clarifying scope of election outreach activities .

according to fhfa staff , fhlbanks had inquired if the existing regulation would prohibit the banks from conducting outreach to or recruiting of diverse board candidates in the nomination or solicitation process .

fhfa regulation restricts fhlbanks from advocating for a particular member director candidate or influencing the board election for member and independent directors .

according to fhfa staff , to address these concerns , the agency amended the regulation in 2016 to clarify that the banks may conduct outreach to find diverse board director candidates .

fhfa staff added that the regulation amendment also made clear that the banks may fulfill the regulatory requirement to encourage consideration of diversity in nominating or soliciting candidates for board director positions without violating restrictions on advocating for particular director candidates .

guidance .

fhfa provided fhlbanks with guidance related to diversity , including board diversity .

for example , the agency provided guidance on the roles and duties of the banks' omwi officers and the scope of diversity regulations .

fhfa provided the banks a template to report newly required data on the gender and race / ethnicity of board directors .

to help banks prepare their annual reports , in june 2018 fhfa also developed an annual report template that outlines and describes the contents of the required reporting elements .

the template includes sections for individual fhlbanks to present data on board composition by diversity categories and to describe past and future outreach activities and strategies to promote board diversity and outcomes from the bank's activities .

communications .

fhfa has communicated guidance and discussed board diversity issues with fhlbank boards and with staff involved in the banks' board diversity efforts .

for example , fhfa staff gave presentations at meetings during which fhlbank board directors shared information on board diversity efforts .

the staff noted fhfa's omwi director generally attends the semi - annual conferences of the banks' omwi officers , during which she discusses diversity issues such as the roles and responsibilities of these officers and the scope of the fhfa regulations .

furthermore , fhfa omwi and other offices developed and implemented some strategies to help fhlbanks maintain or increase board diversity .

in 2016 , fhfa omwi staff met with fhlbanks and requested that the banks create a bank presidents conference board diversity task force to share practices to promote board diversity .

the staff said that they act as facilitators and informal advisors and may provide technical assistance to the system - wide task force — for example , by developing a list of practices related to board diversity .

also , as encouraged by fhfa , starting in 2017 , each bank has a representative ( a board director or the bank president ) on the task force .

also , based on fhfa's 2016 annual fhlbank board analysis , the fhfa director approved requests from three fhlbanks to add an independent director seat for their 2017 boards to help maintain or increase board diversity .

fhfa extended the offer to the other banks ( except des moines , as its board was undergoing restructuring after the merger with seattle ) .

fhfa staff said in preparation for their 2017 fhlbank board analysis , they informally monitored the gender and minority status of the additional independent director seats filled by the seven banks that accepted the offer .

six of the seats were filled by women ( of whom two were minorities ) and one seat was filled by a minority male , according to fhfa staff .

fhfa staff also told us the fhfa director has some discretion on the number of director seats based on an individual bank's circumstances , including the request to maintain diversity .

for example , in 2018 , one fhlbank requested to retain its female board vice chair to help preserve diversity and institutional knowledge on its board .

fhfa granted the bank's request to keep the director for another year .

fhfa staff told us that fhfa has considered issuing guidance in two areas , but that these areas do not represent immediate priorities for their diversity efforts .

specifically , fhfa omwi staff stated that the office intended to develop an examination module on board diversity , but this is not the office's high priority for 2019 .

as previously noted , fhfa's current examination manual includes a section that covers fhlbanks' workforce and supplier diversity efforts .

but , the manual does not consider board diversity - related issues in as much detail as the supplier and workforce section .

for example , it covers fhfa's review of the quality of corporate governance by board directors and mentions the consideration of diversity for potential board director candidates .

also , the 2015 rule amendments noted that the agency intended to develop guidance to further elaborate on its expectations related to outreach activities and strategies for the banks' board directors .

fhfa staff told us that they would like to focus on ongoing diversity efforts and gather more information before starting new efforts .

at the overall fhlbank board level , the share of female directors increased from 18 percent ( 34 directors ) in 2015 to 23 percent ( 44 directors ) in october 2018 ( see fig .

3 ) .

this represented a continuation of an upward trend .

for example , we previously reported a 16 percent share ( 31 female directors ) in 2014 .

each fhlbank had at least two female board directors in october 2018 , but some boards had higher shares of female directors than others .

as shown in figure 4 , four banks — chicago , des moines , dallas , and pittsburgh — had four or more female board directors ( representing 22 – 38 percent of the boards ) .

in comparison , seven banks had two or three female directors ( representing 14 – 20 percent ) .

additionally , fhlbanks varied in how many female directors were added from 2015 to october 2018 — one bank added two , six each added one , and four added none .

for additional information on the number of board directors by bank and by gender from 2015 to october 2018 , see appendix ii .

women have some representation in board leadership positions .

in october 2018 , two fhlbanks — des moines and pittsburgh — had female vice chairs of their respective board .

another bank ( san francisco ) had a female vice chair of its board in 2016 and 2017 .

in 2015 , we reported that one bank ( atlanta ) had a female board chair .

additionally , each bank's board has committees ( such as the audit committee and the risk management committee ) with committee chairs and vice chairs .

ten of the 11 banks had board committees with at least one female chair or vice chair in october 2018 .

the share of women who chaired board committees was the same as the share of women on the overall fhlbanks boards in october 2018 — 23 percent .

we compared female representation on fhlbank boards to that of other corporate boards and that of senior management in the financial services sector .

women constituted 23 percent of fhlbank boards in october 2018 and 22 percent of boards of the companies in the standard and poor's 500 in 2017 , as reported by institutional shareholder services .

our analysis of the most recently available eeoc data found that the share of women in senior management positions in the financial services industry in 2016 was 29 percent .

the share of women on fhlbank boards was 19 percent in the same year .

senior management in the financial services sector represents a pool of comparable candidates that could provide directors for fhlbank boards .

the share of directors who self - identified as racial / ethnic minorities increased from 2015 to 2017 , but the size of the increase is unclear due to the number of directors who did not report this information .

board directors voluntarily submit demographic information , including race / ethnicity .

some directors might have chosen not to self - identify their race / ethnicity .

at the overall fhlbank board level , the share of directors who self - identified as racial / ethnic minorities increased from 2015 to 2017 ( see fig .

5 ) .

eleven percent ( 20 directors ) of fhlbank board directors self - identified as racial / ethnic minorities in 2015 and 15 percent ( 30 directors ) in 2017 .

four percent ( 7 directors ) did not self - identify in 2015 and 8 percent ( 15 directors ) in 2017 .

the increase in the number of directors who identified as racial / ethnic minorities shows an upward trend from 10 percent ( 19 directors ) in 2014 , as we reported in 2015 .

the number of directors who self - identified as racial / ethnic minorities varied by bank .

as shown in figure 6 , all 11 fhlbanks had at least one minority director on the board in 2017 , and six banks had three or more minority directors .

ten of the 11 banks each added one minority director during 2015 – 2017 .

for additional information on the number of board directors by bank and by race / ethnicity in 2015 – 2017 , see appendix ii .

more specifically , as seen in table 4 , in 2017 , 9 percent ( 18 directors ) identified as african - american , 4 percent ( 8 directors ) identified as hispanic , 2 percent ( 3 directors ) identified as asian , and 1 percent ( 1 director ) identified as “other.” racial / ethnic minorities have limited representation in board leadership positions .

as of october 2018 , one fhlbank had a vice chair of its board who identified as a minority .

in 2017 , another bank had one vice chair of its board who identified as a minority .

we compared the fhlbank boards' share of racial / ethnic minorities to those of corporate boards and senior management in the financial services sector .

in 2017 , 15 percent of the fhlbank board directors identified as racial / ethnic minorities , as previously noted .

this compares to 14 percent on boards of directors of companies in the standard and poor's 500 in 2017 , according to institutional shareholder services , and 12 percent in senior management of the financial services industry in 2016 , based on our analysis of eeoc data .

in 2016 , the share of minority directors on fhlbank boards was 13 percent .

board demographic data collection processes vary by fhlbank , which may contribute to the differences in the number of directors who did not self - identify their gender , race / ethnicity , or both .

fhfa has not reviewed the banks' varying processes to determine whether some processes were more effective , such as whether the practices allowed banks to more effectively identify and follow up with directors who may have forgotten to respond .

all directors at three banks self - reported their gender and race / ethnicity in 2015 – 2017 , but some directors at the other eight banks did not self - identify this information .

however , we could not determine whether those directors deliberately chose not to self - report this information or inadvertently did not respond to the data collection forms or questions .

as allowed by fhfa regulation , fhlbanks varied in the data collection forms they used , questions they asked , and methods they used to distribute forms to board directors to obtain self - reported gender and race / ethnicity information .

for example , the three banks with complete data from all directors each used different data collection forms .

one bank collected gender and race / ethnicity as a voluntary section of its annual board director skills assessment , which was filled out by each director .

two banks distributed a separate data collection form at a board director meeting or through an online survey , which might have included a mechanism for tracking which directors had not responded to the survey .

the other eight banks , which had incomplete demographic data , also used varying data collection processes .

of these , four banks distributed their data collection forms during a board meeting or through an e - mail , and the other four banks used online surveys .

of the 11 banks , six included an option on their forms to mark “opt not to self - identify,” while five included similar language as part of the form indicating that completing the form is voluntary .

although some banks had similar approaches to data collection , such as using an online survey , it is unclear whether certain approaches helped some banks to obtain more complete data despite directors' right to opt out of self - reporting demographic information .

fhfa has implemented some efforts on improving the quality of the data fhlbanks report to the agency , but fhfa staff told us that such efforts have not included a review of how the banks collect board director demographic data .

for example , fhfa created templates to help banks report board data and board - related content , and its data reporting manual focused on reporting data related to the banks' workforce , supplier base , and financial transactions .

however , none of these documents discussed processes for collecting board director demographic data .

according to fhlbank staff , fhfa's instructions on board director data collection are limited to what is stated in the regulation .

that is , banks should collect data on their board directors' gender and race / ethnicity using eeoc categories , and such data should be voluntarily provided by the directors without personally identifiable information .

fhfa's 2015 regulation amendments require fhlbanks to compare the board demographic data with prior year's data and provide a narrative of the analysis .

fhfa also stated in the amendments that it intended to use the director data to establish a baseline to analyze future trends of board diversity .

additionally , federal internal control standards state that agency management should use quality information to achieve their objectives .

quality information would include complete and accurate information that management can use to make informed decisions in achieving key objectives .

by obtaining a better understanding of the different processes fhlbanks use to collect board demographic data , fhfa and the banks could better determine which processes or practices could contribute to more complete data .

for example , there may be practices that could help banks more effectively follow up with directors who might have missed the data collection forms or questions .

more complete board demographic data could help fhfa and the banks more effectively analyze data trends over time and demonstrate the banks' efforts to maintain or increase board diversity .

fhlbanks report some challenges that may slow or limit their efforts to increase board diversity , which include low levels of diversity in the financial sector ; member institutions not prioritizing diversity ; balancing the need for diversity with retaining institutional knowledge ; and competition for women and minority candidates .

despite these challenges , the banks have taken several steps to help increase board diversity .

according to fhlbank representatives , including board directors , the fhlbank boards face challenges that may slow or limit their efforts to increase diversity , including the following: low levels of diversity in the financial sector .

twelve representatives from nine fhlbanks told us that the pool of eligible women and minority board candidates is small in the banking and financial sector .

for example , five representatives emphasized that the majority of member institutions have chief executive officers ( ceo ) who are white males .

in particular , one director told us that out of the hundreds of member institutions affiliated with his fhlbank , he knew of only six female ceos .

directors representing five banks also noted that the pool of eligible , diverse candidates in senior management positions in the financial services sector can be even smaller in certain geographic areas .

as a result , it can be particularly challenging for some banks to fill member director seats because , by statute , candidates for a given fhlbank board must come from member institutions in the geographic area that the board seat represents .

for example , one director said that the pool of such candidates is especially small in rural areas .

in 2015 , fhfa told us that the overall low levels of diversity in the financial services sector , including at fhlbank member institutions , increased the challenges for improving board diversity .

however , representatives of corporate governance organizations with whom we spoke told us that the financial services sector does not face unique challenges .

representatives also said that qualified women and minority candidates are present in the marketplace .

our analysis of 2016 eeoc data found that the representation of women in senior management in the financial services sector was within 1 percentage point of the share of women in senior management in the private sector overall , and minority representation was within 4 percentage points .

member institutions may not always prioritize diversity in director elections .

as previously discussed , member institutions nominate member director candidates and vote for the member director and independent director candidates .

ten representatives from eight fhlbanks stated that member institutions may prioritize other considerations over diversity when they nominate and vote on board candidates , such as name recognition or a preference for candidates who are ceos .

one director told us that the member banks may not be as interested in diversity as the fhlbanks .

another director emphasized that fhlbanks are trying to change attitudes and embed diversity in the member institutions' operations .

he characterized this process as a marathon , not a sprint .

board directors with whom we spoke also stressed that fhfa regulations do not allow the fhlbank boards to exert influence over how member institutions vote .

board directors can emphasize the importance of diversity to member institutions but cannot in their official capacity campaign for specific candidates .

balancing the need for diversity with retaining institutional knowledge .

directors from five banks told us that they aim to balance bringing in new women or minority directors with retaining the valuable institutional knowledge of incumbent directors .

one director added that new board directors face a steep learning curve .

thus , the directors at some banks will recruit new directors only after allowing incumbent directors to reach their maximum number of terms ( which could translate to several years ) .

as we reported in 2015 , fhfa staff acknowledged that low turnover , term lengths , and the need to balance diversity with required skills posed challenges to the fhlbank board diversity .

in our 2016 report on women on corporate boards , relevant stakeholders acknowledged this as a challenge because directors with longer tenure possess knowledge about a company that newer directors cannot be expected to possess .

competition for women and minority candidates .

board directors from five fhlbanks told us that they face competition as they seek to recruit women and minority candidates .

for example , a director from one bank told us that his board encouraged a potential female candidate to run for a director seat .

however , the candidate felt she could not accept the opportunity because of her existing responsibilities on the boards of two publicly traded companies .

while these challenges can apply to member and independent directors , representatives from all 11 fhlbanks emphasized that it can be particularly challenging to find and elect female or minority member directors .

our analysis of fhlbank board director data confirmed that across 11 fhlbank boards , female representation was lower among member directors ( 13 directors or 12 percent ) than independent directors ( 31 directors or 36 percent ) in october 2018 .

fhfa stated in this review and in 2015 that they are aware of the potential difficulty of identifying diverse candidates for member directors and that greater board diversity likely would be achieved with independent directors .

since 2015 , fhlbanks have taken actions to help increase board diversity , including developing and implementing practices and strategies that target board diversity in general and member directors specifically .

as previously discussed , at the request of fhfa , the banks established the bank presidents conference board diversity task force .

the purpose of the task force is to develop recommendations for advancing board diversity and to enhance collaboration and information sharing across fhlbank boards .

each bank is represented by a board director or the bank president .

representatives meet regularly to discuss challenges , recommend practices , and receive training .

one task force representative told us that her participation on the taskforce has helped demonstrate to her board and bank that diversity matters .

others mentioned that the ability to share practices and learn from other banks was a great benefit .

as part of its work , the task force developed a list of practices that fhlbanks have used or could use to improve board diversity ( see text box ) .

according to bank staff , the list was approved by the presidents of each bank and distributed to bank staff .

the practices can be generally summarized into three categories — emphasizing the importance of diversity ; assessing skills diversity ; and seeking new ways to find candidates — which are generally similar to the commonly cited practices for improving board diversity we identified in 2015 .

summary of practices developed by bank presidents conference board diversity task force of the federal home loan banks include references to diversity on the bank website , in appropriate publications , in presentations about the bank , and particularly in all election materials .

educate current board members on the business case for diversity .

educate member institutions on the business case for diversity through member meetings , newsletter articles , etc .

to help develop a more diverse member base and help groom new leaders .

perform a skills assessment of current board skills and areas of expertise and determine skill sets and expertise needed .

review the term limits of current directors and determine the possible loss of continuity if multiple incumbent directors leave the board in a short period of time .

build a pool of diverse member and independent candidates .

conduct outreach to regional and national business organizations , such as trade associations , women and minority business groups , and professional organizations , to ask for referrals of possible candidates and form relationships prior to a board election .

seek an additional independent board seat from the federal housing finance agency .

example of diversity statement in an election announcement for a federal home loan bank the federal home loan bank of new york ( fhlbny ) included the following statement in its 2017 director election announcement package: “the fhlbny's board of directors consists of a talented group of dedicated individuals that benefits from , among other things , demographic ( including gender and racial ) diversity , and we expect that this will continue in the future .

as you consider potential nominations for member directorships and give thought to persons who might be interested in independent directorships , please keep diversity in mind .

your participation in this year's director election process is greatly appreciated , and will help continue to keep the board and the fhlbny diverse and strong.” emphasizing the importance of diversity .

all 11 fhlbanks included statements in their 2017 election announcements that encouraged voting member institutions to consider diversity during the board election process .

six banks expressly addressed gender , racial , and ethnic diversity in their announcements .

one female director with whom we spoke said that she was encouraged to run for a board seat after reading an election announcement in 2013 that specifically called for candidates with diverse backgrounds .

all 11 fhlbanks also referenced their commitment to diversity on their websites , including posting diversity and inclusion policies , describing diversity missions , or including board statements on diversity .

directors we interviewed from all 11 fhlbanks told us that their bank conducted or planned to conduct diversity training for board directors .

the training sessions covered topics such as the business case for diversity and unconscious bias .

additionally , board directors from two banks discussed efforts to encourage member institutions to increase diversity , such as holding a panel on the importance of diversity at the annual member conference .

in 2015 , we found that demonstrating a commitment to diversity in ways similar to these is a first step towards addressing diversity in an organization .

assessing skills diversity .

nine fhlbanks performed board skills assessments annually or biennially .

these assessments asked directors to evaluate their knowledge of specific topic areas .

fhfa regulation allows each bank to annually conduct a skills and experience assessment and , if applicable , inform members before elections of particular qualifications that could benefit the board .

in 2015 , we found that conducting a skills assessment was a commonly cited practice for boards seeking to increase representation of women and minorities .

the other two fhlbanks conducted board self - assessments annually , focused on board effectiveness and organization , but did not evaluate the skills of their individual directors .

all 11 fhlbanks also reported regularly reviewing the remaining terms of current directors to determine the possible loss of continuity .

seeking new ways to find candidates .

representatives from 10 fhlbanks noted that their banks maintain a pool of diverse director candidates for future open positions .

fhlbanks described using various methods to build these pools .

all 11 banks described outreach to trade organizations , industry groups , universities , and nonprofit organizations when looking to identify women and minority candidates .

for example , fhlbank of pittsburgh identified 15 organizations in its district that actively promote diversity and the inclusion of women and minorities in business to specifically target in 2017 .

directors from seven banks also reported hiring a search firm or consultant to help them identify women and minority candidates .

these activities are consistent with commonly cited practices described in our 2015 work that boards can use to reach out beyond the typical pool of applicants .

as previously mentioned , seven fhlbanks requested or were offered an additional independent director seat by fhfa .

according to fhfa staff , four of the seats were filled by white females , two were filled by minority females , and one was filled by a minority male .

example of a diversity practice focused on member directors in 2017 , the federal home loan bank of san francisco developed a member director diversity outreach plan .

the plan included eight steps that provide timelines and specific assignments for directors and bank management .

for example , steps include conducting early outreach to trade organizations where women and minority directors might participate , individual director outreach to potential candidates , and developing a list of prospective candidates in case of vacancy appointments .

following the implementation of this plan , member institutions elected one female director and one minority director to fill the vacant member director seats .

fill interim seats with women and minority candidates .

fhlbanks can appoint women or minority candidates to fill interim member director seats .

by regulation , when a director leaves the board in mid - term , the remaining board directors may elect a new director for the remaining portion of the term .

for example , the fhlbank of pittsburgh reported electing a minority director in 2017 to fill a vacant member director seat .

one director told us that when a female or minority director is elected for an interim term , the election increases the likelihood of the director being elected by the member institutions for a following full term .

conduct mentoring and outreach .

fhlbank board directors also can use their personal networks to conduct outreach and mentor potential candidates .

current directors can pledge to identify and encourage potential women and minority candidates to run for the board .

for example , one director told us that his board emphasizes the need for directors to pay attention to potential women and minority candidates they meet .

this director said he had personally contacted qualified potential candidates and asked them to run .

another director noted that women and minority directors are likely to know other qualified candidates with diverse backgrounds .

these directors can identify and refer individuals in their networks .

another director emphasized the importance of member directors conducting outreach to member institutions .

member directors have the most interaction with the leadership of member institutions and can engage and educate them on the importance of nominating and electing diverse member directors .

look beyond ceos .

additionally , fhlbanks can search for women and minority candidates by looking beyond member bank ceos .

by regulation , member directors can be any officer or director of a member institution , but there is a tendency to favor ceos for board positions , according to board directors , representatives of corporate governance organizations , and academic researchers with whom we spoke .

the likelihood of identifying a woman or minority candidate increases when member institutions look beyond ceos to other officers , such as chief financial officers or board directors .

for example , the fhlbank of des moines expanded its outreach to women and minority candidates to include board directors at member institutions .

in 2017 , a female director who is a board member of her member institution was elected .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 emphasized the importance of diversity at the fhlbank system , and fhfa and fhlbanks have undertaken efforts to encourage diversity at the banks' boards .

in particular , fhfa plans to use data it collects on the gender and race / ethnicity of board directors as a baseline to analyze trends in board diversity .

while fhfa regulation allows directors to choose not to report this information , the banks' varying data collection processes did not always allow banks to accurately account for missing information ( as in the case of directors forgetting to respond to the data questions or fill out forms ) .

reviewing the processes the banks use to collect the demographic data could help fhfa and the banks identify practices to produce data that would better allow fhfa to track trends in board diversity .

fhfa could work with fhlbanks ( potentially through the system - wide board diversity task force ) to conduct such a review .

the director of fhfa's office of minority and women inclusion , in consultation with fhlbanks , should conduct a review on each bank's processes for collecting gender and race / ethnicity data from boards of directors and communicate effective practices to fhlbanks .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to fhfa and each of the 11 fhlbanks for review and comment .

in its comments , reproduced in appendix iii , fhfa agreed with our recommendation .

fhfa commented that it intends to engage with fhlbanks' leadership in 2019 to discuss board data collection issue and address our recommendation .

fhfa also stated that it plans to request that the board diversity task force explore the feasibility and practicability for fhlbanks to adopt processes that can lead to more complete data on board director demographics .

in addition , four fhlbanks provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

the other seven fhlbanks did not have any comments .

as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date .

at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the acting director of fhfa , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or ortiza@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .

this report examines the ( 1 ) extent to which the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) has taken steps to encourage board diversity at the federal home loan banks ( fhlbank ) ; ( 2 ) trends in diversity composition ( gender , race , and ethnicity ) for the boards of individual fhlbanks ; and ( 3 ) challenges fhlbanks face and practices they use in recruiting and maintaining a diverse board .

while diversity has many dimensions , this report focuses on gender , race , and ethnicity .

to understand the steps fhfa has taken to encourage fhlbank board diversity , we reviewed relevant laws and regulations related to fhlbank boards , including fhfa regulations on director elections and diversity reporting requirements .

for example , we reviewed the relevant sections in the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 pertaining to fhfa and the banks and fhfa's 2010 minority and women inclusion rule and its 2015 amendments .

we also reviewed other fhfa and bank documentation related to board director elections and diversity considerations .

for example , we reviewed fhfa's annual board director analysis for 2016 – 2018 to identify actions the agency took to help maintain or increase the number of female or minority directors at the fhlbank boards .

additionally , we interviewed fhfa staff to understand the agency's role in overseeing fhlbank board diversity and the agency's efforts in helping the banks maintain or increase board diversity .

to describe trends in fhlbank board diversity , we analyzed gender and race / ethnicity data self - reported by board directors in fhlbanks' annual reports to fhfa as of the end of 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 .

the banks' annual reports use the gender and race / ethnicity classifications from the employer information report ( eeo - 1 ) of the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) .

the eeo - 1 report race / ethnicity categories are hispanic or latino , white , black or african - american , native hawaiian or other pacific islander , asian , native american or alaska native , and two or more races .

the hispanic or latino category in eeo - 1 incorporates hispanics or latinos of all races .

for our report , we used the following categories: hispanic , white , african - american , asian , and “other.” we included only non - hispanic members under white , african - american , asian , and “other.” we included asian american , native hawaiian or pacific islander under the asian category , and we included native american or alaskan native , and two or more races under “other.” to provide more recent data on gender composition , we also analyzed data on the gender of directors who were on boards as of october 17 , 2018 .

specifically , we compiled a list of board directors who started or continued their terms on the boards in 2018 , based on board director information from the banks' 2017 form 10-k filings with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) .

the filings include the names and brief biographies of board directors , which we used to derive the gender data for directors .

for example , if directors were referred to as “mr.” in the form 10-ks , we counted them as male .

if they were referred to as “ms.,” we counted them as female .

we then confirmed with each fhlbank the compiled list of board directors , as of october 17 , 2018 .

because some directors did not self - identify their gender in 2015 – 2017 annual reports , we also used information in the banks' 2014 – 2016 form 10-ks to derive data on the gender of the banks' board directors .

as a result , we were able to report the gender information for all fhlbank board of directors from 2015 through october 2018 .

we separately requested the names of the chairs and vice chairs for the committees of each bank's board as of october 26 , 2018 .

we then derived the gender of the chairs and vice chairs for these committees based on the information in the banks' form 10-ks .

to analyze data on board director race / ethnicity , we relied on fhlbanks' 2015 – 2017 annual reports .

however , we were not able to use banks' form 10-ks to derive data on race / ethnicity for board directors who did not self - identify race / ethnicity in the annual reports because the 10-ks do not include such information .

we also requested and analyzed from each bank data on the gender and race / ethnicity of their board chair and vice chair as of october 17 , 2018 .

we assessed the reliability of the data from the banks' annual reports and form 10-ks through electronic testing , a review of documentation , and interviews with knowledgeable agency staff , and we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for describing the overall trends and composition of gender and race / ethnicity at the fhlbank boards , except the data for directors who did not self - identify their race / ethnicity , as discussed in the report .

we also compared the most recently available demographic information on fhlbank board directors with the demographic composition of senior management in the financial services industry and the overall private sector ( excluding financial services ) , based on data from the 2016 eeo - 1 report from eeoc .

senior management in the financial services industry represents a pool of comparable candidates that could provide directors for fhlbank boards .

the eeo - 1 report data are annually submitted to eeoc by most private - sector firms with 100 or more employees .

the data include gender and race / ethnicity of the employees by job category .

we included workforce from all sites of multi - establishment companies ( companies with multiple locations ) .

consequently , the analysis included in this report may not match the analysis found on eeoc's website , which excludes workforce from sites of multi - establishment companies with less than 50 employees .

in our analysis of senior management - level diversity in the financial services sector , we included companies in the finance and insurance industry categorized under code 52 of the north american industry classification system .

we assessed the reliability of the data from the eeo - 1 report through electronic testing , a review of documentation , and interviews with knowledgeable agency staff .

we determined these data to be sufficiently reliable for comparing the composition of gender and race / ethnicity in the financial services sector and the overall private sector with that of the fhlbank boards .

furthermore , to provide a general comparison of fhlbank board diversity composition with corporate boards of u.s. companies , we reviewed research that discussed data related to diversity at corporate boards of u.s. companies in recent years .

in addition , from each fhlbank , we requested and reviewed the instrument they used to collect gender and race / ethnicity information from their board directors .

we also obtained and reviewed information on the methods the banks used to distribute and collect the data collection instruments , and any instructions fhfa provided to the banks or that the banks provided to the board directors on collecting this information .

we reviewed relevant information from the banks' annual reports and relevant regulations on collecting and submitting board directors' gender and race / ethnicity information .

we also compared the banks' data collection processes with relevant federal internal control standards .

to determine the challenges the fhlbanks face and practices they use to recruit and maintain a diverse board , we interviewed staff at fhlbanks and fhfa to learn about the bank presidents conference board diversity task force and the list of diversity practices compiled by the task force .

we reviewed and analyzed the banks' 2017 annual reports to learn about the most recent practices the banks implemented .

we also reviewed the banks' websites and bank documents , such as election materials and skills assessments for all 11 banks .

in addition , we conducted semi - structured interviews with 10 board directors and one bank president , who act as representatives on the system - wide board diversity task force .

we also conducted semi - structured interviews with a nongeneralizable sample of fhlbank board chairs from six banks ( atlanta , boston , des moines , pittsburgh , san francisco , and topeka ) .

we selected these banks to achieve variation in board diversity composition ( share of women and minority directors ) , asset size , and geographic locations .

in these interviews , we asked directors and staff about the challenges their banks faced as they sought to increase or maintain diverse boards .

we also asked about their participation on the task force , the task force diversity practices , and any other practices their banks had implemented related to board diversity efforts .

to determine if the task force diversity practices generally followed commonly cited practices used to improve board diversity , we compared the task force practices against commonly cited practices we identified in previous work in 2015 .

to verify that the practices we identified in 2015 were still relevant and useful , we interviewed three academics and representatives of four organizations that advocate for board diversity , including gender and racial / ethnic diversity .

we selected these external stakeholders based on their research and experience related to increasing board diversity and referrals from others knowledgeable in the field .

in our interviews with external stakeholders , we also asked about the challenges that financial organizations or other publicly traded companies may face as they work to increase or maintain board diversity .

we compared these answers to the challenges that fhlbank representatives described .

we conducted this performance audit from july 2018 to february 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

anna maria ortiz , ( 202 ) 512-8678 , ortiza@gao.gov .

in additional to the individual named above , kay kuhlman ( assistant director ) , anna chung ( analyst in charge ) , laurie chin , kaitlan doying , jill lacey , moon parks , barbara roesmann , jessica sandler , and jena sinkfield made key contributions to this report .

