medicaid , a joint federal - state program for certain low - income individuals , is an important source of health coverage for millions of children , adults , aged individuals ( individuals aged 65 and older ) , and those with disabilities .

in fiscal year 2012 , the medicaid program spent approximately $435.5 billion to provide health care services to about 72.6 million beneficiaries .

additionally , medicaid enrollment is likely to grow within states that choose to expand eligibility for medicaid in response to the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( ppaca ) .

the congressional budget office estimated that , as a result of ppaca , 10 million additional people could be enrolled in medicaid and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) by 2016 compared with 2012 .

within medicaid , there are two groups of beneficiaries — one composed of individuals who are only enrolled in medicaid , and another composed of individuals enrolled in both medicaid and medicare , research on commonly referred to as dual - eligible beneficiaries.medicaid enrollment and spending has demonstrated that a small percentage of beneficiaries account for a disproportionately large share of medicaid expenditures .

understanding states' expenditures for both high - expenditure populations — those dually eligible and those who are medicaid - only — could enhance efforts to manage medicaid expenditures for particular types of beneficiaries .

you asked us to provide information on the demographics and service usage of different types of high - expenditure medicaid beneficiaries , noting that less attention has been paid to the demographics and service utilization of high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries compared with dual - eligible beneficiaries .

in this report , we examine ( 1 ) states' spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries , both medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries , compared with other medicaid beneficiaries ; ( 2 ) the characteristics associated with high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries ; and ( 3 ) the services that contributed to high expenditures for medicaid - only beneficiaries , and how they compared with service usage by all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

to examine states' spending for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries compared with other medicaid beneficiaries , we used data from the fiscal year 2009 medicaid statistical information system ( msis ) annual person summary file .

we first calculated the total number of medicaid enrollees and total medicaid expenditures in each state we separately for both the medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries.then determined the number of beneficiaries whose total expenditures fell within the top 5 percent of total expenditures within each state for each of these groups , designating them as high - expenditure beneficiaries .

finally , we calculated the total expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries and all other medicaid - only beneficiaries in each state , and combined these data at a national level .

to examine the characteristics associated with high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries , we determined the percentage of high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries with key characteristics and used logistic regression to examine the effect of having key beneficiary characteristics on the probability of being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary .

the key beneficiary characteristics represented as independent variables in our logistic regression model included: eligibility group ( disabled , child , adult , aged ) , age , gender , race / ethnicity , geographic location , participation in capitated managed care , period of enrollment in medicaid ( whether full year or partial year ) , as well as whether the beneficiaries had any of five health conditions or had received any of two services .

finally , our logistic regression models included characteristics of states' medicaid programs , such as their spending on high - expenditure beneficiaries and long - term services and supports ( ltss ) in non - institutional settings ( also called home and community based services ) and capitated managed care penetration rates.beneficiary population , as well as the probabilities that demonstrate the association of each characteristic with the likelihood of being in the high - expenditure group .

we report percentages that describe the high - expenditure to examine the services that contributed to high expenditures for medicaid - only beneficiaries and how they compared with service usage by all other medicaid - only beneficiaries , we determined the distribution of expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries .

the data allowed us to describe patterns of usage for the following six service categories: ( 1 ) hospital care , ( 2 ) non - hospital acute care , ( 3 ) drugs , ( 4 ) managed care and premium assistance , settings , and ( 6 ) ltss in institutional settings .

we compared their distribution to those of all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

 ( 5 ) ltss in non - institutional we assessed the reliability of the 2009 msis annual summary file data we received from the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) by performing appropriate electronic data checks and by interviewing agency officials who were knowledgeable about the data .

this allowed us to determine that the data were suitable for our purposes .

we retained approximately 64.5 million of the original 71.6 million records ( 90 percent ) for our analysis ; the majority of exclusions were due to unknown eligibility status .

for a more complete description of our methodology , see appendix i .

managed care and premium assistance describe medicaid health insurance payments made toward hmo / capitated risk - based , primary care case management , and prepaid managed care health plans .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 through february 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform our work to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

at the federal level , cms , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for overseeing the design and operation of states' medicaid programs , and states administer their respective medicaid programs' day - to - day operations .

in conformance with federal requirements , states establish beneficiaries' eligibility for medicaid , and determine the services that will be provided to beneficiaries and how they will be provided in their state .

eligibility for medicaid is based on a variety of categorical and financial requirements .

historically , categories of medicaid eligibility included pregnant women , low - income children and their parents , individuals who are aged , and individuals with disabilities .

in 2014 , certain low - income adults who did not fall into one of these groups may be eligible for medicaid in states that chose to expand coverage to these individuals under ppaca .

dual - eligible beneficiaries , who are eligible for both medicaid and medicare , generally fall into two categories: ( 1 ) low - income seniors ( individuals aged 65 years old and over ) and ( 2 ) individuals with disabilities under the age of 65 .

while some characteristics of state programs vary , medicaid generally covers a wide range of health care services .

these include hospital care ; outpatient services , such as physician services , laboratory and other diagnostic tests ; prescription drugs ; dental care ; and ltss in institutions non - institutional ltss include home health and and in the community.personal care services , among other services .

medicaid is the nation's primary payer for ltss , and provided approximately 41 percent of ltss funding in the united states in 2010 .

as we have previously reported , nearly all states enroll some medicaid beneficiaries in a form of managed care .

the scope of services they provide and the populations they enroll in managed care .

some states contract with managed care organizations to provide the full range of covered medicaid services to certain enrollees , for which they pay a set , or capitated , amount per member per month .

alternatively , states may rely on arrangements , such as limited benefit plans — which provide a limited set of services , including dental care or behavioral health services — or primary care case management programs in which enrollees are assigned a primary care provider who is responsible for providing primary care services and for coordinating other needed health care .

states often provide long - term care services outside of managed care arrangements .

gao , medicaid: states' use of managed care , gao - 12-872r ( washington , d.c.: aug. 17 , 2012 ) .

top 10 percent of medicaid spending were responsible for 51 percent of medicaid spending on dual - eligible beneficiaries .

the research also indicates that there is a subset of medicaid - only beneficiaries who are very costly , such as those with institutional care needs or chronic conditions .

one study showed that high - expenditure medicaid beneficiaries in 2001 included subgroups from each eligibility category , with the elderly and disabled making up the greatest shares of this high - expenditure group .

the largest portions of spending were for hospital care for children and adults , intermediate care for individuals with disabilities , and nursing home care for the elderly .

showed that annual per capita expenditures ranged from $8,000 to nearly $16,000 for medicaid beneficiaries with chronic conditions , including asthma , coronary heart disease , congestive heart failure , diabetes , or hypertension .

this study also noted that annual per capita expenditures may double and sometimes triple when single chronic conditions are coupled with mental illness and a drug or alcohol disorder .

intermediate care included intermediate care facility services for persons with intellectual disabilities , services in institutions for mental disease for the elderly , and inpatient psychiatric care under age 21 .

kaiser family foundation , medicaid's high cost enrollees ( washington , d.c.: march 2006 ) .

beneficiaries ( less than 1 percent of the total medicaid population ) and 21.9 percent of total medicaid expenditures on other dual - eligible beneficiaries ( 13.8 percent of total medicaid beneficiaries ) .

 ( see fig .

1 ) .

at the beneficiary level , per - capita spending on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries greatly exceeded that of all other medicaid - only beneficiaries , but was less than what was spent on high - expenditure dual - eligible beneficiaries .

 ( see table 1. ) .

overall , per capita spending by states on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries was approximately 18 times higher than per capita spending on all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

this was similar to the pattern of spending for dual - eligible beneficiaries , with per capita spending significantly higher for high - expenditure dual - eligible beneficiaries compared with all other dual - eligible beneficiaries .

at the state level , there was wide variation in spending per capita on high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

per - capita expenditures by state per beneficiary ranged from $20,896 to $83,365 .

key characteristics — such as having a disability , having certain conditions , delivery / childbirth , and residing in a ltc facility — were strongly associated with being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary .

these key characteristics had consistently strong associations with being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary even when the data were examined separately for each eligibility group .

we found that about two - thirds of the high - expenditure group was comprised of beneficiaries who were eligible for medicaid due to disability .

only beneficiary was 18.3 percent for disabled medicaid - only beneficiaries , which was higher than for any other eligibility group .

 ( see table 2. ) .

in contrast , non - disabled children and adult beneficiaries each had less than a 3 percent probability of being in the high - expenditure group , but made up 16.1 and 15 percent , respectively , of the high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries .

overall , hospital services and ltss represented the bulk of spending for high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries — almost 65 percent .

in contrast , payments to managed care organizations and premium assistance constituted the largest proportion of expenditures for all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

in addition , when we examined medicaid - only high - expenditure and other beneficiaries separately by eligibility group , the differences in service use were generally consistent , but the proportion of expenditures for the different services varied .

separately examining high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries in ltc institutions and beneficiaries with spending in the top 1 percent of expenditures showed that these beneficiaries had the highest spending for hospital services and ltss .

for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries as a whole , hospital services comprised 30.6 percent , ltss in non - institutional settings comprised 24.3 percent , and ltss in institutions comprised 9.7 percent of their expenditures .

other expenditures were for drugs , managed care and premium assistance , and non - hospital acute care .

in contrast to high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries , the largest share of total expenditures for all other medicaid - only beneficiaries was for managed care and premium assistance ( 57.2 percent ) , followed by non - hospital acute care ( 16.6 percent ) , hospital services ( 11.9 percent ) , drugs ( 9.7 percent ) and ltss in non - institutional settings ( 4.5 percent ) .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

the general pattern of greater hospital and ltss service use by high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries compared with greater spending on managed care and premium support by all other medicaid - only beneficiaries was consistent across eligibility groups .

however , there were some differences in expenditures by eligibility category among high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries and all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

beneficiary profile beneficiary a was a 61-year - old disabled african american male in 2009 , with $73,539 in total medicaid expenditures in that year .

he was not enrolled in managed care at any point in the year .

he was indicated to have diabetes , a mental health condition , and resided in a long - term care facility .

his expenditures were highly concentrated in ltss non - institutional care ( 81.9 percent ) .

about 10 percent of his expenditures were for prescription drugs .

disabled: for high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries in the disabled category , ltss non - institutional ( 27.5 percent ) , hospital ( 24.8 percent ) , and ltss institutional services ( 11.9 percent ) represent almost two - thirds of their expenditures .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

in contrast , all other medicaid - only beneficiaries in the disabled category had over half of their expenditures for managed care and premium assistance ( 52.1 percent ) , and had almost no ltss institutional expenditures ( 0.1 percent ) .

overall , 79.5 percent of expenditures for medicaid - only beneficiaries in the disabled group were for the high - expenditure beneficiaries .

children: medicaid - only children had almost no ltss institutional expenditures ( less than 1 percent ) , whether in the high - expenditure group or not .

 ( see fig .

5. ) .

high - expenditure medicaid - only children had 70 percent of their expenditures for hospital ( 46.1 percent ) and ltss non - institutional services ( 23.9 percent ) .

for all other medicaid - only children , over 58 percent of their expenditures were for managed care and premium assistance , followed by non - hospital acute ( 18.8 percent ) and hospital services ( 9.8 percent ) .

about 22 percent of expenditures for medicaid - only children were for those in the high - expenditure group .

adults: similar to children , medicaid - only adult beneficiaries had almost no ltss institutional expenditures ( less than 1 percent of each of their total expenditures ) whether in the high - expenditure group or not .

 ( see fig .

6. ) .

hospital services represented over half the expenditures for high - expenditure adult beneficiaries .

the remaining expenditures were almost equally distributed between non - hospital acute care ( 15.2 percent ) , drugs ( 14.2 percent ) , and managed care and premium support ( 14.1 percent ) .

ltss non - institutional services were a relatively small part of their total expenditures ( 3.4 percent ) .

the greatest share of expenditures for all other medicaid - only adult beneficiaries were for managed care and premium support ( 58.4 percent ) followed by hospital ( 16.2 percent ) and non - hospital acute care ( 15.4 percent ) services .

about 22 percent of expenditures for medicaid - only adult beneficiaries were for the high - expenditure group .

aged: for the aged , both high - expenditure and all other medicaid - only beneficiaries had ltc institutional expenditures , but the share of those expenditures differed — 28.2 percent compared with 4.2 percent .

among the high - expenditure medicaid - only aged beneficiaries , hospital ( 28.6 percent ) , ltss institutional ( 28.2 percent ) , and ltss non - institutional ( 15.4 percent ) services represented over 70 percent of total expenditures .

 ( see fig.7. ) .

for all other medicaid - only aged beneficiaries , managed care and premium support represented 48.3 percent of their expenditures , followed by drugs ( 18.2 percent ) , hospital ( 13.7 percent ) , and non - hospital acute care ( 10.6 percent ) services .

over 73 percent of expenditures for the medicaid - only aged were for those in the high - expenditure group .

ltss spending differed for high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries living in ltc facilities and those living in the community .

 ( see fig .

8. ) .

among high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries residing in a ltc facility , expenditures for ltss in institutional settings ( 50 percent ) , hospital services ( 27.2 percent ) , and ltss in non - institutional settings ( 7.3 percent ) accounted for almost 85 percent of their total expenditures .

among high - expenditure beneficiaries not residing in a ltc facility , expenditures for ltss in non - institutional settings ( 28.4 percent ) were much greater , and expenditures for hospital services were similar ( 31.4 percent ) — and these two services represented almost 60 percent of their total expenditures .

in addition , the percentage of expenditures on drugs and non - hospital acute care was greater for high expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries who were not living in ltc facilities .

while hospital services were the largest expenditure category among high - expenditure beneficiaries not residing in a ltc facility , per - capita hospital expenditures for beneficiaries residing in a ltc facility were over two times as much ( $21,589 compared with $9,978 ) .

 ( see table 4. ) .

beneficiaries with expenditures within the top 1 percent for their state — the top one - fifth of the high - expenditure group — had a greater share of spending on hospital services , ltss in non - institutional settings , and ltss in institutional settings compared with all of the high - expenditure beneficiaries .

spending on these services comprised almost 80 percent of the total expenditures for beneficiaries with expenditures within the top 1 percent for their state .

 ( see app .

iv for complete table of results , and app .

v for the demographic characteristics and spending for some randomly selected beneficiaries in that group. ) .

hhs reviewed a draft of this report and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs and to interested congressional committees .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vi .

this appendix describes the methodology for addressing three objectives that examine: ( 1 ) states' spending for high - expenditure beneficiaries , both medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries , compared with other medicaid beneficiaries ; ( 2 ) the characteristics associated with high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries ; and ( 3 ) the services that contributed to high expenditures for medicaid - only beneficiaries , and how they compared with service usage by all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

we analyzed data from the fiscal year 2009 medicaid statistical information system ( msis ) annual person summary file .

the summary file consolidates individual beneficiaries' claims for the fiscal year , including data on their enrollment and information on their expenditures .

the summary file also includes beneficiary specific information regarding enrollment categories , expenditures among six categories , dual eligibility status , age , gender , payment arrangements — including fee - for - service payments and capitated payments made to managed care organizations — and indicators for five conditions and two service categories.in the full claims files ( for example , the summary file may not include the summary file excludes some encounter details included details regarding the care encounter , such as individual cost per encounter ; however , it does include monthly enrollment data ) .

we made several adjustments to the summary file in order to ensure that the data were reliable for our purposes .

specifically we excluded: records with unknown eligibility status ( eliminated 5,166,648 records , or 7.21 percent of total records ) ; all records associated with duplicate msis ids or social security numbers within a state ( eliminated 277,363 records , or 0.39 percent of total records ) ; records with negative total spending amounts ( eliminated 975,869 records , or 1.36 percent of total records ) , which may reflect adjustments to claims made in the prior year ; records of individuals who were only enrolled in a stand - alone , separate children's health insurance program during the year ( eliminated 471,507 records , or 0.66 percent of total records ) ; records associated with a payment adjustment rather than an individual ( eliminated 202,456 records , or 0.28 percent of total records ) ; records of individuals whose age appeared to conflict with their identified eligibility group ( eliminated 65,016 records , or 0.09 percent of total records ) .

for example , records of individuals in the child eligibility group whose age was 85 and older ; records with unknown dual status ( eliminated 698 records , or less than 0.01 percent of total records ) ; and , records of individuals whose age was over 65 , but indicated as having delivered a child ( eliminated 126 records , or less than 0.01 percent of total records ) .

after making these adjustments , we were able to retain 64,457,343 , or 90 percent , of the summary file's 71,617,026 original records .

in order to determine variations in states' spending for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries compared with other medicaid beneficiaries , we calculated the total number of medicaid enrollees and total medicaid expenditures in each state .

we then calculated these same statistics for our subpopulations of medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries based on the “last - best” indicator of dual eligibility status available in the summary file .

medicaid - only beneficiaries were eligible for medicaid but not medicare .

dual - eligible beneficiaries were eligible for both medicaid and medicare .

next , we determined the number of beneficiaries whose total expenditures fell within the top 5 percent of total expenditures within each state ( we calculated these figures separately for medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries ) .

we termed these 2,763,407 beneficiaries as high - expenditure beneficiaries .

we then separately calculated the total expenditures for our high - expenditure beneficiaries and other beneficiaries in each state for medicaid - only and dual - eligible beneficiaries , and summed this data at a national level .

to examine the characteristics associated with high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries , we determined the percentage of high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries with key characteristics and used logistic regression to examine the effect of having key beneficiary characteristics on the probability of being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary .

the key beneficiary characteristics for which we describe the high - expenditure beneficiary population and represented as independent variables in our logistic regression model included: eligibility group ( disabled , child , adult , aged ) , age , gender , race / ethnicity , geographic location , participation in capitated managed care , period of enrollment in medicaid ( whether full year or partial year ) , as well as whether the beneficiaries had any of five health conditions or had received any of two services .

finally , our logistic regression models included characteristics of states' medicaid programs , including their spending on high - expenditure beneficiaries and long - term services and supports ( ltss ) in non - institutional settings ( also called home and community based services ) and capitated managed care penetration rates.beneficiary population , as well as the probabilities that demonstrate the association of each characteristic with the likelihood of being in the high - expenditure group if all beneficiaries had a particular characteristic while holding all other characteristics constant .

probabilities were calculated by converting the odds that resulted from our logistic regression models .

the size of the independent effect of each enrollee characteristic is expressed as a probability , with greater values reflecting a greater chance that the characteristic increased the likelihood of being a high - expenditure beneficiary .

medicaid - only beneficiaries had a hypothetical 5 percent probability of being in the high - expenditure group by chance alone .

all probabilities were significant at the 0.05 level .

we report percentages that describe the high - expenditure in order to determine which service categories contributed to expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries , we examined how total expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries were distributed among the following six expenditure categories: ( 1 ) hospital care , ( 2 ) non - hospital acute care , ( 3 ) drugs , ( 4 ) managed care and premium assistance , ( 5 ) long - term services and supports ( ltss ) in non - institutional settings , and ( 6 ) long - term services and supports in institutional settings .

of spending among each of the six expenditure categories for beneficiaries in our high - expenditure group compared to the distribution of spending among each of the six expenditure categories for all other medicaid - only beneficiaries .

the summary file includes information on spending for 30 types of services .

we consolidated 28 of these types of services into the six categories we report .

we conducted this performance audit from september 2012 through february 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the table below demonstrates the characteristics of high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries , and how expenditures were distributed within each characteristic of interest .

for each subpopulation , we also calculated the per - capita expenditures in dollars .

high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiaries who resided in a long - term care ( ltc ) facility during fiscal year 2009 had the highest per capita expenditures ( $79,464 ) .

our logistic regression analysis found that key characteristics — such as having a disability , having certain conditions , delivery / childbirth , and residing in a ltc facility — were consistently strongly associated with being a high - expenditure medicaid - only beneficiary when looking at all records , and when the data was examined separately for each eligibility group .

the table below demonstrates the characteristics of medicaid - only beneficiaries with expenditures in the top 1 percent of total expenditures ( 558,798 beneficiaries ) .

for each subpopulation , we also calculated the per capita expenditures in dollars .

the top 1 percent of medicaid - only beneficiaries had per capita spending of $94,821 , over 2.5 times that of beneficiaries in the top 5 percent of total expenditures whose per capita spending was $35,983 ( top 1 percent included ) .

we examined individual cases of a random group of medicaid - only beneficiaries in the top 1 percent of expenditures .

some of these beneficiaries illustrated the trends identified in our analysis , but we also found beneficiaries who demonstrated that there was diversity among the high - expenditure group .

below are some examples of the characteristics and spending patterns for individual beneficiaries .

overall , per capita spending in the top 1 percent ranged from $19,068 to $43,728,641 , with an average expenditure of $94,821 .

in addition to the contact named above , sheila k. avruch , assistant director ; giselle hicks ; drew long ; vikki porter ; kristal vardaman ; eric wedum ; jennifer whitworth ; and carla willis made key contributions to this report .

medicaid: states reported billions more in supplemental payments in recent years .

gao - 12-694 .

washington , d.c.: july 20 , 2012 .

high risk series: an update .

gao - 13-283 .

washington , d.c.: february 14 , 2013 .

medicaid: cms needs more information on the billions of dollars spent on supplemental payments .

gao - 08-614 .

washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2008 .

medicaid demonstration waivers: recent hhs approvals continue to raise cost and oversight concerns .

gao - 08-87 .

washington , d.c.: january 31 , 2008 .

medicaid long - term care: information obtained by states about applicants' assets varies and may be insufficient .

gao - 12-749 .

washington , d.c.: july 26 , 2012 .

medicaid: data sets provide inconsistent picture of expenditures .

gao - 13-47 .

washington , d.c.: october 29 , 2012 .

medicaid home and community - based waivers: cms should encourage states to conduct mortality reviews for individuals with developmental disabilities .

gao - 08-529 .

washington , d.c.: may 23 , 2008 .

medicaid: states' use of managed care .

gao - 12-872r .

washington , d.c.: august 17 , 2012 .

