since 2001 , the national archives and records administration ( nara ) has been working to develop a modern electronic records archive ( era ) .

according to nara , this major information system is estimated to cost between $456 and $481 million and is intended to preserve and provide access to massive volumes of all types of electronic records , independent of their original hardware or software .

nara plans for the system to manage the full life - cycle of electronic records , from their ingestion through preservation and dissemination to customers .

because of the system's complexity , nara awarded a contract to lockheed martin to develop era in five phases , or increments , the first of which is referred to as the “era base.” according to nara , the era base included initial functionality for transferring federal electronic records into the system and achieved initial operating capability in june 2008 .

the second increment includes the executive office of the president ( eop ) system or “era eop,” and nara certified that it reached initial operating capability in december 2008 .

nara originally planned to complete the development of the remaining increments and achieve full operating capability in march 2012 .

however , in acquiring this system , nara has repeatedly revised the program schedule and increased the estimated costs .

as a result , in july 2010 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) directed nara to halt era development at the end of fiscal year 2011 , 1 year earlier than originally planned .

as mandated by the consolidated appropriations act , nara is required to submit an expenditure plan before obligating multiyear funds for the era program .

on october 1 , 2010 , the agency submitted its fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan to support its request for $85.5 million in era funding , which includes $61.8 million in multiyear funds .

in the expenditure plan , nara also included support for requests at two alternative funding levels — $72.0 million and $61.4 million — based on congressional direction .

subsequently , on october 19 , 2010 , nara submitted a summary of its expenditure plan that included revised requests at $72 million and $65 million funding levels .

according to nara , both the expenditure plan and the summary reflect fiscal year 2011 as the final year of era development .

as in the previous year , the plan must satisfy six legislative conditions , including a review by gao .

our objectives in reviewing the plan and the summary were to ( 1 ) determine whether nara's fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan satisfies legislative conditions , ( 2 ) determine the extent to which nara has implemented prior gao recommendations , and ( 3 ) provide any other observations about the expenditure plan and the era acquisition .

to assess compliance with legislative conditions , we analyzed the expenditure plan submitted by nara in october 2010 and reviewed its budget submission to omb , along with other program documentation .

to determine the extent to which nara had implemented our prior recommendations , we obtained and reviewed agency documents , which included briefings to senior management on era cost , schedule , and performance ; requirements management documentation ; and earned value management processes .

to develop observations on the era expenditure plan and acquisition , we analyzed fiscal year 2010 and 2011 cost , schedule , and planned system functionality information contained in the expenditure plans and other era briefings .

in addition , we reviewed and analyzed requirements management documentation , including the revised list of era requirements .

we also interviewed nara and lockheed martin officials .

to assess the reliability of the data in the expenditure plan , we interviewed nara officials to gain an understanding of the data and discussed our use of the data in this briefing .

we concluded that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes .

in addition , we reviewed nara budget documents , as well as its consolidated financial statement results for the fiscal year 2010 performance and accountability report .

we did not , however , assess the reliability of the information in these documents .

we conducted this performance audit from october 2010 to march 2011 at nara's college park , maryland , location in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

on december 21 , 2010 , we transmitted the results of our review to the staffs of the senate subcommittee on financial services and general government , committee on appropriations , and the house subcommittee on financial services and general government , committee on appropriations .

this report transmits the briefing materials we provided , the matter we suggest congress consider , and the recommendations that we made to the archivist of the united states .

the full briefing materials , including details on our scope and methodology , are reprinted as appendix i .

in summary , we made the following major points: nara's fiscal year 2010 expenditure plan satisfies four of the six legislative conditions .

specifically , nara's plan complies with the agency's enterprise architecture , conforms to the agency's enterprise life - cycle methodology , reflects certain system acquisition best practices , and was reviewed by gao .

the expenditure plan partially satisfies the other two conditions: nara partially satisfies the condition that it develop capital planning and investment control review processes designed to help ensure that projects are being implemented at an acceptable cost and within expected time frames and that they are contributing to observable improvements in mission performance .

while nara has conducted regular meetings with senior - level agency management to review era progress , these groups did not document approval of important schedule and scope changes to a recent era increment .

further , nara has not conducted post - implementation reviews of deployed era capabilities , such as the recently deployed congressional records component , to validate estimated benefits and costs .

as a result , nara has limited ability to ensure that the system is being implemented at an acceptable cost and within expected time frames , and that deployed capabilities are contributing to observable improvements in mission performance .

nara partially satisfies the condition that the expenditure plan be approved by the agency and omb .

nara approved the expenditure plan in october 2010 , but the plan was not approved by omb because , according to nara officials , omb will only review the expenditure plan if there is an existing appropriation with language requiring its review .

without approval from omb , congress will have limited assurance that the plan is accurate and reliable .

nara has fully implemented one of our prior recommendations and nara implemented our recommendation to ensure that era's requirements are managed using a disciplined process by updating the era requirements document and developing a process to ensure that the era requirements are kept current following significant changes to the program , such as significant modifications to the contract .

nara has partially implemented three other recommendations .

first , in response to our recommendation that nara ensure that its investment review process has adequate executive - level oversight by maintaining documentation of the results of reviews , nara documented meetings that its senior management attended where the era program was discussed , but the agency did not document approval of important changes to a recent increment through its review process .

second , in response to our recommendation that nara provide additional information in the fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan on what was spent and delivered for deployed increments , nara added information on delivered functionality and additional capabilities planned for fiscal year 2011 .

however , the expenditure plan lacked other important information , such as the estimated fiscal year 2011 costs and the expected completion date of an ongoing increment .

third , in response to our recommendation to strengthen its use of earned value processes , nara documented an action plan to improve its earned value processes , but continues to have weaknesses in this area .

among other things , we found that era's earned value data trends do not accurately portray program status , and future cost overruns would likely be between $195 and $433 million if the full era system were to be completed as originally designed .

we made three observations related to the era program and fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan and summary: nara's fiscal year 2011 era expenditure plan does not provide a reliable basis for informed investment decision making .

specifically , nara's plan does not clearly show what functions have been delivered to date or how actual costs compare to planned costs .

for example , the plan does not clearly show the system functions of an ongoing increment that have been delivered and how the actual costs of this increment compare to the amount nara planned to spend , as reported in the fiscal year 2010 expenditure plan .

further , even though nara plans to end development in fiscal year 2011 , the fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan does not clearly show what functionality is planned to be delivered , by when , and at what cost during this period .

for example , the plan does not discuss the delivery date of an ongoing increment , nor the fiscal year 2011 costs associated with completing this increment .

lastly , nara's cost estimates , used as the basis for determining its fiscal year 2011 funding requests , do not reliably reflect the work to be completed because of weaknesses in the supporting methodology .

for example , while nara's estimates were based on information provided by the contractor , including estimates of the total lines of software code required and the related costs , these data could not be traced back to their original sources , and nara did not validate the information when preparing its cost estimates .

nara's fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan does not address how remaining multiyear funds from fiscal year 2010 will be allocated .

specifically , in fiscal year 2010 , nara spent $41.7 million of the $61.8 million in accumulated multiyear funds that it was provided by congress to develop the era system , which resulted in a balance of $20.1 million that is available for obligation in fiscal year 2011 .

according to nara officials , the era program plans to use the $20.1 million to fund development efforts needed to make the system available to all federal agencies , as well as to fund other operations and maintenance costs .

however , nara's plans for using these funds and their supporting details are not included in the fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan or the revised summary .

until nara specifies how it will use the multiyear funds remaining from fiscal year 2010 , appropriators will lack information important for evaluating nara's fiscal year 2011 request .

nara has not yet determined which era requirements will be implemented in fiscal year 2011 , nor fully prioritized the remaining requirements .

in june 2010 , we reported that nara had developed and documented a set of 853 high - level business requirements for era and planned to complete about 57 percent of them by the end of fiscal year 2010 .

subsequently , in july 2010 , nara updated its requirements document .

according to nara , the original 853 requirements were decomposed to a more detailed set of 1,577 requirements , portions of which were allocated to increments 1 through 5 , deferred to post - increment 5 ( i.e. , post - fiscal year 2011 ) , or removed from the scope of the era program .

however , nara could not determine which of the remaining requirements would be addressed before the end of fiscal year 2011 because , according to nara officials , the requirements were subject to ongoing negotiations with the development contractor .

this uncertainty is further exacerbated because nara has not fully prioritized its requirements .

maintaining a prioritized set of system requirements can better ensure that the requirements that are most critical to the customer and other stakeholders are addressed quickly .

until the era program fully prioritizes the era requirements to be completed during fiscal year 2011 , it will be unclear what system development work is planned to be completed and whether it will result in functionality that is most critical to nara's customers and other stakeholders .

while nara's fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan meets four of the six legislative conditions , the lack of critical capital planning and oversight steps — including documentation demonstrating approval of significant changes to a recent era increment , post - implementation reviews of deployed capabilities , and omb's approval of the expenditure plan — limits nara's ability to ensure that the system is being implemented at an acceptable cost and within expected time frames and contributes to observable improvements in mission performance .

these issues are further exacerbated by the agency's partial implementation of several open gao recommendations , such as those related to improving investment oversight and earned value processes .

with significant weaknesses in many basic oversight and management processes , as well as continued delays in completing increment 3 , nara's ability to make significant development progress in the remainder of the fiscal year will be challenged .

in addition , without a reliable era expenditure plan , nara has not provided adequate information to assist congressional oversight and informed decision making related to the use of appropriated funds .

when these weaknesses are combined with the lack of prioritization of the remaining requirements under negotiation for fiscal year 2011 , congress has little assurance that additional funds allocated to era will result in significant benefits to potential users .

with omb's direction to stop development after 2011 , it is unclear whether nara will be able to effectively address the full range of weaknesses we identified and still have adequate time to complete significant development efforts .

the identified deficiencies in nara's expenditure plan and management of the era acquisition make it unclear whether nara can make substantial progress in delivering additional era system capabilities that justify its planned investment by the end of fiscal year 2011 .

as such , we suggest that congress consider employing an accountability mechanism that limits nara's ability to use funds appropriated for era development until nara implements an adequate capital planning and investment control process , updates its expenditure plan to clearly describe what system capabilities and benefits are to be delivered in fiscal year 2011 , and establishes an associated set of prioritized system requirements and adequate earned value reporting .

we are recommending that the archivist of the united states immediately take the following two actions while the current system development contract is active: report to congress on the specific outcomes to be achieved with the balance of any previous multiyear funds in fiscal year 2011 .

ensure that the era requirements planned for fiscal year 2011 are fully prioritized so that those most critical to nara's customers and other stakeholders are addressed .

to ensure that any future efforts are completed within reasonable funding and time constraints , we are recommending that the archivist of the united states take the following four actions: ensure that significant changes to era's program's cost , schedule , and scope are approved through nara's investment review process .

conduct post - implementation reviews of deployed era capabilities to validate estimated benefits and costs .

submit era expenditure plans to omb for review and approval prior to submitting to congress .

update the era requirements management plan and related guidance to mandate requirements prioritization throughout the project's life - cycle .

in written comments on a draft of this report , which are reprinted in appendix ii , the archivist of the united states concurred with our six recommendations .

specifically , he stated that nara has sufficiently addressed the first two recommendations .

he further stated that nara would be unable to address the final four recommendations in a near - term action plan since those were specific to a future era development effort .

the archivist also noted that nara is developing an addendum to the fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan to provide updated information on era requirements , costs , and the schedule of software releases .

we are sending copies of this report to the archivist of the united states .

the report will also be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9286 or by e - mail at pownerd@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii .

on october 1 , 2010 , the agency submitted its fiscal year 2011 expenditure plan to the relevant house and senate appropriations committees to support its request for $85.5 million in era funding .

of this amount , $61.8 million consists of multi - year funds allocated to era .

in the expenditure plan , nara also included support for requests at two alternative funding levels — $72.0 million and $61.4 million — based on congressional direction .

subsequently , on october 19 , 2010 , nara submitted a summary of its expenditure plan to the appropriations committees that included revised requests at $72 million and $65 million funding levels .

according to nara , both the expenditure plan and the summary reflect fiscal year 2011 as the final year of era development .

in addition to the individual named above , key contributions to this report were made by james r. sweetman , jr. , assistant director ; monica perez - nelson ; eric costello ; lee mccracken ; tarunkant mithani ; karl seifert ; jonathan ticehurst ; and adam vodraska .

