thank you for inviting me to testify at today's hearing on the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) efforts to secure federal information systems .

as you know , the federal government faces an array of cyber - based threats to its systems and data , as illustrated by the recently reported data breaches at the office of personnel management ( opm ) , which affected millions of current and former federal employees .

such incidents underscore the urgent need for effective implementation of information security controls at federal agencies .

since 1997 , we have designated federal information security as a government - wide high - risk area , and in 2003 expanded this area to include computerized systems supporting the nation's critical infrastructure .

most recently , in the 2015 update to our high - risk list , we further expanded this area to include protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information ( pii ) — that is , personal information that is collected , maintained , and shared by both federal and nonfederal entities .

my statement today will discuss ( 1 ) cybersecurity challenges that federal agencies face in securing their systems and information and ( 2 ) government - wide initiatives , including those led by dhs , aimed at improving agencies' cybersecurity .

in preparing this statement , we relied on our previous work in these areas , as well as the preliminary observations from our ongoing review of dhs's einstein initiative .

we discussed these observations with dhs officials .

the prior reports cited throughout this statement contain detailed discussions of the scope of the work and the methodology used to carry it out .

all the work on which this statement is based was conducted or is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

as computer technology has advanced , both government and private entities have become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems to carry out operations and to process , maintain , and report essential information .

public and private organizations rely on computer systems to transmit proprietary and other sensitive information , develop and maintain intellectual capital , conduct operations , process business transactions , transfer funds , and deliver services .

in addition , the internet has grown increasingly important to american business and consumers , serving as a medium for hundreds of billions of dollars of commerce each year , and has developed into an extended information and communications infrastructure that supports vital services such as power distribution , health care , law enforcement , and national defense .

ineffective protection of these information systems and networks can result in a failure to deliver these vital services , and result in loss or theft of computer resources , assets , and funds ; inappropriate access to and disclosure , modification , or destruction of sensitive information , such as national security information , pii , and proprietary business information ; disruption of essential operations supporting critical infrastructure , national defense , or emergency services ; undermining of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public's confidence in government ; use of computer resources for unauthorized purposes or to launch attacks on other systems ; damage to networks and equipment ; and high costs for remediation .

risks to cyber - based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats .

unintentional threats can be caused by , among other things , natural disasters , defective computer or network equipment , and careless or poorly trained employees .

intentional threats include both targeted and untargeted attacks from a variety of sources , including criminal groups , hackers , disgruntled employees , foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare , and terrorists .

these adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities , willingness to act , and motives , which can include seeking monetary gain or a political , economic , or military advantage .

for example , adversaries possessing sophisticated levels of expertise and significant resources to pursue their objectives — sometimes referred to as “advanced persistent threats” — pose increasing risks .

they make use of various techniques — or exploits — that may adversely affect federal information , computers , software , networks , and operations .

since fiscal year 2006 , the number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government has steadily increased each year: rising from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in fiscal year 2014 , an increase of 1,121 percent ( see fig .

1 ) .

furthermore , the number of reported security incidents involving pii at federal agencies has more than doubled in recent years — from 10,481 incidents in fiscal year 2009 to 27,624 incidents in fiscal year 2014 .

these incidents and others like them can adversely affect national security ; damage public health and safety ; and lead to inappropriate access to and disclosure , modification , or destruction of sensitive information .

recent examples highlight the impact of such incidents: in june 2015 , opm reported that an intrusion into its systems affected personnel records of about 4 million current and former federal employees .

the director of opm also stated that a separate incident may have compromised opm systems related to background investigations , but its scope and impact have not yet been determined .

in june 2015 , the commissioner of the internal revenue service ( irs ) testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its “get transcript” application .

according to irs , criminals used taxpayer - specific data acquired from non - irs sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts .

these data included social security information , dates of birth , and street addresses .

in april 2015 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) office of inspector general reported that two va contractors had improperly accessed the va network from foreign countries using personally owned equipment .

in february 2015 , the director of national intelligence stated that unauthorized computer intrusions were detected in 2014 on opm's networks and those of two of its contractors .

the two contractors were involved in processing sensitive pii related to national security clearances for federal employees .

in september 2014 , a cyber - intrusion into the united states postal service's information systems may have compromised pii for more than 800,000 of its employees .

given the risks posed by cyber threats and the increasing number of incidents , it is crucial that federal agencies take appropriate steps to secure their systems and information .

we and agency inspectors general have identified challenges in protecting federal information and systems , including those in the following key areas: designing and implementing risk - based cybersecurity programs at federal agencies .

agencies continue to have shortcomings in assessing risks , developing and implementing security controls , and monitoring results .

specifically , for fiscal year 2014 , 19 of the 24 federal agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) actreported that information security control deficiencies were either a material weakness or a significant deficiency in internal controls over their financial reporting.agencies cited information security as a major management challenge for their agency .

moreover , inspectors general at 23 of the 24 as we testified in april 2015 , for fiscal year 2014 , most of the agencies had weaknesses in the five key security control categories .

these control categories are ( 1 ) limiting , preventing , and detecting inappropriate access to computer resources ; ( 2 ) managing the configuration of software and hardware ; ( 3 ) segregating duties to ensure that a single individual does not have control over all key aspects of a computer - related operation ; ( 4 ) planning for continuity of operations in the event of a disaster or disruption ; and ( 5 ) implementing agency - wide security management programs that are critical to identifying control deficiencies , resolving problems , and managing risks on an ongoing basis .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

examples of these weaknesses include: ( 1 ) granting users access permissions that exceed the level required to perform their legitimate job - related functions ; ( 2 ) not ensuring that only authorized users can access an agency's systems ; ( 3 ) not using encryption to protect sensitive data from being intercepted and compromised ; ( 4 ) not updating software with the current versions and latest security patches to protect against known vulnerabilities ; and ( 5 ) not ensuring employees were trained commensurate with their responsibilities .

gao and agency inspectors general have made hundreds of recommendations to agencies aimed at improving their implementation of these information security controls .

enhancing oversight of contractors providing it services .

in august 2014 , we reported that five of six agencies we reviewed were inconsistent in overseeing assessments of contractors' implementation of security controls .

this was partly because agencies had not documented it security procedures for effectively overseeing contractor performance .

in addition , according to omb , 16 of 24 agency inspectors general determined that their agency's program for managing contractor systems lacked at least one required element .

we recommended that omb , in conjunction with dhs , develop and clarify guidance to agencies for annually reporting the number of contractor - operated systems and that the reviewed agencies establish and implement it security oversight procedures for such systems .

omb did not comment on our report , but the agencies generally concurred with our recommendations .

improving security incident response activities .

in april 2014 , we reported that the 24 agencies did not consistently demonstrate that they had effectively responded to cyber incidents .

specifically , we estimated that agencies had not completely documented actions taken in response to detected incidents reported in fiscal year 2012 in about 65 percent of cases .

in addition , the 6 agencies we reviewed had not fully developed comprehensive policies , plans , and procedures to guide their incident response activities .

we recommended that omb address agency incident response practices government - wide and that the 6 agencies improve the effectiveness of their cyber incident response programs .

the agencies generally agreed with these recommendations .

we also made two recommendations to dhs concerning government - wide incident response practices .

dhs concurred with the recommendations and , to date , has implemented one of them .

responding to breaches of pii .

in december 2013 , we reported that eight federal agencies had inconsistently implemented policies and procedures for responding to data breaches involving pii .

in addition , omb requirements for reporting pii - related data breaches were not always feasible or necessary .

thus , we concluded that agencies may not be consistently taking actions to limit the risk to individuals from pii - related data breaches and may be expending resources to meet omb reporting requirements that provide little value .

we recommended that omb revise its guidance to agencies on responding to a pii - related data breach and that the reviewed agencies take specific actions to improve their response to pii - related data breaches .

omb neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation ; four of the reviewed agencies agreed , two partially agreed , and two neither agreed nor disagreed .

implementing security programs at small agencies .

in june 2014 , we reported that six small agencies ( i.e. , agencies with 6,000 or fewer employees ) had not implemented or not fully implemented their information security programs .

for example , key elements of their plans , policies , and procedures were outdated , incomplete , or did not exist , and two of the agencies had not developed an information security program with the required elements .

we recommended that omb include a list of agencies that did not report on the implementation of their information security programs in its annual report to congress on compliance with the requirements of fisma , and include information on small agencies' programs .

omb generally concurred with our recommendations .

we also recommended that dhs develop guidance and services targeted at small agencies .

dhs has implemented this recommendation .

until federal agencies take actions to address these challenges — including implementing the hundreds of recommendations we and inspectors general have made — federal systems and information will be at an increased risk of compromise from cyber - based attacks and other threats .

in addition to the efforts of individual agencies , dhs and omb have several initiatives under way to enhance cybersecurity across the federal government .

while these initiatives all have potential benefits , they also have limitations .

personal identity verification: in august 2004 , homeland security presidential directive 12 ordered the establishment of a mandatory , government - wide standard for secure and reliable forms of identification for federal government employees and contractor personnel who access government - controlled facilities and information systems .

subsequently , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) defined requirements for such personal identity verification ( piv ) credentials based on “smart cards” — plastic cards with integrated circuit chips to store and process data — and omb directed federal agencies to issue and use piv credentials to control access to federal facilities and systems .

in september 2011 , we reported that omb and the eight agencies in our review had made mixed progress for using piv credentials for controlling access to federal facilities and information systems .

we attributed this mixed progress to a number of obstacles , including logistical problems in issuing piv credentials to all agency personnel and agencies not making this effort a priority .

we made several recommendations to the eight agencies and to omb to more fully implement piv card capabilities .

although two agencies did not comment , seven agencies agreed with our recommendations or discussed actions they were taking to address them .

for example , we made four recommendations to dhs , who concurred and has taken action to implement them .

in february 2015 , omb reported that , as of the end of fiscal year 2014 , only 41 percent of agency user accounts at the 23 civilian cfo act agencies required piv cards for accessing agency systems .

continuous diagnostics and mitigation ( cdm ) : according to dhs , this program is intended to provide federal departments and agencies with capabilities and tools that identify cybersecurity risks on an ongoing basis , prioritize these risks based on potential impacts , and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first .

these tools include sensors that perform automated searches for known cyber vulnerabilities , the results of which feed into a dashboard that alerts network managers .

these alerts can be prioritized , enabling agencies to allocate resources based on risk .

dhs , in partnership with the general services administration , has established a government - wide contract that is intended to allow federal agencies ( as well as state , local , and tribal governmental agencies ) to acquire cdm tools at discounted rates .

in july 2011 , we reported on the department of state's ( state ) implementation of its continuous monitoring program , referred to as ipost.visibility over information security at the department and helped it administrators identify , monitor , and mitigate information security weaknesses .

however , we also noted limitations and challenges with state's approach , including ensuring that its risk - scoring program identified relevant risks and that ipost data were timely , complete , and accurate .

we made several recommendations to improve the implementation of the ipost program , and state partially agreed .

we determined that state's implementation of ipost had improved national cybersecurity protection system ( ncps ) : the national cybersecurity protection system , operationally known as “einstein,” is a suite of capabilities intended to detect and prevent malicious network traffic from entering and exiting federal civilian government networks .

the einstein capabilities of ncps are described in table 1 .

in march 2010 , we reported that while agencies that participated in einstein 1 improved their identification of incidents and mitigation of attacks , dhs lacked performance measures to understand if the initiative was meeting its objectives .

we made four recommendations regarding the management of the einstein program , and dhs has since taken action to address them .

currently , we are reviewing ncps , as mandated by congress .

the objectives of our review are to determine the extent to which ( 1 ) ncps meets stated objectives , ( 2 ) dhs has designed requirements for future stages of the system , and ( 3 ) federal agencies have adopted the system .

our final report is expected to be released later this year , and our preliminary observations include the following: dhs appears to have developed and deployed aspects of the intrusion detection and intrusion prevention capabilities , but potential weaknesses may limit their ability to detect and prevent computer intrusions .

for example , ncps detects signature anomalies using only one of three detection methodologies identified by nist ( signature - based , anomaly - based , and stateful protocol analysis ) .

further , the system has the ability to prevent intrusions , but is currently only able to proactively mitigate threats across a limited subset of network traffic ( i.e. , domain name system traffic and e - mail ) .

dhs has identified a set of ncps capabilities that are planned to be implemented in fiscal year 2016 , but it does not appear to have developed formalized requirements for capabilities planned through fiscal year 2018 .

the ncps intrusion detection capability appears to have been implemented at 23 cfo act agencies.capability appears to have limited deployment , at portions of only 5 of these agencies .

deployment may have been hampered by various implementation and policy challenges .

the intrusion prevention in conclusion , the danger posed by the wide array of cyber threats facing the nation is heightened by weaknesses in the federal government's approach to protecting its systems and information .

while recent government - wide initiatives hold promise for bolstering the federal cybersecurity posture , it is important to note that no single technology or set of practices is sufficient to protect against all these threats .

a “defense in depth” strategy is required that includes well - trained personnel , effective and consistently applied processes , and appropriately implemented technologies .

while agencies have elements of such a strategy in place , more needs to be done to fully implement it and to address existing weaknesses .

in particular , implementing gao and inspector general recommendations will strengthen agencies' ability to protect their systems and information , reducing the risk of a potentially devastating cyber attack .

chairman ratcliffe , ranking member richmond , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you may have .

if you have any questions about this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov .

other staff members who contributed to this statement include larry crosland and michael gilmore ( assistant directors ) , bradley becker , christopher businsky , nancy glover , rosanna guerrero , kush malhotra , and lee mccracken .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

