in 2017 , an estimated 56.8 million adults had a behavioral health disorder — that is , a substance use or mental health disorder .

when these disorders go untreated , the individual may suffer potential consequences such as worsening health , reduced educational attainment , loss of employment , and involvement with the justice system .

treatment for behavioral health disorders can help individuals reduce or stop substance use , manage their symptoms , and improve their quality of life .

behavioral health services include an array of options , ranging from less to more intensive , and may include prevention services , screening and assessment , outpatient treatment , inpatient treatment , and emergency services for mental health and substance use conditions .

prescription drugs may also be included as part of treatment .

medicare covers services for the treatment of behavioral health disorders under medicare parts a and b , or original medicare , and under medicare advantage ( ma ) , medicare's private plan alternative .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administers medicare and provides information to beneficiaries about the behavioral health services covered by medicare .

annually , cms must send information to all medicare beneficiaries about available benefits , and ma plans must send information regarding benefits and available providers , among other information , to their enrollees .

the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( support act ) included several provisions to expand access to behavioral health services under medicare .

these include providing coverage for opioid treatment programs for beneficiaries with opioid use disorder ( oud ) , as well as expanding access to telehealth services for the treatment of substance use disorders ( sud ) or co - occurring mental health disorder .

the support act also included a provision for gao to examine medicare behavioral health services and how beneficiaries are informed of available coverage and treatment options .

in this report we 1. describe the utilization of behavioral health services by medicare beneficiaries , and the types of providers furnishing these services ; and 2. examine how cms provides information to beneficiaries about medicare's coverage for behavioral health services .

to describe the utilization of behavioral health services by medicare beneficiaries and the providers furnishing these services , we analyzed the 2018 medicare part b claims file , the latest data available at the time of our analysis .

we focused only on claims for medicare beneficiaries in fee - for - service medicare because similar reliable information was not available for beneficiaries enrolled in ma .

from the 2018 part b data , we isolated the behavioral health services provided in 2018 and analyzed these behavioral health services as a share of total part b services and expenditures .

we also analyzed the behavioral health services by diagnosis , type of service , provider type , and beneficiary demographic .

we conducted our analysis at the service level: a single service or multiple services may be delivered during a single visit to a provider .

for example , a beneficiary may receive a general consultation and psychotherapy during one visit , and the provider would bill both services to medicare for that visit .

we selected the behavioral health services included in our analysis based on the service codes ( which describe the type of service provided ) and diagnosis codes ( which describe the primary condition related to the service ) associated with each claim .

our analysis focused on services delivered by health care providers that can diagnose , treat , or otherwise care for an individual , and excluded behavioral health - related services provided by other types of providers , such as services performed by lab facilities .

for all service codes other than psychiatry , services were only included if the beneficiary's primary diagnosis was a behavioral health condition .

we defined behavioral health conditions as those in the mental and behavioral disorders range of the international statistical classification of diseases and related health problems , 10th revision ( icd - 10 ) .

to assess the reliability of the behavioral health services claims data , we obtained information from knowledgeable cms officials regarding the accuracy of the information , and we performed checks to identify missing or incorrect data .

based on these steps , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objective .

to examine how cms provides information to beneficiaries about medicare's coverage of behavioral health services , we reviewed cms's requirements for providing coverage information to beneficiaries .

we also obtained statistics from cms officials about the usage of the publications , online content , and telephone support tools used to provide coverage information to medicare beneficiaries .

in addition , we interviewed cms officials , advocates for medicare beneficiaries and behavioral health issues , and provider associations .

to understand the information made available to beneficiaries in ma plans , we interviewed officials with the five largest ma plans that cover about two - thirds of all ma enrollees .

to assess the information made available to medicare beneficiaries on coverage for behavioral health services , we compared cms's medicare publications , and their descriptions of behavioral health benefits , to hhs's and cms's current strategic priorities related to treatment for suds .

we conducted this performance audit from may 2019 to may 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

medicare beneficiaries with behavioral health conditions have a diverse range of conditions , of different severity , requiring different types of care .

beneficiaries with mild behavioral health conditions — such as mild depression — may require less complex care than beneficiaries with serious behavioral health conditions — such as schizophrenia — or with multiple interacting behavioral or physical health conditions .

subpopulations of medicare beneficiaries also may face different behavioral health challenges .

for example , dual - eligible beneficiaries — individuals eligible for both medicare and medicaid — are three times more likely to have been diagnosed with a major psychiatric disorder than non - dual beneficiaries .

medicare covers services for the diagnosis and treatment of behavioral health conditions , which includes the inpatient care covered by part a and the physician services and outpatient care covered by part b .

key behavioral health services in medicare part b include visits with a physician or other covered provider , partial hospitalization program services , annual depression screening , alcohol misuse screening and counseling , psychotherapy , screening , brief intervention , and referral to treatment services , and behavioral health integration services .

dual - eligible beneficiaries may be able to access additional behavioral health services through medicaid that are not available through medicare .

medicare covers behavioral health services delivered by a range of providers , including psychiatrists and physicians , clinical psychologists , licensed clinical social workers ( lcsw ) , nurse practitioners , physician assistants , and clinical nurse specialists .

in order to bill for services provided to medicare beneficiaries , providers must enroll with cms .

providers who do not want to enroll in the medicare program may “opt out” of medicare .

behavioral health providers have among the highest opt - out rates , with over 7,000 psychiatrists , psychologists , and lcsws opting out of medicare , representing nearly one - third of all providers who opted out of medicare in 2017 .

beneficiaries may still see these providers but must enter into a private contract with them .

medicare will not pay for any services furnished by providers who have opted out , so in these cases , beneficiaries must pay the provider's entire charge out of pocket .

according to researchers , psychiatrists have low participation rates across all forms of insurance , including medicare , which may be explained , in part , by the reimbursement rates for time intensive treatments , low supply and high demand for psychiatry services , and high administrative burdens for solo practitioners to participate in insurance programs .

cms is required by law to provide information annually to medicare beneficiaries about their coverage , including benefits and limitations on payment .

various factors affect how beneficiaries receive and process information about behavioral health conditions and their coverage options for behavioral health services .

according to hhs , low health literacy is a key barrier that impacts individuals' ability to comprehend health - related information .

moreover , researchers have found that low health literacy is associated with poor physical and mental health .

more specific challenges facing individuals with behavioral health conditions include the stigma surrounding behavioral health conditions that may discourage individuals from seeking help or treatment .

according to advocates for medicare beneficiaries and individuals with behavioral health conditions , some individuals may have caregivers or other support for finding information and engaging in decision - making about their behavioral health care .

according to cms , one - third ( 36 percent ) of medicare beneficiaries in 2019 were enrolled in ma plans , which cms pays on a monthly capitated basis to deliver all covered services needed by an enrollee .

ma plans contract with provider networks to deliver care to medicare beneficiaries and must meet cms's network adequacy standards .

ma plans may employ care management and utilization management strategies .

care management may include case managers or care coordinators who work with enrollees and providers to manage the care of complex or high - risk enrollees , including those with behavioral health conditions .

according to the ma plan officials we interviewed , prior authorization — a utilization management strategy — may be employed for high - cost treatments .

officials from all five ma plans told us that they may have difficultly recruiting behavioral health providers to participate in their network .

one study found access to psychiatrists to be more limited than any other physician specialty in ma plan networks , with 23 percent of psychiatrists in a county included in network on average , compared to 46 percent of physicians in a county across all physician specialties in 2015 .

our analysis of medicare claims data shows that in 2018 approximately 5 million beneficiaries used behavioral health services through medicare part b .

this represented about 14 percent of the more than 36 million fee - for - service ( traditional ) medicare beneficiaries , and cms paid providers about $3.3 billion for approximately 39.3 million behavioral health services in 2018 .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

our analysis of claims data also shows that among medicare beneficiaries who used behavioral health services in 2018 , utilization of the services varied significantly .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

the average number of services used by medicare beneficiaries who used behavioral health services in 2018 was eight , while the median was three .

nearly half of all such beneficiaries used between two and seven behavioral health services during the year .

nearly one - third ( 30 percent ) of beneficiaries using behavioral health services used one behavioral health service during the year .

the 11 percent of beneficiaries who were the highest behavioral health service users used 19 or more behavioral health services ( the 90th percentile ) during 2018 , and accounted for about half of all medicare expenditures on behavioral health services .

our analysis also found that the services beneficiaries received largely fell into two broad categories in 2018: general patient consultations ( 53 percent of services ) and psychiatry services , including psychotherapy ( 43 percent of services ) .

other services , such as central nervous system assessments and drugs administered by providers , accounted for about 5 percent of services .

beneficiaries receiving behavioral health care were largely diagnosed with a condition in at least one of five diagnostic behavioral health conditions categories , each of which contain multiple specific diagnoses .

in 2018 , 96 percent of all behavioral health services were for a primary diagnosis within one of these five categories .

for example , the mood disorder category , which includes diagnoses such as depression and bipolar disorder , accounted for 42 percent of services provided .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

medicare claims data for 2018 show that some medicare beneficiaries used behavioral health services to obtain treatment for suds .

seven percent of the behavioral health services in 2018 were for suds .

moreover , medicare beneficiaries with suds represented 11 percent of beneficiaries using behavioral health services .

on average , medicare beneficiaries with suds used five behavioral health services in 2018 , which is less than the number of behavioral health services used on average by all beneficiaries with a behavioral health diagnosis .

overall , beneficiaries under age 65 and dual - eligible beneficiaries were disproportionately represented among users of behavioral health services compared to the medicare population .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

in 2018 , while beneficiaries under age 65 constituted 16 percent of all medicare beneficiaries , they represented 34 percent of the medicare beneficiaries who used behavioral health services and accounted for 42 percent of all behavioral health services paid for by medicare that year .

similarly , while dual - eligible beneficiaries , many of whom are under age 65 , constituted 20 percent of all medicare beneficiaries , they represented 39 percent of the medicare beneficiaries who used behavioral health services in 2018 and accounted for 45 percent of all behavioral health services paid for by medicare .

finally , women constituted about 55 percent of all medicare beneficiaries in 2018 and represented 62 percent of the beneficiaries who used behavioral health services that year .

our analysis of medicare part b claims shows that in 2018 two - thirds of behavioral health services ( 67 percent ) were delivered to medicare beneficiaries by behavioral health specialists: psychiatrists , psychologists , and licensed clinical social workers ( lcsw ) .

 ( see fig .

5. ) .

psychiatrists provided the most behavioral health services ( 31 percent ) , followed by lcsws ( 19 percent ) , and psychologists ( 17 percent ) .

a range of other providers delivered the remaining one - third of behavioral health services , including advanced practice providers ( 16 percent ) , primary care physicians ( 11 percent ) , other physicians ( 5 percent ) , and other providers ( 1 percent ) .

as figure 5 shows , beneficiaries who were relatively high users of behavioral health services received a greater share of services from behavioral health specialists compared to all medicare beneficiaries who used behavioral health services .

approximately three - quarters of services ( 78 percent ) provided to the highest service users ( those in the 90th percentile with 19 or more services per year ) were delivered by behavioral health specialists: psychiatrists ( 31 percent ) , lcsws ( 25 percent ) , and psychologists ( 22 percent ) .

however , this pattern did not hold for medicare beneficiaries with suds .

our analysis showed that beneficiaries with suds received 20 percent of their behavioral health services from a behavioral health specialist , and the other 80 percent of services were delivered by providers who did not specialize in behavioral health .

see appendix i for additional information on medicare behavioral health utilization .

according to cms officials , the agency's overall strategy for providing information to beneficiaries about coverage of behavioral health services involves a variety of communication and outreach approaches .

for example , cms disseminates information to beneficiaries through written and online publications , medicare.gov , scripted answers to questions through 1-800-medicare , and social media .

cms is required by law to provide information to beneficiaries about coverage under medicare .

cms annually mails out the medicare & you handbook to all beneficiaries , and according to cms officials , it mailed the handbook to 42.6 million households in 2018 .

the information provided in the publication includes descriptions of benefits and services , a summary of cost sharing , and the types of providers medicare covers .

according to cms officials , medicare.gov also includes information about covered benefits and a provider directory , although some may not be accepting new medicare patients .

according to cms officials , the most comprehensive source of information on coverage for behavioral health services is contained in the publication medicare & your mental health benefits , which is also available at medicare.gov .

we obtained statistics from cms officials on the frequency with which medicare beneficiaries requested copies of medicare & you or the agency's other publications or accessed the agency's web - based tools to obtain information on medicare coverage , including coverage for behavioral health services .

the most frequently accessed in 2018 were medicare & you , medicare.gov , and the “what's covered ? ” smartphone application .

 ( see table 1. ) .

these sources of information cover medicare more broadly and provide information about medicare benefits in general , rather than those dealing specifically with behavioral health .

like cms , ma plans use different approaches to provide information to the beneficiaries enrolled in ma plans , including publications , phone calls , and websites .

according to officials from the five ma plans in our review , ma plans use multiple modes of communication to meet the preferences of their enrolled populations .

ma plans are required to provide information to each enrollee at the time of enrollment and annually thereafter ; for example , ma plans must share information about providers reasonably available to enrollees .

ma plans are also required to provide marketing materials to cms for review to ensure the adequacy and accuracy of the information in the materials .

two of the ma plans in our review offer digital health tools to their enrollees .

one plan offers a tool that allows enrollees to communicate with case managers , and another plan provides enrollees access to test results , the ability to refill prescriptions and schedule appointments , as well as resources for patient education .

according to cms officials , the agency also uses other strategies for providing information to beneficiaries about coverage of behavioral health benefits .

cms officials stated that it partners with stakeholders to assist beneficiaries and caregivers seeking help with behavioral health conditions .

for example , cms officials described webinars and workshops it conducts to educate partners and stakeholders who educate and counsel medicare beneficiaries .

according to agency officials , the webinars cover a range of topics related to medicare benefits and coverage , including behavioral health .

the officials also told us that cms partners with state health insurance programs to provide information about medicare , including information to help medicare beneficiaries understand their coverage .

cms officials also stated that the agency conducts public awareness and outreach campaigns to provide information to beneficiaries .

medicare & you — the most widely disseminated source of information on medicare benefits and coverage — does not provide explicit information about coverage of services for beneficiaries with suds , although hhs and cms have identified addressing suds as a top priority .

we reviewed the fall 2019 edition of the medicare & you publication and found that , while it does provide information on medicare coverage for behavioral health services , it does not contain an explicit description of the services that may be covered for treatment of suds .

cms officials noted that printing the almost 43 million hard copies of the fall 2019 edition of medicare & you started in july 2019 , several months before the rule implementing expanded oud coverage under medicare was finalized .

in december 2019 , cms officials updated the 2020 edition of medicare & you to include information on the expanded oud treatment authorized by the support act , which were finalized in november 2019 , and became effective in january 2020 .

according to cms officials , as of december 2019 , this updated version was available on medicare.gov , and cms officials told us it will be sent to all individuals who become eligible for medicare throughout calendar year 2020 .

we reviewed the updated 2020 web version of medicare & you and found that a reference to opioid treatment was included ; however , explicit information about medicare's coverage for other suds was not added .

although information on medicare's coverage for treating oud is important , oud represents only a subset of the suds for which medicare beneficiaries may need treatment .

further , several of the advocates we interviewed noted that medicare beneficiaries would benefit from clearer and more specific information about sud coverage .

according to data from samsha , about one in 10 sud cases is related to an oud , while the rest are related to non - opioid substances .

we asked cms officials why the additions to medicare & you relate only to ouds , and they explained that it is the only distinct medicare benefit category for substance abuse treatment .

officials also stated that while there is no category in medicare & you for other suds specifically , the publication does note some related benefits , such as for counseling and services for behavioral issues , alcohol misuse screening , and behavioral health integrative services .

however , the alcohol misuse screening benefit is specifically for beneficiaries who do not meet the criteria for alcohol dependency and covers brief counseling in a primary care setting .

the description of behavioral health does not specify that suds are a behavioral health condition .

the absence of information on medicare's coverage for suds in medicare & you is inconsistent with hhs and cms strategic priorities related to treatment for suds .

the department of health and human services' fiscal year 2018-2022 strategic plan includes among its strategic objectives reducing the impact of suds through treatment .

additionally , cms has made addressing suds a top priority and has a stated commitment to treat suds , including ouds .

beneficiaries lacking information on coverage of suds may be less likely to seek treatment .

hhs and cms have made addressing suds a priority .

however , in its most widely disseminated publication on medicare coverage and benefits , cms does not provide explicit information about the program's coverage for sud treatment services .

as a result , beneficiaries with suds may not be aware of this coverage and may not seek needed treatment .

we are making the following recommendation to cms: the administrator of cms should ensure that the medicare & you publication includes explicit information on the services covered by the medicare program for beneficiaries with a sud .

 ( recommendation 1 ) .

we provided a draft of this report to hhs for review .

hhs concurred with our recommendation , and provided written comments that are reproduced in app .

ii , and technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate .

in its written comments , hhs stated it would explore opportunities to modify the medicare & you handbook to ensure beneficiaries with substance use disorders are aware of the services covered by medicare .

hhs also reiterated some of the situations under which substance use disorder may be covered under medicare , as well as its communication strategies and tools to ensure that beneficiaries and providers are aware of all of the services available under medicare .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , the administrator of cms , and other interested parties .

in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or at cosgrovej@gao.gov .

contact points for our office of congressional relations and office of public affairs can be found on the last page of this report .

other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

to produce the tables below describing the utilization of behavioral health services by medicare beneficiaries and the providers furnishing these services , we analyzed the 2018 medicare part b claims file , the most recent data available at the time of analysis .

our analysis only includes medicare beneficiaries in fee - for - service medicare because similar reliable information was not available for beneficiaries enrolled in medicare advantage .

in addition to the contact named above , lori achman ( assistant director ) , n. rotimi adebonojo ( analyst in charge ) , todd anderson , sauravi chakrabarty , kelly krinn , rich lipinski , drew long , diona martyn , vikki porter , and caitlin scoville made key contributions to this report .

