thank you for the opportunity to appear before you to discuss the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) efforts to secure federal computer networks .

as recent cyberattacks have illustrated , the need for robust and effective cybersecurity has never been greater .

today , i will provide an overview of our work related to efforts by dhs to improve the cybersecurity posture of the federal government .

in particular , i will focus on two of the department's initiatives: the national cybersecurity protection system ( ncps ) , operationally known as einstein , and the continuous diagnostics and mitigation ( cdm ) program .

in developing this testimony , we relied on our previous reports as well as information provided by the department on its actions in response to our previous recommendations .

a more detailed discussion of the objectives , scope , and methodology for this work is included in each of the reports that are cited throughout this statement .

the work on which this statement is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform audits to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

federal agencies are dependent on computerized ( cyber ) information systems and electronic data to carry out operations and to process , maintain , and report essential information .

the security of these systems and data is vital to public confidence and the nation's safety , prosperity , and well - being .

virtually all federal operations are supported by computer systems and electronic data , and agencies would find it difficult , if not impossible , to carry out their missions and account for their resources without these information assets .

hence , ineffective security controls to protect these systems and data could have a significant impact on a broad array of government operations and assets .

computer networks and systems used by federal agencies are often riddled with security vulnerabilities — both known and unknown .

these systems are often interconnected with other internal and external systems and networks , including the internet , thereby increasing the number of avenues of attack and expanding their attack surface .

in addition , cyber threats to systems supporting the federal government are evolving and becoming more sophisticated .

these threats come from a variety of sources and vary in terms of the types and capabilities of the actors , their willingness to act , and their motives .

for example , foreign nations — where adversaries possess sophisticated levels of expertise and significant resources to pursue their objectives — pose increasing risks .

safeguarding federal computer systems has been a long - standing concern .

this year marks the 20th anniversary of when gao first designated information security as a government - wide high - risk area in 1997 .

we expanded this high - risk area to include safeguarding the systems supporting our nation's critical infrastructure in 2003 and protecting the privacy of personally identifiable information in 2015 .

over the last several years , gao has made about 2,500 recommendations to agencies aimed at improving the security of federal systems and information .

these recommendations identified actions for agencies to take to strengthen their information security programs and technical controls over their computer networks and systems .

many agencies continue to be challenged in safeguarding their information systems and information , in part because many of these recommendations have not been implemented .

as of february 2017 , about 1,000 of our information security - related recommendations had not been implemented .

our audits of the effectiveness of information security programs and controls at federal agencies have consistently shown that agencies are challenged in securing their information systems and information .

in particular , agencies have been challenged in the following activities: enhancing capabilities to effectively identify cyber threats to agency systems and information .

a key activity for assessing cybersecurity risk and selecting appropriate mitigating controls is the identification of cyber threats to computer networks , systems , and information .

in 2016 , we reported on several factors that agencies identified as impairing their ability to identify these threats to a great or moderate extent .

the impairments included an inability to recruit and retain personnel with the appropriate skills , rapidly changing threats , continuous changes in technology , and a lack of government - wide information sharing mechanisms .

we believe that addressing these impairments will enhance the ability of agencies to identify the threats to their systems and information and be in a better position to select and implement appropriate countermeasures .

implementing sustainable processes for securely configuring operating systems , applications , workstations , servers , and network devices .

in our reports , we routinely determine that agencies do not enable key information security capabilities of their operating systems , applications , workstations , servers , and network devices .

agencies were not always aware of the insecure settings that introduced risk to the computing environment .

we believe that establishing strong configuration standards and implementing sustainable processes for monitoring and enabling configuration settings will strengthen the security posture of federal agencies .

patching vulnerable systems and replacing unsupported software .

federal agencies we have reviewed consistently fail to apply critical security patches on their systems in a timely manner , sometimes doing so years after the patch becomes available .

we have consistently identified instances where agencies use software that is no longer supported by their vendors .

these shortcomings place agency systems and information at significant risk of compromise , since many successful cyberattacks exploit known vulnerabilities associated with software products .

we believe that using vendor - supported and patched software will help to reduce this risk .

developing comprehensive security test and evaluation procedures and conducting examinations on a regular and recurring basis .

federal agencies we have reviewed often do not test or evaluate their information security controls in a comprehensive manner .

the agency evaluations we reviewed were sometimes based on interviews and document reviews ( rather than in depth security evaluations ) , were limited in scope , and did not identify many of the security vulnerabilities that our examinations identified .

we believe that conducting in - depth security evaluations that examine the effectiveness of security processes and technical controls is essential for effectively identifying system vulnerabilities that place agency systems and information at risk .

the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) provides a comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over information resources that support federal operations and assets and for ensuring the effective oversight of information security risks , including those throughout civilian , national security , and law enforcement agencies .

the law requires each agency to develop , document , and implement an agency - wide information security program to provide risk - based protections for the information and information systems that support the operations and assets of the agency .

fisma also establishes key government - wide roles for dhs .

specifically , with certain exceptions , dhs is to administer the implementation of agency information security policies and practices for information systems including: monitoring agency implementation of information security policies and providing operational and technical guidance to agencies ; operating a central federal information security incident center ; and deploying technology upon request to assist the agency to continuously diagnose and mitigate cyber threats and vulnerabilities .

in addition , the cybersecurity act of 2015 requires dhs to deploy , operate , and maintain for use by any federal agency , a capability to ( 1 ) detect cybersecurity risks in network traffic transiting to or from agency information systems and ( 2 ) prevent network traffic with such risks from traveling to or from an agency information system or modify the traffic to remove the cybersecurity risk .

in implementing federal law for securing agencies' information and systems , dhs is spearheading several initiatives to assist federal agencies in protecting their computer networks and electronic information .

these include ncps , cdm , and other services .

however , our work has highlighted the need for advances within these initiatives .

operated by dhs's united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) , ncps is intended to detect and prevent cyber intrusions into agency networks , analyze network data for trends and anomalous data , and share information with agencies on cyber threats and incidents .

deployed in stages , ncps , operationally known as einstein , has provided increasing capabilities to detect and prevent potential cyber - attacks involving the network traffic entering or exiting the networks of participating federal agencies .

table 1 provides an overview of the einstein deployment stages to date .

the overarching objectives of ncps are to provide functionality that supports intrusion detection , intrusion prevention , analytics , and information sharing .

however , in january 2016 , we reported that ncps had partially , but not fully , met these objectives: intrusion detection: ncps provided dhs with a limited ability to detect potentially malicious activity entering and exiting computer networks at federal agencies .

specifically , ncps compared network traffic to known patterns of malicious data , or “signatures,” but did not detect deviations from predefined baselines of normal network behavior .

in addition , ncps did not monitor several types of network traffic and therefore would not have detected malicious traffic embedded in such traffic .

ncps also did not examine traffic for certain common vulnerabilities and exposures that cyber threat adversaries could have attempted to exploit during intrusion attempts .

intrusion prevention: the capability of ncps to prevent intrusions was limited to the types of network traffic it monitored .

for example , the intrusion prevention function monitored and blocked e - mail determined to be malicious .

however , it did not monitor malicious content within web traffic , although dhs planned to deliver this capability in 2016 .

analytics: ncps supported a variety of data analytical tools , including a centralized platform for aggregating data and a capability for analyzing the characteristics of malicious code .

however , dhs had not developed planned capabilities to facilitate near real - time analysis of various data streams , perform advanced malware behavioral analysis , and conduct forensic analysis in a more collaborative way .

dhs planned to develop and implement these enhancements through 2018 .

information sharing: dhs had yet to develop most of the planned functionality for ncps's information - sharing capability , and requirements had only recently been approved at the time of our review .

agencies and dhs also did not always agree about whether notifications of potentially malicious activity had been sent or received , and agencies had mixed views about the usefulness of these notifications .

further , dhs did not always solicit — and agencies did not always provide — feedback on them .

in addition , while dhs had developed metrics for measuring the performance of ncps , the metrics did not gauge the quality , accuracy , or effectiveness of the system's intrusion detection and prevention capabilities .

as a result , dhs was unable to describe the value provided by ncps .

to enhance the functionality of ncps , we made six recommendations to dhs , which if implemented , could help the agency to expand the capability of ncps to detect cyber intrusions , notify customers of potential incidents , and track the quality , efficiency , and accuracy of supporting actions related to detecting and preventing intrusions , providing analytic services , and sharing cyber - related information .

dhs concurred with the recommendations .

in february 2017 when we followed up on the status of the recommendations , dhs officials stated that they have implemented 2 of the recommendations and initiated actions to address the other 4 recommendations .

we are in the process of evaluating dhs's actions for the two implemented recommendations .

in january 2016 , we also reported that federal agencies had adopted ncps to varying degrees .

specifically , the 23 civilian agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act that were required to implement the intrusion detection capabilities had routed some traffic to ncps intrusion detection sensors .

however , as of january 2016 , only 5 of the 23 agencies were receiving intrusion prevention services , due to certain policy and implementation challenges .

for example , officials stated that the ability to meet dhs security requirements to use the intrusion prevention capabilities varied from agency to agency .

further , agencies had not taken all the technical steps needed to implement the system , such as ensuring that all network traffic was being routed through ncps sensors .

this occurred in part because dhs had not provided network routing guidance to agencies .

as a result , it had limited assurance regarding the effectiveness of the system .

we recommended that dhs work with federal agencies and the internet service providers to document secure routing requirements in order to better ensure the complete , safe , and effective routing of information to ncps sensors .

dhs concurred with the recommendation .

when we followed up with dhs on the status of the recommendations , dhs officials said that nearly all of the agencies covered by the cfo act are receiving at least one of the intrusion prevention services , as of march 2017 .

further , the officials stated that dhs has collaborated with the office of management and budget ( omb ) to develop new guidance for agencies on perimeter security capabilities as well as alternative routing strategies .

we will evaluate the network routing guidance when dhs finalizes and implements it .

the cdm program provides federal agencies with tools and services that are intended to provide them with the capability to automate network monitoring , correlate and analyze security - related information , and enhance risk - based decision making at agency and government - wide levels .

these tools include sensors that perform automated scans or searches for known cyber vulnerabilities , the results of which can feed into a dashboard that alerts network managers and enables the agency to allocate resources based on the risk .

dhs , in partnership with and through the general services administration , established a government - wide acquisition vehicle for acquiring continuous diagnostics and mitigation capabilities and tools .

the cdm blanket purchase agreement is available to federal , state , local , and tribal government entities for acquiring these capabilities .

there are three phases of cdm implementation: phase 1: this phase involves deploying products to automate hardware and software asset management , configuration settings , and common vulnerability management capabilities .

according to the cybersecurity strategy and implementation plan , dhs purchased phase 1 tools and integration services for all participating agencies in fiscal year 2015 .

phase 2: this phase intends to address privilege management and infrastructure integrity by allowing agencies to monitor users on their networks and to detect whether users are engaging in unauthorized activity .

according to the cybersecurity strategy and implementation plan , dhs was to provide agencies with additional phase 2 capabilities throughout fiscal year 2016 , with the full suite of cdm phase 2 capabilities delivered by the end of that fiscal year .

phase 3: according to dhs , this phase is intended to address boundary protection and event management for managing the security life cycle .

it focuses on detecting unusual activity inside agency networks and alerting security personnel .

the agency planned to provide 97 percent of federal agencies the services they need for cdm phase 3 in fiscal year 2017 .

as we reported in may 2016 , most of the 18 agencies covered by the cfo act that had high - impact systems were in the early stages of cdm implementation .

all 17 of the civilian agencies that we surveyed indicated they had developed their own strategy for information security continuous monitoring .

additionally , according to survey responses , 14 of the 17 had deployed products to automate hardware and software asset configuration settings and common vulnerability management .

further , more than half of the agencies noted that they had leveraged products / tools provided through the general services administration's acquisition vehicle .

however , only 2 of the 17 agencies reported that they had completed installation of agency and bureau / component - level dashboards and monitored attributes of authorized users operating in their agency's computing environment .

agencies also noted that expediting the implementation of cdm phases could be of benefit to them in further protecting their high - impact systems .

the effective implementation of the cdm tools and capabilities can assist agencies in overcoming the challenges we have identified that they face when securing their information systems and information .

as noted earlier , our audits often identify insecure configurations , unpatched or unsupported software , and other vulnerabilities in agency systems .

we believe that the tools and capabilities available under the cdm program , when effectively used by agencies , can help them to diagnose and mitigate vulnerabilities to their systems .

by continuing to make these tools and capabilities available to federal agencies , dhs can also have additional assurance that agencies are better positioned to protect their information systems and information .

dhs provides other services that could help agencies protect their information systems .

such services include , but are not limited to: us - cert monthly operational bulletins are intended to provide senior federal government information security officials and staff with actionable information to improve their organization's cybersecurity posture based on incidents observed , reported , or acted on by dhs and us - cert .

cyberstat reviews are in - depth sessions with national security staff , omb , dhs , and an agency to discuss that agency's cybersecurity posture and opportunities for collaboration .

according to omb , these interviews are face - to - face , evidence - based meetings intended to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture .

the sessions are to assist the agencies in developing focused strategies for improving their information security posture in areas where there are challenges .

dhs red and blue team exercises are intended to provide services to agencies for testing their systems with regard to potential attacks .

a red team emulates a potential adversary's attack or exploitation capabilities against an agency's cybersecurity posture .

the blue team defends an agency's information systems when the red team attacks , typically as part of an operational exercise conducted according to rules established and monitored by a neutral group .

in may 2016 , we reported that although participation varied among the 18 agencies we surveyed , most of those that chose to participate generally found these services to be useful in aiding the cybersecurity protection of their high - impact systems .

specifically , 15 of 18 agencies participated in us - cert monthly operational bulletins , and most found the service very or somewhat useful .

all 18 agencies participated in the cyberstat reviews , and most found the service very or somewhat useful .

9 of 18 agencies participated in dhs' red / blue team exercises , and most found the exercises to be very or somewhat useful .

half of the agencies in our survey reported that they wanted an expansion of federal initiatives and services to help protect their high - impact systems .

for example , agencies noted that expediting the implementation of cdm phases , sharing threat intelligence information , and sharing attack vectors , could be of benefit to them in further protecting their high - impact systems .

we believe that by continuing to make these services available to agencies , dhs will be better able to assist agencies in strengthening the security of their information systems .

in conclusion , dhs is leading several programs that can benefit federal efforts to secure agency information systems and information .

two such programs , ncps and cdm , offer the prospect of important advances in the security over federal systems .

enhancing ncps's capabilities and greater adoption by agencies will help dhs achieve the full benefit of the system .

effective implementation of cdm functionality by federal agencies could better position them to protect their information technology resources from evolving and pernicious threats .

chairman ratcliffe , ranking member richmond , and members of the subcommittee , this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to respond to your questions .

if you or your staff have any questions about this testimony , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov .

contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement .

gao staff who made key contributions to this testimony are christopher businsky , michael w. gilmore , nancy glover , jeff knott , kush k. malhotra , scott pettis , david plocher , and angela d. watson .

this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states .

the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao .

however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately .

