the navy's vh - 92a program is to replace the aging presidential helicopter fleet , which has been in service for several decades .

the vh - 92a program intends to provide new helicopters for safe , reliable , and timely transportation for the president of the united states and other parties as directed by the white house military office .

the navy plans to acquire a fleet of 23 vh - 92a helicopters to replace the marine corps' existing fleet of vh - 3d and vh - 60n aircraft .

the navy's acquisition strategy is to integrate mature technologies and an executive interior into an existing helicopter while minimizing modifications .

initial delivery of the vh - 92a helicopters is scheduled to begin in fiscal year 2020 with production ending in fiscal year 2023 .

the national defense authorization act of 2014 included a provision for gao to report on the presidential helicopter program annually until the navy awards a contract for full - rate production , currently planned for 2021 .

in this report we discuss ( 1 ) the extent to which the program is meeting cost , schedule , and performance goals and ( 2 ) challenges , if any , the program has experienced in developmental testing and in producing aircraft and plans for addressing the challenges .

to assess whether the program is achieving cost , schedule , and performance goals , we compared cost estimates and program milestones established at the start of development to current estimates and milestone dates .

these data were contained in defense acquisition executive summary reports , selected acquisition reports , and program briefings provided by the program office and sikorsky aircraft corporation , a lockheed martin company ( the prime contractor for the program ) .

we also examined and analyzed key acquisition documents including contractor monthly status reports , earned value management data , and defense contract management agency reports to determine the performance and cost status of the development effort .

we reviewed the program's integrated master schedule ( ims ) and compared it against best practices criteria in the gao schedule assessment guide and discussed the results of our schedule assessment with vh - 92a program officials .

to understand potential program challenges facing the program in system development and steps taken to address those challenges , we interviewed program officials from the navy's presidential helicopter program office , as well as officials from the defense contract management agency and from the offices of the director , operational testing and evaluation , and department of defense ( dod ) , developmental test and evaluation to better understand the test and evaluation aspects of the program .

we analyzed data on program risks and challenges obtained during our visits to the navy's presidential helicopter program office in patuxent river , maryland and the lockheed martin facility in owego , new york .

we conducted this performance audit from june 2018 to april 2019 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

those standards require that we plan and perform the audit and obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .

the marine corps uses a fleet of 23 helicopters to support the president in the national capital region and when traveling in the continental united states and overseas .

these aircraft have been in service for decades .

in april 2002 , the navy began development of a replacement helicopter later identified as the vh - 71 program .

by 2009 , schedule delays , performance issues , and a doubling of cost estimates , from $6.5 billion in 2005 to $13 billion in 2009 , prompted the navy to terminate the program .

the need for a replacement helicopter remained , and by april 2012 , the office of the secretary of defense approved the navy's current acquisition approach .

the navy's approach is based on the modification of an in - production aircraft to replace the legacy aircraft , by incorporating an executive cabin interior and unique mission equipment such as communications and mission systems , and limiting modifications to the aircraft to avoid a costly airworthiness recertification .

in may 2014 , the navy awarded a fixed - price incentive ( firm target ) contract to sikorsky aircraft corporation , a lockheed martin company , for an engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase .

the contract includes options for production quantities .

the vh - 92a presidential helicopter is based on sikorsky's s - 92a commercial helicopter .

the fixed - price incentive contract includes a ceiling price of $1.3 billion that limits the maximum amount that the navy may have to pay the contractor under the contract subject to other contract terms .

the vh - 92a is expected to provide improved performance , survivability , and communications capabilities , while offering increased passenger capacity when compared to the current helicopters .

sikorsky is taking s - 92a aircraft from an active production line ( at the sikorsky plant in coatesville , pennsylvania ) to a dedicated vh - 92a modification facility for subsystem integration at its plant in stratford , connecticut .

when the aircraft arrives from coatesville , some components , such as circuit breaker panels , engines , and main and tail rotor blades are removed .

after airframe modifications are done , the aircraft is then transferred to the sikorsky facility in owego , new york , where integration of the mission communications system , painting , and contractor - led testing , installation of the executive cabin interior , and the delivery of the aircraft will take place .

see figure 1 for a depiction of modification of the commercial s - 92a aircraft to the vh - 92a presidential helicopter .

the vh - 92a development program includes delivery of two engineering development model ( edm ) test aircraft and four system demonstration test article ( sdta ) aircraft .

the first flight of the first edm aircraft took place in july 2017 and the second edm aircraft's first flight occurred in november 2017 .

the two edm aircraft are currently undergoing government - led integrated testing , at naval air station patuxent river , maryland , and were used to conduct an operational assessment in march 2019 to support a decision on whether to enter low - rate initial production .

the four sdta aircraft , now in the modification stages , are production representative aircraft being built under the development contract .

these aircraft are to be used in the vh - 92a's initial operational test and evaluation , which is planned to begin in march 2020 .

the results of that testing will be used to inform a decision whether to enter full - rate production in 2021 .

these sdta aircraft will be used to determine whether the vh - 92a is operationally effective and suitable for its intended use .

in july 2018 , the federal aviation administration certified the vh - 92a edm - 1 aircraft and supporting documentation to allow delivery to the government under the contract .

according to the program office , the first edm vh - 92a configured test aircraft arrived at naval air station in patuxent river , maryland , to begin government - led performance testing .

the program office explained that in december 2018 , the contractor provided vh - 92a edm - 2 , the second development aircraft , to the navy and it , too , is undergoing government testing .

the vh - 92a total program acquisition cost estimate has declined from $5.18 billion to $4.95 billion ( then - year dollars ) — since the program started in april 2014 .

contractor officials attribute that the estimated decline in cost is due to stable requirements , a low number of design changes , and streamlined processes and reviews .

the program has incurred delays of about 5 months to the start of its operational assessment due to parts shortages and early integration problems during product development .

program officials told us they have adjusted schedule milestones accordingly and now project that the vh - 92a is on track to meet its key performance parameters , including providing a fully interoperable mission communications system ( mcs ) in time for initial operational test and evaluation in 2020 .

the navy continues to reduce its acquisition cost estimate for the vh - 92a program .

the total vh - 92a program acquisition cost estimate has decreased $234 million or about 4.5 percent — from $5.18 billion to $4.95 billion ( then - year dollars ) — since the program started in april 2014 .

the total program acquisition unit costs have decreased by the same percentage .

according to the program office , this decrease is comprised , in part , by reductions of approximately: $36 million for lower than expected inflation rates , $88 million for efficiencies gained during development , and $103 million for revised spare parts cost and equipment production list .

a key factor in controlling total program acquisition cost has been performance requirements stability .

the navy has not added any key performance requirements to the fixed - price contract , thereby limiting cost growth .

in addition , the navy and the contractor have been able to limit the number of necessary design changes that require modifications to aircraft .

these modifications are now being incorporated into the four production representative aircraft .

the navy is using an existing basic ordering agreement with sikorsky , separate from the vh - 92a contract , for two additional design changes that are not part of the baseline program .

these changes are to allow for improved visibility from the aircraft's forward door and the addition of a fifth multi - functional display in the cockpit ( which is identical to the existing four displays ) to improve situational awareness .

the program office is working with the contractor to determine the best time to make these modifications to the aircraft in order to minimize the effect on the production schedule .

the final costs are still being negotiated ; however , the program office expects the cost of implementing these two engineering changes to be minimal relative to the program's total acquisition cost .

the navy and contractor have also taken advantage of other cost saving measures including streamlining some work processes and revised testing approach for some components ; they are also sharing secure facilities used in support of the current presidential helicopter .

in addition , they eliminated activities deemed redundant to the federal aviation administration vh - 92a airworthiness certification and plan to use a streamlined reporting process for the march 2019 operational assessment .

according to program officials , the vh - 92a has also optimized its live fire test and evaluation program .

overall , sikorsky reported it had accomplished about 83.3 percent of development work , with the remainder to be completed by october 2020 .

as of february 2019 , the contractor estimates it would have completed nearly all of its activities necessary to demonstrate performance specification compliance per the contract , by february 2019 , and the navy is now more than halfway through its ground and flight testing requirements needed to a support milestone c , the decision point for entering into low - rate initial production .

the program has addressed delays resulting from technical challenges and new discoveries during development by delaying the start dates for the operational assessment , the low - rate initial production decision , and initial operational test and evaluation by 5 months each .

the milestone start dates still meet the baseline schedule thresholds .

as we found in the past , part shortages and the integration and assembly effort taking longer than planned have all contributed to delays early in the development of the two engineering development model aircraft .

the overall effect has been between 3 and 5 months of schedule delays .

in addition , some work initially allocated to the contractor's site will now be completed at the naval air station , patuxent river , maryland .

this is a result of the contractor's inability to get some parts when needed to maintain the planned build schedule .

according to the program office , the navy has implemented a number of mitigation strategies to reduce the effect of the schedule slip , including leasing a commercial s - 92a for pilot training , reducing the duration of some future activities , adjusting the program's schedule , and reexamining and optimizing some work processes to maintain the approved program baseline schedule .

we also found that the program's integrated master schedule met the best practices for a reliable schedule compared against best practices criteria in the gao schedule assessment guide .

the success of programs depend , in part , on having an integrated and reliable master schedule that defines when and how long work will occur and how each activity is related to the others .

such a schedule is necessary for government acquisition programs for many reasons .

it provides not only a road map for systematic project execution but also the means by which to gauge progress , identify and resolve potential problems , and promote accountability at all levels of the program .

an ims provides a time sequence for the duration of a program's activities and helps everyone understand both the dates for major milestones and the activities that drive the schedule .

a program's ims is also a vehicle for developing a time - phased budget baseline .

moreover , it is an essential basis for managing tradeoffs between cost , schedule , and scope .

among other things , scheduling allows program management to decide between possible sequences of activities , determine the flexibility of the schedule according to available resources , predict the consequences of managerial action or inaction on events , and allocate contingency plans to mitigate risks .

our research has identified 10 best practices associated with effective schedule estimating that can be collapsed into 4 general characteristics ( comprehensive , well - constructed , credible , and controlled ) for sound schedule estimating .

overall , we found the program's ims fully met one and substantially met three of the four characteristics for sound schedule estimating .

table 2 provides a comparison of the planned timeframe for key events at development start to the current estimated schedule .

the navy's operational assessment began in march 2019 and ended about 30 days later ; this is nearly 2 months prior to the milestone c review , which will authorize low - rate initial production .

the contractor's delivery of the first engineering development model aircraft to the government was about a month late .

a developmental test and evaluation official stated that this reduced the already short window of time between the end of development testing and start of the operational assessment .

a director , operational test and evaluation official responsible for monitoring the program expressed concern that there is little time to address any new discoveries found during the operational assessment .

the program office acknowledged that , while solutions to any newly discovered problems may not be ready to implement at the start of production , it expects to have enough information from government - led integrated testing and the operational assessment to move forward with the milestone c decision .

according to the contractor , by february 2019 , its test program for the first two development aircraft will be nearly completed .

in addition , as of december 2018 , the government completed about 48 percent of its development ground and flight test points to support milestone c but is slightly behind , as it had planned to complete about 57 percent at this time .

between august and december 2018 , the program conducted three major test events — the navy conducted 14 landings on the white house south lawn to assess approaches , departures , and operations in the landing zone .

the navy also installed mcs version 2.0 on the second edm aircraft in support of the operational assessment and tested the ability to transport the vh - 92a in a cargo plane .

figure 2 shows the status of government testing as of january 2019 .

while the program has made progress , the vh - 92a program continues to face development challenges that could affect sikorsky's ability to deliver fully capable aircraft prior to the start of initial operational test and evaluation .

those challenges include issues associated with the aircraft's start procedures for the propulsion system , landing zone suitability , and the aircraft's mission communications system interoperability with secure networks .

according to the program office , the performance requirements associated with these challenges may not be fully achieved until after the low - rate initial production decision currently planned for june 2019 , which may result in a need to retrofit already built aircraft .

below is additional information on each of those performance requirements .

vh - 92a aircraft start procedures: as we reported last year , the vh - 92a was pursuing technical improvements related to the s - 92a propulsion system , which was not meeting a performance requirement .

according to program officials , a previously identified solution is no longer being pursued .

however , these officials stated that the program is continuing to assess current capabilities and both material and non - material solutions to any potential capability shortfalls .

testing to demonstrate aircraft performance against the requirement will be completed prior to the milestone c review in june 2019 .

design changes , if needed , will be coordinated with program stakeholders .

program risk for this performance requirement has not changed since our april 2018 report on the program .

landing zone suitability: the vh - 92a operates in and out of a variety of restrictive and highly visible landing zones .

the white house south lawn is one of the most frequent locations utilized for helicopter operations in support of the president .

as we reported last year , the program was not meeting a key system capability requirement to land the aircraft without adversely affecting landing zones ( including the white house south lawn ) .

the program has still not fully met this requirement and its assessment of this risk has increased since our last report .

according to program officials , sikorsky expects to have a solution for this requirement by november 2020 .

mission communications system ( mcs ) : the mission communications system is a subsystem of the vh - 92a aircraft that provides on - board and off - board communications services for the pilots , passengers , and crew .

currently , the vh - 92a program has experienced problems connecting the mcs to secure networks , presenting a new risk area for the program .

according to program officials , the mcs cannot connect to required secure networks due to recent changes in security protocols .

design changes will be needed to permanently correct this problem .

for the march 2019 operational assessment , the program plans to connect to existing networks that do not use the new security protocols .

this allowed the operational assessment to proceed but will limit the scope of testing .

the navy plans to have a final fix by january 2020 that will then be incorporated into the four production representative helicopters built under the development contract .

these changes have caused the navy to delay the start of the vh - 92 initial operational test and evaluation by 3 months , a delay that is still within the approved program baseline threshold , as discussed earlier .

we provided a draft of this report to dod for review and comment .

dod provided technical comments , which were incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the acting secretary of defense and the secretary of the navy .

in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .

if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or sullivanm@gao.gov .

contacts points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .

gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix l .

in addition to the contract above , bruce h. thomas , assistant director ; marvin e. bonner ; bonita j. p. oden: peter anderson , juana s. collymore , danny c. royer , and marie ahearn made key contributions to this report .

presidential helicopter: vh - 92a program is stable and making progress while facing challenges .

gao - 18-359 .

washington , d.c.: april 30 , 2018 .

defense acquisitions: assessments of selected weapon programs .

gao - 17-333sp .

washington , d.c.: march 30 , 2017 .

presidential helicopter: program progressing largely as planned .

gao - 16-395 .

washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2016 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: program established knowledge - based business case and entered system development with plans for managing challenges .

gao - 15-392r.washington , d.c.: april 14 , 2015 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: update on program's progress toward development start .

gao - 14-358r .

washington , d.c.: april 10 , 2014 .

department of defense's waiver of competitive prototyping requirement for the vxx presidential helicopter replacement program .

gao - 13-826r.washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2013 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: program makes progress in balancing requirements , costs , and schedule .

gao - 13-257 .

washington , d.c.: april 9 , 2013 .

presidential helicopter acquisition: effort delayed as dod adopts new approach to balance requirements , costs , and schedule .

gao - 12-381r .

washington , d.c.: february 27 , 2012 .

defense acquisitions: application of lessons learned and best practices in the presidential helicopter program .

gao - 11-380r .

washington , d.c.: march 25 , 2011 .

