the internal revenue service ( irs ) agreed with recommendations we made in june 1998 to broaden its year 2000-related contingency planning approach by developing a comprehensive , business - based set of business continuity and contingency plans .

because adequate plans are necessary for mitigating the impact of any year 2000-related system failure , we followed up on our june 1998 report by reviewing two plans that address critical irs business processes .

we recognize that these plans are being revised to incorporate the results of testing that was done in july 1999 .

at the time we prepared this report , however , the testing reports were not completed .

because of the time - critical nature of year 2000 business continuity and contingency planning , we are reporting the results of our work at this time , rather than waiting to review testing reports and any revisions that may be made to the plans as a result of that testing .

our objective was to evaluate two irs business continuity and contingency plans for their consistency and completeness on the basis of irs' guidance for such plans .

we focused on 2 of the 18 plans that irs developed for its submission processing core business process .

these two plans address processing paper tax returns that result in a refund and receiving paper submissions ( which include tax returns ) .

we reviewed these plans because they are designed to address failure scenarios that , if they occur and are prolonged , could require irs to revert to manual operations for issuing refunds — something that could potentially affect the majority of taxpayers that file individual tax returns .

for example , in calendar year 1998 , irs processed about 91 million paper individual tax returns and issued more than 82 million refunds totaling about $112 billion .

business continuity and contingency plans should describe the steps an organization would take to ensure the continuity of its core business processes in the event of a system failure .

in a june 1998 report , we made a series of recommendations aimed at broadening irs' year 2000 contingency planning approach to encompass a core business system focus as called for in our business continuity and contingency plan guide.irs agreed with our recommendations and in july 1998 began to take action to develop a more comprehensive , business - based approach to contingency planning .

irs' century date change project office hired a contractor to provide business continuity and contingency planning expertise and training and assist the business areas in developing and testing their plans .

irs established a working group comprised of representatives from irs' business areas to identify irs' core processes and associated subprocesses .

for each core business process , irs established a working group to ( 1 ) identify possible failure scenarios for subprocesses ; ( 2 ) determine the business impact of these failures ; ( 3 ) determine which failure scenarios should be addressed by business contingency plans , based on a scoring system that included business impact and risk ; and ( 4 ) develop plans for those scenarios .

irs determined that business continuity and contingency plans should be prepared for all of the failure scenarios for its five submission processing subprocesses ( receive paper submissions ; receive electronic submissions ; control and track tax and submissions ; process , correct , and forward payment data ; and process , correct , and forward tax information return data ) , several of which involve issuing refunds .

in november 1998 , irs' century date change project office issued its business continuity and contingency plan guidance that describes the ( 1 ) methodology to be used to develop business contingency plans ( the term irs uses for plans prepared in accordance with this guidance ) and ( 2 ) types of information that should be included in the plans .

irs' guidance states that irs used our guide to help develop its methodology for preparing business contingency plans .

irs' chief operations officer designated a year 2000 business executive to help coordinate the efforts of the working groups and oversee the development of the plans .

according to irs officials , the groups used irs' guidance to develop the plans .

these groups also received technical guidance from the contractor .

each business contingency plan was assigned to an executive - level official who was responsible for approving the plan .

in the event of a year 2000 system - related failure , this executive is also to decide if and when the trigger conditions have been met for implementing the business contingency plan .

the plans were to be tested to identify any needed changes .

the two plans that we reviewed were tested on july 8 and 9 , 1999 , respectively .

the refund plan and the paper submissions plan were inconsistent and incomplete in two key areas of irs' guidance .

these areas were performance goals and mitigating actions .

these weaknesses raise questions about whether these two plans provide sufficient assurance that irs has taken all the necessary steps to reduce the impact of a potential year 2000 failure .

irs officials agreed to make changes to these two plans to improve their consistency and completeness in these areas .

in addition , irs officials said they have taken steps to help ensure the consistency and completeness of other business contingency plans and make changes to those plans if necessary .

irs does not have viable , alternative backup systems for the various information systems used for processing tax returns .

further , irs' refund plan acknowledges that in the event that one or more of these systems fail , irs may experience “a major work stoppage,” depending on how long the failure continues .

given the lack of automated alternatives , the refund plan calls for ( 1 ) notifying the public and ( 2 ) reverting to manual issuance of refunds — a process that irs currently uses for certain types of taxpayers ( eg , those receiving a refund of more than $1 million or those with a specific hardship ) .

although this business contingency plan includes a specific performance goal as required by irs' guidance , that goal is inconsistent with the recommended contingency actions .

specifically , the plan's performance goal calls for issuing 20 percent of the normal refund volume , using a $5,000 minimum as the threshold for manual issuance .

however , the plan's contingency procedures call for instituting a manual operation that would give priority to processing refunds for 1040ez returns .

these returns are filed by taxpayers with taxable incomes of less than $50,000 .

consequently , these returns may not generate a significant number of $5,000 refunds .

the inconsistency between the performance goal and the business contingency plan procedures raises questions about the goal that irs is trying to achieve with its contingency plan .

for example , if irs is trying to reduce the potential for incurring increased interest costs on late refunds , high - dollar refunds should be targeted regardless of the type of return.however , if irs is trying to expedite tax refunds for those taxpayers who may have the greatest financial need , a performance goal that focuses on issuing refunds of $5,000 or more may not be appropriate .

in our june 1999 meeting with irs officials , we pointed out this inconsistency , and they agreed that they needed to change the plan's performance goal .

in our meeting , the executive that was responsible for this plan said the plan's performance goal should focus on issuing refunds to certain “hardship” taxpayers .

according to irs , hardship taxpayers would be those that filed a return with ( 1 ) a form 911 , application for taxpayer assistance order ; ( 2 ) an earned income tax credit , which is a refundable tax credit available to low - income , working taxpayers ; or ( 3 ) an adjusted gross income within a certain dollar range that is to be determined if a year 2000 failure actually occurs .

with respect to mitigating actions , this plan did not include dates for completing them before a potential year 2000 failure .

examples of the plan's mitigating actions include ( 1 ) preparing a letter to the department of the treasury's financial management service outlining the process for transferring refund documents and files , ( 2 ) planning for one additional week of training on the manual refund issuance process , ( 3 ) identifying additional secure storage space in each service center , and ( 4 ) coordinating press release information with irs' office of public affairs .

moreover , the plan did not specify which individuals were to be responsible for completing the mitigating actions .

although irs' guidance does not require that the plan identify specific individuals , without identifying responsible individuals and dates for completing the mitigating actions , irs has little assurance that these actions will be completed before a potential year 2000 failure .

in our june 1999 meeting , the executive responsible for this plan acknowledged this omission and agreed that the mitigating actions should identify responsible individuals and completion dates .

irs receives paper submissions , including tax returns , at each service center loading dock .

from the loading dock , the returns are taken to the mailroom for sorting .

irs' service center automated mail processing system ( scamps ) is a new automated system that irs uses to sort the mail .

scamps is to ( 1 ) open the envelopes to expedite the extraction process , in which employees remove the tax return information from the envelopes ; ( 2 ) identify those tax returns with checks ; ( 3 ) read the bar - coded tax return envelopes and sort them into one of 40 different categories ; and ( 4 ) sort outgoing mail .

the paper submissions plan focuses on the contingency actions to be implemented in the event that scamps experiences a year 2000 system failure .

although irs' guidance calls for plans to contain a performance goal , the paper submissions plan did not include one .

according to the plan , “specific performance measures for manual mail handling operations are not yet available.” however , without a performance goal , it is unclear how irs determined that it would be sufficient to “use available service center personnel to handle incoming mail” as specified in the plan .

while we recognize that irs is developing new performance measures that may not yet be available for this business function , in our june 1999 meeting with irs officials , we identified information that could be used to develop a performance goal for the plan .

for example , the scamps processing rate could be used as a guide for developing an acceptable ( albeit reduced ) level of service for a manual mail sorting process .

irs could also use its productivity data on employees that manually extract tax return information from envelopes as a basis for developing a performance goal .

the irs executive that was responsible for this plan agreed that a goal should be included and that these two data sources could be used to develop that goal .

the plan's mitigating actions were also incomplete .

like the refund plan , this plan did not include the dates and the responsible individuals for completing the plan's two mitigating actions .

also , we told irs officials that we had questions about the viability of one of the plan's mitigating actions .

that action calls for reverting back to a mail sorting system that is currently not year 2000 compliant .

even if irs could develop a workaround solution to make the older mail sorting system year 2000 compliant , irs officials said that they had planned to remove the equipment for the older system by the 2000 filing season .

irs officials told us that as a result of testing this plan , this mitigating action would be deleted in the revised plan .

the executive responsible for this plan also agreed to add responsible individuals and the dates for completing the other mitigating action , which pertains to sorting outgoing mail .

in addition to agreeing to make changes to the two plans , irs officials said that actions are under way to help ensure that other business contingency plans are consistent and complete .

according to officials in irs' business systems requirements office ( bsro ) , a staff member has been designated to review all of the business contingency plans for consistency and completeness and for crosscutting issues among the plans .

heretofore , bsro did not view this as its function , in part because according to bsro officials , it had a limited number of staff .

irs also has issued a work request for one of its year 2000 contractors to develop a database that bsro staff could use to track the implementation of key elements of the business contingency plan ( eg , triggers , mitigating actions , contingency team actions ) .

according to irs , information from the business contingency plans is to be added to the database by late september 1999 , and reports are to be generated shortly thereafter .

if properly implemented in a timely fashion , these actions should provide irs with a higher level of assurance that its business contingency plans will help reduce the impact in the event of a year 2000 – related system failure .

accordingly , we are not making any recommendations at this time .

to achieve our objective of evaluating the consistency and completeness of two of irs' year 2000 business contingency plans according to irs' guidance , we reviewed the following business continuity and contingency plan guidance: ( 1 ) year 2000 computing crisis: business continuity and contingency planning ( gao / aimd - 10.1.19 , aug. 1998 ) ; ( 2 ) internal revenue service century date change contingency management plan , ( version 5.0 , mar .

1 , 1999 ) ; and ( 3 ) internal revenue service century date change business continuity and contingency plan , ( version 1.0 , nov. 24 , 1998 ) ; interviewed officials from the century date change project office ; interviewed members of the submission processing contingency plan working group , the executive that was responsible for the two plans we reviewed , the business year 2000 executive , and other bsro staff ; toured the atlanta service center to learn more about how tax returns are processed through irs' information systems ; and reviewed 6 of the 10 sections of the two business contingency plans to determine whether they were consistent with irs' guidance .

we did not analyze four sections of the plans ( training and testing , post - event wrap - up , contingency actions log sheet , and information recovery ) for several reasons .

in lieu of including the testing procedures in the plan , irs developed separate test plans for each contingency plan .

to provide timely feedback to irs so that they could begin corrective actions promptly , we focused our efforts on the business contingency plans themselves rather than the test plans .

we did not analyze the post - event wrap - up information or the contingency actions log sheet because these sections are to be completed after the business contingency plan has been implemented .

both plans included little information about information recovery ( i.e. , regaining or retrieving data that may be lost or damaged as a result of a system failure ) .

we also did not review any existing business resumption plans that irs developed for other than year 2000-induced failures , and we did not examine the relationship between individual year 2000 business contingency plans and irs' “end game” activities , which irs is currently developing .

we conducted our review from may 1999 to july 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

on august 27 , 1999 , we obtained written comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of internal revenue .

 ( see app .

i for a copy of irs' letter. ) .

irs said that it generally agreed with the issues raised in our report and is taking the necessary steps to correct them .

irs also amplified on its business contingency plan testing process and clarified some facts and provided updated information , which we included in the report where appropriate .

irs said that it had envisioned that the business contingency plans were “living documents” that would be revised over time to reflect changes in technology , business processes , and legislation .

furthermore , irs said that the plans were to be tested by subject matter experts , including field staff , to ensure their viability , which would result in modifications to the plans .

we agree that the plans were to be living documents and designed our methodology accordingly .

recognizing that the plans were subject to change based on the results of business contingency plan testing ( as stated on p. 1 of our draft report ) , we met with irs in june 1999 to discuss our initial findings .

we scheduled this meeting , in part , so that irs would have the benefit of our feedback while the plans were still subject to change , and possibly before they were to be tested .

irs said that as a result of our findings on the weaknesses in the plans and the results of testing two plans , it has begun work to address our concerns .

we are sending copies of this letter to representative amo houghton , chairman , and representative william j. coyne , ranking minority member , subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means ; senator robert f. bennett , chairman , and senator christopher j. dodd , vice - chairman , senate special committee on the year 2000 technology problem ; and representative stephen horn , chairman , and representative jim turner , ranking minority member , subcommittee on government management , information and technology , house committee on government reform .

we are also sending copies to the honorable lawrence h. summers , secretary of the treasury , and the honorable jacob j. lew , director of the office of management and budget .

copies will be made available to others on request .

if you have any questions about the information contained in this report , please contact me or sherrie russ at ( 202 ) 512-9110 .

key contributors to this assignment were jackie nowicki , joanna stamatiades , and linda standau .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

