we are pleased to be here today to summarize our past work on concessions issues , discuss the need for concession reform , and provide some details on the park service's use of concessioner special accounts .

my remarks today are based on over 30 reports and testimonies we have issued over the past 20 years .

of the six land management agencies , much of our work on concessions has focused on the concession activities at the national park service within the department of the interior .

in addition , we have also reviewed concession activities in the other five land management agencies including , the u.s. forest service within the department of agriculture ; bureau of land management , bureau of reclamation , and u.s .

fish and wildlife service within the department of the interior ; and the u.s. army corps of engineers within the department of defense .

our most recent report on concessions , which we issued in april 1996 , discussed rates of returns from concessioners operating in civilian agencies throughout the federal government .

the findings of that report as well as the others continues to demonstrate the need for concessions reform among the land management agencies .

in summary , our work has shown the following: concession activities on federal lands is a large industry that generates billions of dollars .

in 1994 , there were over 11,000 concession agreements managed by civilian agencies through - out the federal government.concessioners operating under these agreements generated about $2.2 billion in gross revenue .

over 90 percent of concession agreements and the concession gross revenues were from concessioners in the six land management agencies .

for agreements that were either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 , concessioners in the land management agencies paid the government an average of about 3 percent of their gross revenues .

in contrast , concessioners in nonland management agencies paid fees of about 9 percent of their gross revenues .

the key factors affecting the rate of return to the government were ( 1 ) whether the fee was established through competition , ( 2 ) whether the agency was permitted to retain most of the concessions fees it generated , and ( 3 ) whether an incumbent concessioner had a preferential right in renewing its concession agreement with the government .

throughout the federal government , rates of return from concessioners were higher when established through competition .

in addition , agencies which had authority to retain fees and which did not grant preferential rights of renewal generally obtained higher rates of return to the government from concessioners .

in previous reports , we noted that as the congress considers reforming concessions it may want to consider ( 1 ) encouraging greater competition and eliminating preferential rights of renewal , and ( 2 ) promoting greater consistency among the land management agencies in managing concessioners at federal recreation areas .

in addition , it may wish to consider providing opportunities for the land management agencies to retain at least a portion of concession fees .

mr. chairman , before i discuss our most recent report on concessions issues and the need for concession reform , i would like to note that concessioners play a vital role in enhancing the public's enjoyment of the national parks , forests , and other recreation areas .

at the same time , the land management agencies managing concessioners have an obligation to ensure not only that these concessioners provide healthy and safe services to the public , but also that the government receives a fair return for the use of its lands so that the nation's natural resources can be adequately conserved and enjoyed by future generations .

our work has shown that concession activities on federal lands are a large industry that generates billions of dollars .

in april 1996 , we issued a report on governmentwide concessions activities .

unlike our past work , which examined concession activities within the six land management agencies , this report reviewed concession operations throughout the civilian agencies of the federal government and included concession activities at agencies such as nasa , the u.s .

postal service , the department of justice , and the department of veterans affairs — just to name a few .

in the report , we found that in fiscal year 1994 , there were 11,263 concession agreements managed by 42 different federal agencies .

concessioners operating under these agreements generated about $2.2 billion in revenues , and paid the government about $65 million in fees and about $23 million in other forms of compensation .

the average total rate of return to the government from concessioners that had their concession agreement initiated or extended in fiscal year 1994 was about 3.6 percent of concession revenues .

while 42 different federal agencies have concession agreements , 93 percent of these agreements and revenues are managed by the six land management agencies .

however , in spite of having the largest programs , the rate of return from concessioners operating in the land management agencies is significantly less than the return generated from concessioners in other federal agencies .

we found that for concession agreements that were either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 , the average return to the government from concessions in land management agencies was about 3 percent while the return from concessions in the other federal agencies averaged about 9 percent .

within the six land management agencies , concession agreements in the national park service accounted for about 30 percent of the gross revenues and the return to the government .

 ( see att .

i for a list of rates of return from concessioners for agreements initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 for each federal agency in our review. ) .

our analysis of rates of return throughout the federal government indicated that there are three key factors that affect the rate of return to the government .

these are ( 1 ) whether the return from a concession agreement was established through a competitive bidding process , ( 2 ) whether the incumbent concessioner had a preferential right of renewal in the award of a follow - on concession agreement , and ( 3 ) whether the agency had the authority to retain a majority of the fees generated from the concession agreement .

our work indicated that when concession agreements are awarded through a competitive process , the rate of return to the federal government was higher .

specifically , for concession agreements that were initiated during fiscal year 1994 , the return to the government from concession agreements that were competed averaged 5.1 percent of the concessioners' gross revenues .

when competition was not used in establishing concession agreements , the return to the government averaged about 2.0 percent .

while the return to the government is higher for concessions that are competitively selected , very few concessions agreements have fees established through competition — especially among concessions in the land management agencies .

for concession agreements which were entered into during fiscal year 1994 , only 8.6 percent of over 2,100 agreements in land management agencies were established through competition .

in contrast , for concession agreements in the nonland management agencies , about 96 percent of 101 concession agreements were established through competition during this time period .

another factor affecting the return to the government from concessioners is the existence of preferential rights of renewal .

these rights primarily affect concessioners in the park service .

under the concessions policy act of 1965 , park service concessioners that have performed satisfactorily have a preferential right of renewal when their concession agreements expire .

this preference has generally meant that when a concession agreement expires , an incumbent concessioner has the right to match or better the best competing offer to win the award of the next concession agreement .

this preference tends to put a chilling effect on competition because qualified business are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely going to the incumbent concessioners .

with fewer bidders , there is less competitive pressure to increase the return to the government .

our analysis of park service concession agreements showed that in fiscal year 1994 , new concession agreements that were awarded with a preferential right of renewal resulted in a return to the government of about 3.8 percent .

in contrast , park service concession agreements that were competed in the same year without any preference resulted in an average return to the government of 6.4 percent .

a third factor that affects the rate of return to the government from concessioners is the agencies' authority to retain fees .

our analysis of federal concessions showed that when agencies are permitted to retain over 50 percent of the fees from concessions , the return to the government is over 3 times higher than agencies that are not authorized to retain this level of fees .

in addition , five nonland management agencies that had authority to retain most of their fees managed 5 percent of the concession agreements throughout the government .

these agreements generated about 3 percent of the total revenues from concessioners , but generated 18 percent of the total concession fees .

in contrast , the six land management agencies , which have not had authority to retain concession fees , have over 90 percent of the total concession agreements and concession revenues , but generate only 73 percent of the total concession fees .

thus , our work showed that agencies authorized to retain fees obtained more fees in proportion to their concessioners' revenue than agencies that were not authorized to retain fees .

for over 20 years , we have issued reports and testimonies that highlighted the need for reform of federal concession laws and policies .

our most recent work , which i have just summarized , is further evidence of the need for reform .

based on this body of work , it is our view that any efforts at reforming concessions should consider ( 1 ) encouraging greater competition in the awarding of concession agreements , including eliminating preferential rights of renewal ; and ( 2 ) promoting more consistency by including all of the land management agencies as part of concessions reform .

in addition , congress may also wish to consider providing opportunities for the land management agencies to retain at least a portion of their concession fees .

encouraging greater competition in awarding concession agreements , and eliminating preferential rights of renewal , should be a primary goal of reforming concessions .

using a competitive bid process to award concession agreements has several benefits .

our april 1996 report presents evidence that where there is competition in awarding concession agreements the rate of return to the government is significantly higher .

competition among qualified bidders would also likely result in improving the level or quality of services provided to the public .

finally , using competition to establish fees would eliminate much of the need for elaborate and at times cumbersome fee systems used by the land management agencies .

a significant impediment to competition is preferential rights of renewal granted to park service concessioners by the concessions policy act of 1965 .

thus , in our view , any legislative effort to reform existing concessions law should consider including the elimination of preferential rights of renewal .

our work has shown the need for common concessions policies among the land management agencies so that similar concessions operations are managed consistently throughout federal recreation lands .

as we reported in june 1991 , no single law authorized concessions operations for all six land management agencies .

rather , at least 11 different laws govern concessions operations .

many of these laws are specific to an agency and allow the agency broad discretion in establishing policies on the terms and conditions of concessions agreements .

one exception to this is the concessions policy act of 1965 which prescribes park service policy for several key terms and conditions in concessions agreements .

the results of differing laws and policies are that similar concessioners are managed quite differently among the land management agencies .

for example , a marina operator in the park service may have a preferential right of renewal and pay a fee based the park service's fee system that is based on industry profitability norms .

in contrast , a marina operator in the forest service may not have any preferential right to renew his agreement , and pays a fee based on the forest service's fee system that determines fees based on the concessioner's level of investment in facilities and a percentage of their revenues in up to nine different business categories such as food service or grocery .

our april report on concessions indicated that when agencies are authorized to retain most of their concession fees , the return to the government from its concessioners is significantly higher .

however , permitting agencies to retain a portion of the fees from concessioners has both costs and benefits .

our work has shown that retaining fees for use in agencies' operations serves as a powerful incentive in managing concessioners .

however , if the congress decides to use increased fees to supplant rather than supplement existing appropriations , this incentive would be diminished .

in addition , our past work in the park service and forest service has indicated that these agencies have backlogs of unmet maintenance and infrastructure needs , which combined exceed $5 billion .

furthermore , in recent years , both agencies have had to cutback on the level of visitor services provided to the public .

one option to help address these issues , which we have raised in the past , might be to provide additional financial resources through fees — including entrance fees , user fees , and concession fees .

while retaining fees will not resolve such problems as multibillion dollar backlogs , it will nonetheless provide some assistance to parks , forests , and other recreation areas across the nation .

it is important to note that permitting the land management agencies to retain fees is a form of “backdoor” spending authority , and as such raises questions of oversight and accountability .

in addition , earmarking revenues reduces governmentwide budget flexibility .

furthermore , permitting the land management agencies to retain fees could also raise scoring and compliance issues under the budget enforcement act .

these issues need to be weighed in considering whether to permit the land management agencies to retain fees .

as you requested mr. chairman , i would now like to take a few moments to discuss our recently issued report on special account funds within the park service .

park units have been permitted to keep some of the funds that are generated from specific in - park activities without going through the annual appropriation process .

one type of these special account funds deals with concessions .

these concessions special account funds are generally established as part of the terms and conditions of a concessions agreement with the park service .

as part of the agreement , the concession operator periodically escrows a portion of its gross revenues or a fixed sum of money into a bank account .

the monies deposited into the account are in lieu or in addition to franchise fees and are used by the concessioner to repair , improve , or construct facilities related to the concession operation .

franchise fees from park service concessioners generally go to the treasury .

expenditures from special accounts are made only with the approval of the park service .

the use of concessioner special account funds has increased over the past few years .

this is largely because while franchise fees are returned to the treasury , the special account funds remain at the parks .

in fact , at some of the largest parks like yellowstone and yosemite , the primary concessioner no longer pays any franchise fees .

instead , the return to the government is entirely from special account funds and other nonfee compensation .

at other parks , like the grand canyon and glacier national park , the park service and the concessioners have made amendments to concession agreements to reduce or eliminate franchise fees and to establish or increase the special account funds .

according to data from park service headquarters , in fiscal year 1994 , 21 park units had a concession special account fund ; headquarters officials estimated that the deposits totaled $13.9 million .

during this review , we contacted a sample of 27 parks units to determine the level of deposits in special account funds .

in fiscal year 1994 , 14 of the 27 units we reviewed had concessioner special accounts .

these 14 park units reported that a total of $19.4 million had been deposited into special accounts — a difference of $5.5 million more than reported by park service headquarters .

we discussed this difference with park service officials .

we found that the discrepancies were due to differing interpretations among park service concessions officials — both at headquarters and at the individual parks units — as to what should be counted as concessioners' special accounts .

however , park service officials acknowledged that the headquarter's data were not complete because the park service did not have a system in place to routinely collect information on these accounts .

the agency has been developing a system to track these accounts , and expects it to be implemented by august 1996 .

we plan to follow - up on this issue after the park service's tracking system is implemented .

mr. chairman , in recent years , an understanding has emerged that the federal government needs to be run in a more business like manner than in the past .

it is clear that agencies such as the park service and the forest service can learn some lessons about competition and incentives from nonland management agencies .

however , if the congress proceeds with reforming concessions , it should consider changing existing concessions law to encourage greater competition and eliminating preferential rights of renewal , and promoting greater consistency by establishing common concessions policies among the land management agencies .

in addition , it may wish to consider providing opportunities for the land management agencies to retain at least a portion of concession fees .

this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

total ( fees + special accounts ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

