you asked us to conduct a broad review of the drug enforcement operations of the u.s. customs service along the southwest border of the united states .

this report is one of several that we have issued in response to your request .

this report discusses the results of our evaluation of the internal control techniques customs has in place to safeguard certain law enforcement records in the treasury enforcement communications system ( tecs ) from being inappropriately deleted .

as part of our review , we examined records designated by customs as containing lookout data , which identify persons and vehicles known or suspected of illegal activity .

tecs is designed to enable customs inspectors to compare records containing lookout data with persons and vehicles entering the united states during primary screening inspections at ports of entry .

matches found during this comparison process can lead to a secondary inspection , with an intensive search and the arrest of the person and seizure of the vehicle and other property if drugs or other contraband are discovered during the search .

tecs lookout records at ports of entry can be very important to law enforcement efforts to detect smuggled narcotics crossing the border .

for example , the value of a lookout record was recently demonstrated when customs inspectors seized 112 pounds of cocaine from a vehicle arriving from mexico .

a thorough inspection of the vehicle was performed because of the active tecs lookout record on the vehicle , leading to the discovery of 46 packages of cocaine .

in developing the information in this report , we ( 1 ) interviewed key officials and reviewed tecs internal control documents at customs' headquarters and at three customs management centers ( cmc ) located along the southwest border and ( 2 ) visited three ports of entry: otay mesa , ca ; nogales , az ; and laredo , tx .

we selected the otay mesa port of entry because it was of specific interest to you .

we selected laredo because it is the busiest cargo port of entry on the southwest border , and we selected nogales to provide information on a smaller , yet busy port of entry .

at each port , we interviewed key officials to obtain information on chains of authority for the deletion of records from tecs ; reviewed tecs internal control documents ; and observed customs inspectors' use of tecs .

we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of the treasury .

these comments are discussed near the end of this letter .

we performed our work between february 1998 and july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

a major goal of customs is to prevent the smuggling of drugs into the country by attempting to create an effective drug interdiction , intelligence , and investigation capability that disrupts and dismantles smuggling organizations .

although customs inspectors have the option to conduct examinations of all persons , cargo , and conveyances entering the country , the inspectors may selectively identify for a thorough inspection those that they consider high risk for drug smuggling .

this identification is generally done through the use of databases available to customs , such as tecs .

tecs is designed to be a comprehensive enforcement and communications system that enables customs and other agencies to create or access lookout data when ( 1 ) processing persons and vehicles entering the united states ; ( 2 ) communicating with other computer systems , such as the federal bureau of investigation's national crime information center ; and ( 3 ) storing case data and other enforcement reports .

in addition to customs , tecs has users from over 20 different federal agencies , including the immigration and naturalization service ; the bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms ; the internal revenue service ; and the drug enforcement administration .

the tecs network consists of thousands of computer terminals that are located at land border crossings along the canadian and mexican borders ; sea and air ports of entry ; and the field offices of customs' office of investigations and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco and firearms .

these terminals provide access to records and reports in the tecs database containing information from customs and other department of the treasury and department of justice enforcement and investigative files .

according to the tecs user manual , all tecs users ( eg , customs inspectors and special agents ) can create and query subject records , which consist of data on persons , vehicles , aircraft , vessels , businesses or organizations , firearms , and objects .

according to tecs data standards , records should be created when the subject is deemed to be of law enforcement interest .

this interest may be based on previous violations , such as drug smuggling or suspicion of violations , or subjects that are currently or potentially of investigative interest .

one of the reasons for creating a tecs lookout record is to place a person or vehicle in the system for possible matching at customs' screening locations , such as land border ports of entry .

for example , if a vehicle's license plate that was placed on lookout for possible drug smuggling were later matched during a primary inspectionat a land border port of entry , that vehicle could be referred for additional scrutiny at a secondary inspection .

inappropriate deletions of tecs lookout records could negatively affect customs' ability to detect drug smuggling .

although inspectors have the option to conduct a thorough examination of all persons , cargo , and conveyances entering the country , they selectively identify for a thorough inspection only those that they consider high risk for drug smuggling .

this identification is generally done through the use of databases available to customs , such as tecs .

inspectors also rely on their training and experience to detect behavior that alerts them to potential drug violators .

if lookout records have been inappropriately deleted , inspectors will have less information or less accurate information on which to make their decisions .

the tecs administrative control structure consists of a series of system control officers ( sco ) at various locations , including customs headquarters , cmcs , and ports around the country .

these scos are responsible for authorizing and controlling tecs usage by all of the users within the network .

a national sco has designated other scos at customs headquarters for each major organization ( eg , office of investigations , field operations , and internal affairs ) who , in turn , have designated regional scos who have named scos at each cmc and office of investigations field office .

in some instances , scos have been appointed at the port of entry and office of investigations suboffice level .

consequently , the sco chain is a hierarchical structure with each user assigned to a local sco who , in turn , is assigned to a regional sco , and so on up to the national level .

one of an sco's primary duties is to establish user profile records on each user .

user profile records identify the user by name , social security number , position , duty station , and telephone number .

they also identify the social security number of the user's supervisor , the sco's social security number , and the tecs applications that the user is authorized to access .

scos at the various levels have certain system authorities they can pass on to other users .

for example , the record update level is a required field in the user profile record that indicates the user's authority to modify or delete records .

scos can only assign to a user the level that they have , or a lower level .

according to the tecs user manual , record update levels include the following: 1 .

users can only modify or delete records they own ( i.e. , the user created the records or received them as a transfer from the previous owner ) .

2 .

users can modify or delete any record within their specific customs sublocation , such as a port of entry , thereby ignoring the ownership chain ; the user does not have to be the owner of the record .

3 .

users can modify or delete any record owned by anyone in their ownership chain .

4 .

users can modify or delete any record in the customs service , thereby ignoring the ownership chain .

5 .

users have a combination of levels two and three .

9 .

users can modify or delete any user's record in the database .

according to customs tecs officials , when a tecs user creates a record and enters it into the system , the user's supervisor is automatically notified of the entry .

all records must be viewed by the supervisor .

the supervisor must approve the record , and the record must be linked to supporting documentation , such as a memorandum of information received .

according to the tecs user manual , tecs users can modify and delete records that they own , and on the basis of the record update level in their user profile record , may modify and delete the records of other users as follows: if the users are supervisors or scos with the proper record update level ( three or five ) , they may modify and delete the records owned by users in their supervisory or sco chain .

if the users' record update level ( two , four , or five ) allows , they may modify and delete the records created or owned by other users in a specific customs sublocation , such as a port of entry .

no other controls or restrictions are written in the tecs user manual or any other document that we reviewed .

the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 required , among other items , that we establish internal control standards that agencies are required to follow ( see 31 u.s.c .

3512 ) .

the resulting comptroller general's standards for internal controls in the federal government contain the criteria we used to assess customs' controls over the deletion of lookout records from tecs .

during our review , we identified three areas of control weakness: separation of duties , documentation of transactions , and supervision .

the comptroller general's internal control standards require that key duties and responsibilities in authorizing , processing , recording , and reviewing transactions should be separated among individuals .

to reduce the risk of error , waste , or wrongful acts or to reduce the risk of their going undetected , no one individual should control all key aspects of a transaction or event .

rather , duties and responsibilities should be assigned systematically to a number of different individuals to ensure that effective checks and balances exist .

key duties include authorizing , approving , and recording transactions and reviewing or auditing transactions .

customs' current policy authorizes a wide variety of people within and outside of an individual's supervisory and sco chain to individually delete the records that another individual owns without any checks and balances ( eg , concurrence by another person ) .

this situation increases risk because , as one sco that we interviewed told us , the more individuals — supervisors , scos , or others — with the required record update levels there are , the more vulnerable tecs is to having records inappropriately altered or deleted .

according to the tecs user manual , supervisors , scos , and other users with the proper record update level may delete tecs records that they do not own .

moreover , we noticed a range in the number of individuals who were authorized to individually delete others' records at the three cmcs and three ports we visited .

for example , the southern california cmc had 1 official — the sco — with the authority to delete others' records , while the arizona cmc had 41 individuals — supervisors , scos , and others — with that authority .

in addition , 1 of the ports we visited ( nogales ) had 22 individuals with the authority to delete any record within their port without the record owner's or anyone else's permission .

in these instances , many individuals , by virtue of their status as a supervisor or sco or because they possessed the required record update level , were able to delete records with no checks and balances in evidence .

the comptroller general's standards require that internal control systems and all transactions and other significant events are to be clearly documented , and that the documentation is to be readily available for examination .

documentation of transactions or other significant events should be complete and accurate and should facilitate tracing the transaction or event and related information from before it occurs , while it is in process , to after it is completed .

neither customs policies nor the tecs user manual contained standards or guidance to require that customs officials document reasons for the deletion of tecs lookout records .

although tecs can produce detailed information on what happened to records in the system and when it happened , there is no requirement that the person deleting the record is to describe the circumstances that called for the deletion .

thus , examiners cannot determine from the documentation whether the deletion was appropriate .

the comptroller general's standards require that qualified and continuous supervision is to be provided to ensure that internal control objectives are achieved .

this standard requires supervisors to continuously review and approve the assigned work of their staffs , including approving work at critical points to ensure that work flows as intended .

a supervisor's assignment , review , and approval of a staff's work should result in the proper processing of transactions and events , including ( 1 ) following approved procedures and requirements ; ( 2 ) detecting and eliminating errors , misunderstandings , and improper practices ; and ( 3 ) discouraging wrongful acts from occurring or recurring .

customs had no requirement for supervisory review and approval of record deletions , although supervisory review and approval were required for creating tecs records .

tecs officials told us that users could delete records that they own without supervisory approval .

in addition , anyone with a higher record update level than the record owner , inside or outside of the owner's supervisory and sco chain , could also delete any owner's record without obtaining approval .

tecs lookout records can provide customs inspectors at screening areas on the southwest border with assistance in identifying persons and vehicles suspected of involvement in drug smuggling .

internal control weaknesses over deletions of the records may compromise the value of these tools in customs' anti - drug smuggling mission .

most of the cmcs and ports we reviewed had many individuals who were able to delete tecs records without any checks and balances , regardless of whether they owned the records or whether they were in an authorized supervisory or sco chain of authority .

in addition , customs' current policy authorizes a wide variety of people within and outside of an individual's chain of authority the ability to delete records that other individuals created .

the more people inside or outside of the supervisory or sco chain of authority who can delete records without proper checks and balances , the more vulnerable the records are to inappropriate deletions .

although our review was limited to customs headquarters , three cmcs , and three ports of entry , because of the lack of systemwide ( 1 ) internal control standards concerning deletion authority and ( 2 ) specific guidance concerning the deletion of tecs records that comply with the comptroller general's standards for internal controls , it is possible that tecs lookout records are not adequately safeguarded in other cmcs and other ports of entry as well .

to better ensure that tecs lookout records are adequately safeguarded from inappropriate deletion , we recommend that the commissioner of customs develop and implement guidance and procedures for authorizing , recording , reviewing , and approving deletions of tecs records that conform to the comptroller general's standards .

these procedures should include requiring supervisory review and approval of record deletions and documenting the reason for record deletions .

the treasury under secretary for enforcement provided written comments on a draft of this report , and the comments are reprinted in appendix i .

overall , treasury and customs management generally agreed with our conclusions , and the under secretary said that treasury officials also provided technical comments , which have been incorporated in the report as appropriate .

customs has begun action on our recommendation .

customs recognized that there is a systemic weakness in not requiring supervisory approval for the deletion of tecs records and not requiring an explicit reason for the deletion of these records .

customs agreed to implement the necessary checks and balances to ensure the integrity of lookout data in tecs .

we are providing copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of house and senate committees with jurisdiction over the activities of the customs service , the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of customs , and other interested parties .

copies also will be made available to others upon request .

the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .

if you or your staff have any questions about the information in this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8777 or darryl dutton , assistant director , on ( 213 ) 830-1000 .

brian lipman , site senior the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

