this report responds to the subcommittee's request for a review of the general services administration's ( gsa ) system for estimating the rental expenses of the federal buildings fund ( fbf ) .

the subcommittee was concerned about how gsa estimated the funding needs for the rental - of - space account within fbf .

on august 8 , 1997 , and again on january 9 , 1998 , the subcommittee received requests from gsa to allow it to reprogram a combined total of $324 million in new obligational authority ( noa ) from other fbf accounts into the rental - of - space account to cover its underestimation of the expenses to be paid out of this account in fiscal years 1997 and 1998 .

in its requests , gsa attributed the need for the reprogramming actions to forecasting problems relating to lease expansions , lease cancellations , rent increases for existing leases , and the annualization of the fiscal year 1997 reprogramming .

at the time we started work on this request in august 1998 , gsa's public buildings service ( pbs ) was changing its rent expenditure tracking and estimating process and developing a new computer program , known as galaxy , to facilitate this process .

as agreed with the subcommittee , the objectives of our review were to determine whether ( 1 ) the new galaxy program included the elements needed for tracking actual rental expenditures and forecasting future rental - of - space funding requirements , and ( 2 ) the additional actions pbs was taking to improve its budget process addressed the causes of its underestimation of the rental - of - space account .

funds from the rental - of - space account in fbf pay for all leased space in gsa's inventory .

during fiscal years 1997 and 1998 , gsa received appropriations of about $4.6 billion in noa for this account , about $2.3 billion in each fiscal year .

gsa submitted two requests , totaling $324 million in noa , to reprogram funds from other fbf accounts into the rental - of - space account .

on august 8 , 1997 , gsa requested approval to reprogram $110 million of the fiscal year 1997 appropriated funds , and on january 9 , 1998 , it requested approval to reprogram another $214 million of fiscal year 1998 appropriated funds .

both requests were approved .

the amounts requested equaled about 4.7 percent of the amount initially requested by gsa in its budget requests for the rental - of - space account for fiscal year 1997 , and 9.4 percent of the amount requested for fiscal year 1998 .

in its august 8 , 1997 , reprogramming request for fiscal year 1997 , gsa attributed the need for the reprogramming to three causes .

first , it had estimated that the overall average rents would increase by 2 percent , but actual rent increases ranged from 3 to 5 percent .

this resulted in the cost to the account being underestimated by about $30.9 million .

second , on the basis of regional expectations , gsa had overestimated the amounts that would be saved through lease cancellations by about $74.1 million .

third , gsa had not been able to absorb a $5.1 million congressional reduction in appropriations requested for rental - of - space expenditures in fiscal year 1997 .

according to a gsa official , the agency could not absorb this cut because gsa was already short of noa in this account .

gsa alerted its oversight committees in its reprogramming request letter that these problems would also affect the rental - of - space account in fiscal year 1998 .

in its january 9 , 1998 , reprogramming request for fiscal year 1998 , gsa attributed the need for the reprogramming to four causes .

first , gsa needed $143.6 million to cover the $110 million underestimation in fiscal year 1997 and to annualize this error for fiscal year 1998 .

second , as in fiscal year 1997 , gsa had estimated the overall average rental rate increase at 2 percent , but actual increases ranged from 3 to 5 percent .

this resulted in the cost to the account being underestimated by about $22.5 million .

third , as in fiscal year 1997 , it had overestimated savings from lease cancellations , this time by about $41.8 million .

finally , on the basis of what regional staff believed was going to happen , gsa had underestimated the need for expansion space .

this resulted in a need for an additional $6.1 million .

the process of formulating the budget is to begin no later than the spring of each year , about 9 months before it is transmitted to congress and 18 months before the beginning of the fiscal year in which the budget becomes effective .

during the first 6 months of this period ( from about april through september ) , pbs compiles information on the various budget elements , including the rental - of - space account ; reviews the information for reasonableness and accuracy ; and prepares its budget estimates .

during the next 3 months ( october through december ) these estimates are to be submitted as a portion of gsa's budget request to the office of management and budget ( omb ) for review .

omb reviews the budget request and passes it back to gsa with any changes , and gsa may appeal omb ‘s changes before the budget is finalized .

early the following year ( between the first monday in january and the first monday in february ) , the budget is to be submitted to congress for its review and appropriation of funds .

because of the timing of the budget process , when gsa realizes that an estimation error has been included in its budget request for that fiscal year ( in fiscal year 1997 in this case ) , the error usually cannot be corrected in a future budget estimate until the second fiscal year after the error occurred ( in this case , fiscal year 1999 ) .

to accomplish our objectives , we observed the galaxy program in operation , reviewed training materials on its operation , reviewed documentation on the reprogramming requests , and interviewed pbs officials and budget and / or program analysts responsible for maintaining galaxy in 10 of gsa's 11 regions .

we discussed with the pbs deputy controller what elements were needed to track and forecast rent expenditures .

we checked to see that the elements discussed were included in the galaxy program .

we did not verify the accuracy of the data in galaxy , but we did obtain information from pbs on how it planned to ensure that the data would be accurate , reliable , and consistent .

we also did not contact customer agencies to verify the extent to which they were being contacted by gsa regarding their future space needs .

we did our work in washington , d.c. , between august 1998 and may 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we requested comments on a draft of this report from the administrator of gsa .

gsa's comments are discussed at the end of this letter .

gsa has taken corrective actions to specifically improve its tracking of the rental - of - space account and to improve its budget estimating for this account .

the major step taken to improve both the tracking and estimating of the rental - of - space account was gsa's development of the galaxy program to be the primary tool to manage the rental - of - space account for fiscal year 1999 and to help manage project expenditures for fiscal year 2001 .

the reason galaxy was developed was to provide a means to have all the regions use a consistent format , the same set of tools , and the same assumptions to monitor , reconcile , and estimate future expenditures from the rental - of - space account .

rent account analysts responsible for the rental - of - space account had not had a financial management tool for tracking and analyzing the account since september 1997 .

the previous automated system was discontinued when star was being put on - line .

rent account analysts had been using manual spreadsheets to monitor the account since that time .

the galaxy program software was developed under an existing support services contract , at no additional cost to gsa except for some travel to a region , as an interim program until a module could be developed for star .

current plans are to enhance galaxy so that it will interface with star .

a statement of work to accomplish this objective is currently being developed .

to implement galaxy , gsa provided each region with training on its use and a copy of the software already loaded with the region's data for active lease contracts and active lease projects as of october 1 , 1998 .

galaxy has seven basic components , which include the elements pbs has identified as needed for tracking actual expenditures and estimating the funding requirements for future expenditures from the rental - of - space account .

these components are described in table 1 .

the program can also generate various reports on both leases and projects , such as base rent by month , rwas by lease number , ibaas by lease number , lump sums by lease , operating cost escalation / cpi by lease , noa by base lease , and estimate of rent increases tied to projects .

rent account analysts are responsible for ensuring that galaxy's data are accurate , reliable , and consistent .

the training manual states that all active leases and projects loaded in galaxy “must be validated.” the manual lists five steps that the analyst must follow to validate the information .

table 2 lists these steps .

also , other guidance in the manual indicates that galaxy must be reconciled to near on a monthly basis to ensure that accurate obligations are stated in near .

further , the manual states that the effectiveness of any system is contingent upon the information it is supplied .

therefore , each region is responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the data input into galaxy .

without accurate data , a credible status report for the rental - of - space account cannot be produced .

further , the regional rent account analysts we interviewed all agreed that communications between themselves and the realty specialists will be key in maintaining the accuracy of galaxy .

the analysts believed that communications would be of particular importance in estimating the rent account for a future budget year because , in order to estimate future expenditures , they rely not only on information about active leases , but also on information on projects in process .

project information is dependent upon the realty specialists' communications with the customer agencies .

the analysts we interviewed all believed that , with proper communications , galaxy should help avoid past problems and improve the estimating process .

we were told that all gsa regions are to create a branch that will have as one of its responsibilities the initiating and inputting of all project data into star .

this process should help ensure that the projects are entered into star .

in may 1999 , at least one region had already begun interviewing applicants for positions in the new branch .

we agree that good communication between the analysts maintaining galaxy and the realty specialists maintaining star is critical to the accuracy of the data in galaxy .

to project the rent expenditure account , it is particularly important to obtain data on lease projects , which reflect potential changes in the inventory .

this information is not as readily available as data on existing leases , but must be obtained from customer agencies .

further , we agree that good communication between gsa and its customer agencies is essential to improving the accuracy of the rental - of - space estimate .

however , this may not be easily accomplished , even with good communications , given that for budget purposes gsa needs to estimate changes in space requirements approximately 18 months in advance .

in his testimony on april 24 , 1997 , the pbs commissioner testified that , when he asked federal agency facility managers in a quarterly meeting whether they could identify the space reductions from downsizing a year in advance , they all said that they could not .

this shows how difficult it may be for gsa to get accurate information on changes in the inventory .

in addition to implementing galaxy , gsa has taken other steps to address its underestimation that led to a total of $324 million in reprogramming requests for fiscal years 1997 and 1998 .

table 3 lists the areas with budget estimation problems in the rental - of - space account as well as the noa needed by fiscal year .

in addition to implementing galaxy , gsa has taken several other steps to specifically address the problem areas listed in table 3 .

first , a gsa official told us that gsa regions would use local market rental rate increases to determine the region's estimated rental rate increase for a budget year .

in fiscal years 1997 and 1998 , gsa used national averages to determine rental rate increases .

further , according to an official , gsa will try to improve its estimation of lease cancellations by comparing the amount of a region's projected cancellations with the historical trends for that region .

if the projected cancellations for a region appear to deviate from the historical trends , the divergence will be reviewed to see whether there is a justification for it .

if there is not , gsa will rely on the historical trend data .

in fiscal years 1997 and 1998 , the budget estimates that overestimated the savings from lease cancellations relied on the figures provided by the regions .

finally , with regard to expansion space , according to a gsa official , no specific action other than the use of galaxy is being taken .

the variance in this area only amounted to 0.03 percent and that only in fiscal year 1998 .

also , pbs officials told us that four controls have been established to improve the rental - of - space account estimate of future expenditures .

each region ( 1 ) will be required to develop a financial plan to be used to track the rental - of - space account on a quarterly basis , ( 2 ) will be required to provide an explanation for a variance of plus or minus 0.5 percent between actual obligations and the established targets , ( 3 ) will have a set limit of noa for existing leases and annualizations of leases , and ( 4 ) will have a “cannot exceed limit” for indefinite authority .

further , as we stated in our march 1998 testimony on overestimation of rental revenue projections , gsa issued an order in july of 1997 establishing fis , with one of its responsibilities being the budget estimating process .

it also hired a chief financial officer to oversee fis .

if implemented as designed , both actions should , in our opinion , improve pbs' financial management of fbf .

galaxy appears to have elements needed to track pbs' rental - of - space account and aid in more accurately estimating this account for future budgets .

to the extent that pbs effectively implements the steps it has taken to maintain accurate data and good communications within gsa and with its customer agencies , has improved its estimation and budgetary process , and has corrected the problems it identified as causing its underestimation of the rental - of - space account , it should be able to produce better estimates of this account in the future .

on july 16 , 1999 , the pbs deputy controller provided oral comments on a draft of this report .

he said that gsa generally agreed with the draft report and pointed out that pbs had established a requirement that the regions explain variances of plus or minus 0.5 percent between actual obligations and established targets .

we modified our report to reflect this requirement .

we are sending copies of this report to representative robert e. wise , ranking democratic member of your subcommittee ; senator ben nighthorse campbell , chairman , and senator byron l. dorgan , ranking minority member , senate subcommittee on treasury and general government , committee on appropriations ; senator george v. voinovich , chairman , and senator max s. baucus , ranking minority member , senate subcommittee on transportation and infrastructure , committee on environment and public works ; representative jim kolbe , chairman , and representative steny hoyer , ranking minority member , house subcommittee on treasury , postal service , and general government , committee on appropriations ; the honorable david j. barram , administrator , gsa ; and to others upon request .

if you have any questions regarding this report , please call me or ron king at ( 202 ) 512-8387 .

the key contributor to this assignment was tom keightley .

bernard l. ungar director , government business operations issues the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

