this report responds to your request that we determine what the internal revenue service ( irs ) has done to implement the taxpayer browsing protection act ( public law 105-35 ) .

that law , which was enacted on august 5 , 1997 , made willful unauthorized inspection of taxpayer data illegal .

as agreed with your office , this report discusses ( 1 ) actions irs has taken to implement the law and ( 2 ) the number of potential and proven incidents of unauthorized access by irs employees that irs has identified since enactment of the law , as well as the penalties imposed in cases where unauthorized access was proven .

over the past few years , both irs' office of internal audit and we have reported on the need for improved controls to protect against unauthorized accesses of taxpayer data by irs employees .

in october 1992 , internal audit reported that irs had limited ability to prevent unauthorized accesses and detect such accesses once they had occurred .

in september 1993 , we reported that irs did not adequately monitor the activities of thousands of employees who were authorized to read and change taxpayer files .

we noted that the greatest risk involved irs' integrated data retrieval system ( idrs ) , which is the primary computer system used by irs employees to access and adjust taxpayer accounts .

in 1994 , irs implemented an automated tool — the electronic audit research log ( earl ) — to monitor and detect unauthorized accesses to data on idrs .

in august 1995 , we reported that irs had taken some actions to , among other things , restrict account access and analyze computer usage .

we concluded , however , that irs still lacked sufficient safeguards to prevent or detect unauthorized accesses of taxpayer information .

we noted , for example , that security reports issued to monitor and identify unauthorized accesses were cumbersome and virtually useless to managers responsible for ensuring computer security .

in 1996 , irs implemented enhancements to earl that were designed to improve the quality of data being provided to managers .

in april 1997 , we reported on continuing shortcomings in irs' efforts to prevent unauthorized access to confidential taxpayer data .

we noted , for example , that irs did not ( 1 ) monitor all employees with access to automated systems and data for evidence of unauthorized access , ( 2 ) consistently investigate cases involving unauthorized access , and ( 3 ) consistently discipline employees who accessed taxpayer data without authorization .

because of continuing concerns about unauthorized accesses , public law 105-35 was signed into law on august 5 , 1997 .

the law made willful unauthorized inspection of taxpayer data illegal .

the law provides that a person convicted of unauthorized access shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 , or imprisonment of not more than 1 year , or both , together with the costs of prosecution .

the law also states that an officer or employee of the united states who is convicted of any such violation shall , in addition to any other punishment , be dismissed from office or discharged from employment .

in cases where a person is criminally charged with unauthorized access , the law requires that the secretary of the treasury notify the taxpayer whose tax information was accessed .

to achieve our objectives , we interviewed officials from irs' centralized case development center ( ccdc ) , cau , office of systems standards and evaluation , and office of chief inspector ( we discuss the role of each of these offices later in the report ) ; visited the ccdc in cincinnati , oh , to observe its operations ; analyzed data runs that irs produced at our request as well as irs management information system reports on unauthorized access ; and reviewed irs reports and documentation on unauthorized access .

other than checking for consistency , we did not verify the reliability of statistical data provided by irs .

we also did not assess the effectiveness of the various actions taken by irs since enactment of public law 105-35 .

we requested comments on a draft of this report from irs and the acting treasury inspector general for tax administration .

their comments are discussed near the end of this letter .

we did our work from october 1998 through january 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in an august 1997 report on controlling unauthorized access to taxpayer records , irs concluded that , in the long run , the best solution was to modernize core irs systems .

according to irs , modernization will ( 1 ) allow it to restrict employees' access to only those taxpayer records that they have a specific work - related reason to look at and ( 2 ) enable it to detect unauthorized accesses almost as soon as they happen .

however , irs does not expect to implement those modernization efforts for several years .

in the meantime , irs has taken several steps directed at deterring , preventing , and detecting unauthorized access and ensuring that appropriate disciplinary action is taken when unauthorized access is proven .

some of irs' actions are intended to deter unauthorized access ( i.e. , keep employees from trying to access taxpayer data without authorization ) .

these actions focus on awareness .

in an attempt to make certain that all employees are explicitly informed about unauthorized access and the related penalties , irs , among other things , adopted a policy that proven instances of unauthorized access will result in removal from irs , absent any extenuating circumstances ; sent a memo in october 1997 to all irs employees that discussed , among other things , the penalties associated with unauthorized access ; started giving annual agencywide briefings in november 1997 to inform all employees of irs' unauthorized access policy and the penalties for violations ; created a form that is to be signed by employees and managers to acknowledge attendance at a briefing and receipt of guides on what constitutes unauthorized access ; created a policy that all employees who join or return to irs after the annual awareness briefings have been administered will be given their briefing within 30 days ; developed a standard message to be given in all training courses in which access to tax information is discussed ; developed a video and guides on unauthorized access to ensure that managers deliver a consistent message in briefing employees ; and finally , established an unauthorized access steering committee and unauthorized access support team to address questions and issues raised by employees and managers .

other irs actions are intended to prevent unauthorized access ( i.e. , stop employees who intentionally or unintentionally try to access taxpayer data without authorization ) .

in that regard , according to irs , the most effective way to safeguard against unauthorized access is to build controls into automated systems that prevent employees from accessing information they have no need to access .

however , according to irs , its current systems cannot be effectively modified to provide the “need to know” environment that allows employees to access taxpayers' records only when they have a work - related reason to do so .

irs expects to correct this situation as part of its long - term systems modernization effort .

in the meantime , irs has taken some steps to prevent unauthorized access .

for example , irs ( 1 ) has incorporated blocks into its systems to prevent employees from accessing their own records and , in some cases , the records of their spouses or ex - spouses and ( 2 ) is reviewing the access rights given to individual employees to ensure that they do not have greater access to tax data than is necessary to do their work .

until february 1999 , when a new system was implemented , irs depended primarily on earl to identify potential instances of unauthorized access through after - the - fact analysis of accesses to data on idrs .

earl used data analysis techniques based on a few known patterns of abuse to identify potential cases of unauthorized access .

when earl was run , it created lists of potential violations ( leads ) that were provided to analysts at each of irs' 10 service centers .

the analysts were responsible for researching the lists to determine whether the leads warranted further investigation .

an irs study done in august 1997 concluded that the just - described process did not provide the consistent approach needed to support irs' policy on unauthorized access of taxpayer records .

according to the study report and irs officials , ( 1 ) there was a lack of uniformity in the output produced by earl because each service center had developed its own computer programs , ( 2 ) most earl leads required labor - intensive research to determine whether unauthorized access likely took place , and ( 3 ) each service center had developed its own techniques for developing earl cases .

to correct this lack of a consistent approach to unauthorized access , irs ( 1 ) centralized responsibility for identifying and investigating potential instances of unauthorized access in ccdc , which is located within irs' office of the chief inspector , and ( 2 ) developed a new automated tool to provide better unauthorized access detection capabilities .

in may 1997 , the acting commissioner of internal revenue transferred responsibility for the detection of unauthorized access to the office of the chief inspector .

in october 1997 , the chief inspector created ccdc , which is responsible for identifying potential cases of unauthorized access and determining whether they warrant further investigation by the internal security division in the office of the chief inspector .

ccdc became operational in february 1998 , when it began assuming responsibility from the 10 service centers for analyzing unauthorized access leads .

the transition was completed in september 1998 .

since then , ccdc has been responsible for reviewing all leads and deciding which , if any , should be referred to internal security .

the ccdc staff includes forensic data analysts , security analysts , computer programmers , and criminal investigators .

in addition to referrals from ccdc , internal security also receives allegations of unauthorized access from various other sources , such as calls to the inspection service integrity hotline from irs employees , taxpayers , and tax practitioners .

irs , in february 1999 , implemented the audit trail lead analysis system ( atlas ) to replace earl .

irs officials stated that atlas is an improvement over earl because atlas ( 1 ) will provide better unauthorized access detection capabilities and ( 2 ) is a national system that will not be subject to local modifications and practices by the 10 service centers .

these improvements , according to the director of ccdc and irs documents , will produce better leads than those produced by earl , because they are more indicative of potential unauthorized access .

for example , according to irs , atlas is programmed to do an exact match between an employee's name and the names of taxpayers whose tax information the employee has accessed .

earl's name match component , on the other hand , only matched the first six characters of the last names .

according to irs data , of the 5,468 total leads received by the office of the chief inspector between october 1 , 1997 , and november 30 , 1998 , earl's match of the first six characters of an employee's name accounted for 3,793 ( 69.4 percent ) .

however , of the 338 closed leads that were referred to internal security for investigation , only 67 ( 19.8 percent ) were generated by earl's name match .

according to the director of ccdc and irs documents , atlas' increased precision in matching names should result in fewer leads — because there will now have to be an exact match of last names — but these should be more indicative of potential unauthorized access .

although irs has taken several steps to identify unauthorized accesses involving idrs , it has done little to detect accesses involving the estimated 130 other information systems that contain taxpayer information .

irs does not have a system such as earl or atlas to analyze accesses involving these other systems .

irs officials in the systems standards and evaluation office ( the office with overall responsibility for security and privacy within irs ) informed us that this problem is to be corrected as part of irs' long - term systems modernization efforts .

however , these efforts will not be implemented for several years .

meanwhile , according to these officials , they have been looking at the controls in these various information systems to prevent unauthorized access .

they also said that they depend on the supervisors of employees who use non - idrs information systems to be on the alert for unauthorized access .

in august 1997 , the office of systems standards and evaluation reported that the handling and tracking of unauthorized access cases had not been consistent .

the report further stated that irs would be better served if key operations were centralized to establish consistency and timeliness in developing cases , making decisions on levels of evidence for removals and legal actions , processing and implementing removals , and tracking and reporting cases .

to deal with inconsistencies in case handling and tracking , irs created cau within the labor relations office in the national office .

cau , which became operational in october 1997 , is responsible for tracking and reporting the status of all unauthorized access cases ; preparing paperwork for all cases , including those in which unauthorized access was not proven ; forwarding paperwork on cases to the heads of the appropriate offices for clearance or disciplinary action ; and providing consultative support to management in the administration of discipline .

to further ensure that consistent disciplinary actions are imposed for proven cases of unauthorized access , the systems standards and evaluation office is tasked with reviewing those actions .

between october 1 , 1997 , and november 30 , 1998 , the office of the chief inspector received 5,468 leads ( information indicating potential unauthorized accesses ) and completed work on 4,392 of those leads .

of the 4,392 closed leads , 338 ( 8 percent ) resulted in referrals to internal security .

table 1 shows the disposition of the 4,054 closed leads not referred for investigation .

during the period covered by our review , earl accounted for a large majority of the leads received by the office of the chief inspector and most of the cases referred to internal security for further investigation .

of the 5,468 leads received by the chief inspector during the 14 months ending november 30 , 1998 , 4,742 , or 87 percent , were generated by earl.the other 13 percent came from other sources , such as complaints from taxpayers and irs employees .

although most of the leads referred to internal security also came from earl ( about 56 percent of the 338 referrals ) , other sources of leads proved to be more productive .

in that regard , of the earl leads closed by the office of the chief inspector , 5 percent were referred for investigation compared with about 22 percent of the leads from other sources .

between october 1 , 1997 , and november 30 , 1998 , according to irs' data , internal security opened at least 139 investigations of cases in which unauthorized access was alleged to have occurred after passage of public law 105-35 .

as of november 30 , 1998 , internal security had completed 86 of these investigations , while the other 53 investigations were still ongoing .

from october 1 , 1997 , to january 25 , 1999 , according to irs , internal security sent cau 64 cases for adjudication in which unauthorized access was alleged to have taken place after enactment of public law 105-35 .

as of january 25 , 1999 , action had been completed on 36 of these cases , and 28 remained open .

in 15 of the 36 completed cases , irs determined that an intentional unauthorized access had occurred .

of the remaining 21 cases , irs determined that 14 involved no unauthorized access , 6 involved accidental accesses that were reported by the employees to their supervisors in accordance with established procedures , and 1 involved an accidental access that was not reported in accordance with established procedures .

in the latter case , the employee was reprimanded .

as shown in table 2 , of the 15 proven intentional unauthorized accesses , 10 involved service center employees , and 5 involved district office employees .

according to irs , the offending employees in those 15 cases either resigned in lieu of termination or were terminated .

according to irs data , proven cases of unauthorized access that occurred after enactment of public law 105-35 have generally been referred to u.s .

attorneys for possible prosecution .

in almost every case , according to irs data , the u.s. attorney declined to prosecute .

as of february 2 , 1999 , one case had been accepted for prosecution .

according to irs , although the case was still open , the employee had been removed from the agency .

pursuant to the law , irs notified the three taxpayers whose data the employee had accessed .

we obtained written comments on a draft of this report from irs' chief information officer ( see app .

i ) and the acting treasury inspector general for tax administration ( see app .

ii ) .

the chief information officer said that irs agreed with the information in our report .

he emphasized that , in some regards , irs' current weaknesses are associated with its aging systems and that these weaknesses will be corrected as part of irs' long - term systems modernization plans .

in the meantime , according to the chief information officer , irs ( 1 ) has initiated actions to block employees' access to more taxpayer accounts than they are currently restricted from accessing and ( 2 ) is reviewing the feasibility of incorporating audit trail records from systems other than idrs into atlas .

the acting treasury inspector general for tax administration said that the report provides a good summary of the actions taken by his office ( formerly the office of the chief inspector ) to implement the provisions of public law 105-35 .

he said that the identification and investigation of unlawful accesses of taxpayer information has been and will remain a high priority of his office .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly release its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter .

at that time , we will send copies to senator william v. roth , chairman , and senator daniel p. moynihan , ranking minority member , senate committee on finance ; and representative bill archer , chairman , and representative charles b. rangel , ranking minority member , house committee on ways and means .

we will also send copies to the honorable robert e. rubin , secretary of the treasury ; the honorable charles o. rossotti , commissioner of internal revenue ; the honorable jacob lew , director , office of management and budget ; and mr. lawrence w. rogers , acting treasury inspector general for tax administration .

copies will be made available to others upon request .

major contributors to this report were david j. attianese , assistant director ; and john lesser , evaluator - in - charge .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-9110 if you have any questions .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

