gao's testimony discusses balancing flexibility and accountability in federal grant programs , with particular attention to programs in education .

today's statement previews the results of a comparative study of flexible grant programs — in transportation , health , social services , education , criminal justice and employment — to be completed later this spring .

gao's study covered all of the currently operating 'block grants' plus other grant programs with similar characteristics .

the testimony also reflects gao's work on program evaluation and information issues and on the accountability and fiscal effects issues associated with block grants .

finally , it draws on gao's many studies of education programs .

flexible grants are an adaptable policy tool and are used in fields from urban transit to community mental health .

they are alike in that each addresses a national purpose but gives state or local grantees the flexibility to adapt funded activities to fit the state or local context .

however , there are vast differences among them as well .

some offer flexibility within a narrow range , as do many so - called 'categorical' programs , while others offer choice so broad that they come close to resembling revenue sharing .

these differences reflect three critical design features: whether the national objectives involved are performance - related or fiscal ; whether the grant funds a distinct 'program' or contributes to the stream of funds supporting state and local activities ; and whether it supports a single activity or diverse activities .

in combination , these features are associated with differences in flexibility , accountability , and the level of government that is accountable for performance .

combinations that produce greater flexibility ( such as are typical of k - 12 education programs ) lodge accountability at the state or local level and complicate the task of obtaining program - wide measures of performance through grantee reporting .

additional sources of information may be needed to support program decisions at the national level .

considering design features and their implications can help policymakers ensure that accountability and information needs are met , whatever type of design is selected .

the testimony closes with a design framework in the form of a decision tree to assist in this task .

gao applies the framework to two programs: the title vi innovative education grant program ( with primarily fiscal objectives ) and the safe and drug free schools and communities local grants ( with performance objectives ) .

mr. chairman and members of the education task force: i am pleased to be here today to discuss balancing flexibility and accountability in federal grant programs , particularly in education .

with block grant proposals on the horizon and the first performance plans coming due under the government performance and results act , this topic could hardly be more timely .

our testimony responds to the program design issues raised in previous hearings before this task force and to your request that we provide a comparative perspective on these issues and their implications for future education programs .

flexible grant programs across the federal government take many forms .

three federal program design features appear critical: ( 1 ) objectives — whether the national objectives involved are performance - related or fiscal , ( 2 ) nature of operations — whether the grant operates as a program or a funding stream , and ( 3 ) diversity of activities — whether the grant supports a single activity or diverse activities .

in combination , these features are associated with differences in flexibility , accountability , level of government that is accountable for performance , availability of performance information , and the need to draw from additional sources in order to obtain the information needed to support program decisions at the national level .

considering design features and their implications can help policymakers ensure that accountability and information needs are met .

this testimony previews the results of our comparative study of flexible grant programs — in transportation , health , social services , education , criminal justice and employment — to be completed later this spring .

our study covered all of the currently operating 'block grants' plus other grant programs with similar characteristics .

the testimony also draws from past gao work on program evaluation and information issues and on the accountability and fiscal effects issues associated with block grants .

finally , it draws on our studies of education programs , many of which have been described in testimony at earlier hearings .

for examining current or proposed programs as they come before you for reauthorization or authorization .

flexible grants are an adaptable policy tool and are used in fields from urban transit to community mental health .

they are alike in that each addresses a national purpose but gives state or local grantees the flexibility to adapt funded activities to fit the state or local context .

however , there are vast differences among them as well .

some offer flexibility within a narrow range , as do many so - called 'categorical' programs , while others offer choice so broad that they come close to resembling revenue sharing .

these differences can be traced to a few key design features — objectives , nature of operations , and diversity of activities — each representing an important policy choice .

each feature by itself has implications for accountability and information .

our first feature concerns the nature of the national objectives to be served through the federal grant program .

we are not speaking here of such broad , ultimate national purposes as decreasing poverty , but rather of the more immediate , direct , and concrete objectives to be attained through the provision of grant funds .

grant programs' objectives can be characterized as either primarily performance - related or primarily fiscal .

performance - related objectives focus on services .

in our study , we found such objectives as: expanding services , improving service quality , increasing coverage of targeted problems or populations , or achieving specified service outputs or outcomes .

for example , the central objective of the grants for special programs for the aging — nutrition services is to provide nutritious meals to needy older americans in such a way as to reduce social isolation .

among grants for elementary and secondary education , national objectives like ensuring access to services , equity in educational opportunity , and targeting services to groups that are educationally disadvantaged have historically been important , reflecting civil rights concerns .

fiscal or financial assistance objectives focus on providing dollars .

typical fiscal objectives include increasing support for meritorious goods or under - funded services and targeting grant funding to needy jurisdictions.for example , the objective of the title vi innovative education grants is to provide funds to support local educational reform efforts .

a second critical feature concerns whether national objectives should be achieved through a grant - specific operating program or simply through adding to the stream of funds supporting ongoing state or local programs .

an operating program is a “program” in the common - sense meaning of the term .

 ( the aging nutrition program again is an example. ) .

it has performance requirements and objectives and carries out distinct program - wide functions through a distinct delivery system in such a way that grant - funded activities , clients , and products are clearly identifiable .

criteria of successful operation such as those outlined in our oral testimony last november apply .

these include clear focus , stated objectives , monitoring and reporting in terms of those objectives , and research - based activities .

grants that operate as a funding stream are not federal “programs” in this sense .

here , the federal agency provides funds that are merged with funds from state or local sources ( and sometimes from other federal sources as well ) to support state or local activities allowable under the flexible grant .

the grant is one funding source among many .

the “programs” supported are state or local programs .

for example , funding stream operation is typical in elementary and secondary education , which is a state responsibility administered by local education agencies .

federal funding for kindergarten through grade 12 ( k - 12 ) programs may go directly to local education agencies .

or , it may go to the states , either for provision of state - run programs and services or to be passed through to local agencies under state oversight and accountability .

the third critical feature concerns diversity of activities .

some flexible grants , as in the senior nutrition example , focus on a single major activity or limited set of activities common to all grantees .

at the other extreme , some allow unrestricted choice among a wide variety of allowable activities .

for example , states with preventive health and health services grants can choose among 60 allowable uses of funds .

these design features define the flexibility given to grantees , accountability for performance , and the level of government at which performance is managed .

flexibility reflects the presence or absence of national performance objectives .

its range is most limited when the grant funds a single major activity through a national program and broadest when the grant functions as a funding stream and permits choice among activities .

accountability for performance is established by the inclusion of performance objectives — and provisions that implement them — in a grant program .

when objectives are purely fiscal , accountability to the federal agency focuses on fiscal matters .

for example , if the national objective is to encourage states to provide more of a nationally important service ( like assisted housing ) , states may be held accountable for using grant funds to supplement rather than to replace or supplant their own spending on that service .

programmatic objectives and operation as a national 'program' give the federal funding agency a role in managing performance under the grant .

in programs with primarily fiscal objectives and those that operate as a funding stream , the activities supported are managed at the state or local level .

in the words of agency staff ( quoting state officials ) , “these aren't federal programs , they are state programs that receive federal funds.” the federal agency's role is limited accordingly , and may involve little more than seeing that applications for funding are properly submitted , compliance or audit issues resolved , and money disbursed in timely fashion .

where grant - funded activities are managed at the local level as in the two education programs we studied — title vi innovative education and safe and drug free schools and communities — the state's role may be similarly limited .

design features also affect the availability of performance information .

operation as a program simplifies the task of getting uniform information about performance attributable to grant funds .

it is possible to identify which activities were supported , the amount of federal funds allocated to each , and , to various extents , the results of federal support .

operation as a funding stream complicates this task .

when grant funds are part of a stream , it is possible to identify which activities federal funds supported and the amount allocated to each .

but once added to the overall budget for a state or local activity , federal dollars lose their identity and their results cannot be separated out — particularly when the federal share is small .

thus , the only program outcome measures available are likely to be for the state or local service delivery program , not the federal funding program .

as the above discussion suggests , it is the combination of features , rather than any single feature , that has implications for flexibility , accountability and information .

examining how the design features were used in programs across government , we identified four major combinations or design types .

we have summarized them in table 1 , which shows design features , examples , and summary comments associated with each type .

as the last column indicates , state or local flexibility and control over performance objectives and performance management increase as you move down the table .

partnership act are to provide job training that leads to increases in employment and earnings of youths and adults facing serious barriers to participation in the work force .

to evaluate the results of the program in achieving these objectives , recipients are required to provide counts of activities provided , demographic characteristics of individuals served , employment outcomes , and program costs .

no major k - 12 education grants are of this type .

our second type covers performance - related , funding stream grants ( second row ) — grants that involve national performance objectives , yet operate through state or local programs .

most programs of this type cover a state or local function or delivery system ( such as preventive health ) involving various activities .

national performance objectives typically concern system improvement or capacity - building , ensuring access to services , service quality , and targeting of activities to priority populations .

several grants in this group require state or local grantees to set their own performance objectives of various kinds .

provisions of the preventive health and health services block grant , for example , require each state to fund activities related to healthy people 2000 objectives and to measure and report the progress of the state in meeting the objectives selected .

our third type includes grants with fiscal objectives ( third row ) that provide support for program - like — rather than ongoing — state or local activities .

these activities often take the form of projects — similar to operating programs in having clear boundaries , but with a clear start and finish as well .

grant provisions identify allowable uses of funds and may include national criteria for selecting activities , such as the benefits test that applies to projects supported by community development — entitlement block grants .

otherwise , performance objectives and measures are set at the operating level .

under the drug control and system improvement ( byrne formula ) grant program , for example , states are required to set performance objectives for activities that are funded and to evaluate the success of these activities in achieving those objectives .

output information ( such as client counts ) , but even this can be difficult .

for example , where actual counts of recipients served are not available , the social service block grant accepts counts based on estimation procedures which may vary in their statistical validity .

these four design types present very different situations with respect to grantee accountability — what grantees are held accountable for and the level of government that is accountable for performance — and the information needed to support it .

they also differ with respect to the information needed to support program decisions at the national level and prospects for getting this information through grantee reporting , as opposed to other means .

as a previous gao report has noted , accountability is an elusive concept whose meaning depends on the context .

at a minimum , all grantees are accountable to the federal level for financial management and for using funds to support allowable activities .

beyond that , what grant recipients are accountable for to the federal level varies from grant to grant , reflecting ( 1 ) the type of objective , and ( 2 ) if performance objectives are involved , whether the federal level manages the program or merely adds to the stream of funds supporting state or local programs .

i will now describe the situation for each type of grant , with a focus on performance issues .

accountability for performance to the federal level is most extensive in grants that include national performance objectives and operate as distinct programs — grants with the most limited flexibility .

as mentioned previously , programs of this type commonly collect and report information in line with their performance objectives , which may be concerned with program implementation , outputs , or ( when possible to measure ) direct outcomes of services .

 ( indirect or ultimate outcomes are another matter , which we will discuss in the next section. ) .

flow to the federal funding agency .

if specific fiscal objectives ( such as maintenance of effort ) apply , grantees are accountable for meeting them and for providing fiscal information to verify that they have been met .

the grants that combine federal performance objectives with operation through state or local programs — a common pattern across k - 12 education — present puzzling performance accountability issues , particularly for service outcome objectives .

activities supported with federal funds and the information collected about performance often differ from state to state .

 ( this difficulty affects fiscal - objective operating programs as well. ) .

while state or local program outcomes in total may be measurable , the component attributable to federal funding cannot be separated out .

thus , measuring performance at the level of the federal program may not be feasible .

for accountability purposes , measuring overall performance of the state or local program would not be appropriate , particularly when the federal grant contributes only a small fraction of the cost .

reliance on delivering services through state and local programs or projects thus raises other delicate issues of federalism as well .

first , there is the question of whether achieving a given national objective through existing state and local programs is feasible .

this question is particularly relevant with respect to new service outcome objectives , such as decreasing drug use among students .

state and local programs designed with different objectives in mind may have difficulty incorporating this new objective .

or , conditions that enable achievement of that outcome ( such as solid knowledge of how to produce it ) may not be met .

set performance criteria for schools funded under the grant and procedures to ensure that schools that don't meet these criteria are identified and remedial actions are initiated ( as under education's title i program ) .

states and localities are then accountable to the federal agency for implementing these provisions .

the department of education has been experimenting with a different approach .

the department grants temporary exemptions from certain federal program requirements ( waivers ) to states or school districts that demonstrate that the waiver will lead to educational improvements .

these waivers are intended as a tool to expand the flexibility available to local school districts in exchange for increased accountability for student achievement .

the results of this experiment are not yet in .

one final example of an approach to serving national objectives through state or local activities relies on the techniques embodied in the government performance and results act — that is , requiring states or localities to set — and to report to the federal agency in terms of — performance objectives for the activities or projects they choose to support with federal funds .

provisions of the safe and drug free schools and communities act , for examples , require states and local education agencies to establish drug use and violence prevention objectives , report the outcomes of state and local programs , and assess their effectiveness toward meeting the objectives .

under this 'results' approach , accountability for performance remains at the level of the state or local agency doing the reporting , not the federal or state agency to whom the report is directed .

the federal or state agency receives the information , but does not use it for program management .

this information , however , can be useful in assessing the degree to which national objectives for the program are being met , a subject to which we now turn .

to make decisions about the programs they oversee , congressional committees need evaluative information — information that tells them whether , and in what important respects , a program is working well or poorly as well as whether performance objectives are being met .

performance data collected from grantees is an important source .

but they have limitations , and other sources are useful as well .

let me describe for you some limitations of performance data in the flexible grant context .

first of all , our study indicates that , beyond simple activity counts , few grant programs are able to obtain these data program - wide .

collecting reliable uniform data requires conditions ( such as uniformity of activities , objectives , measures ) that are unlikely to exist under many flexible program designs , and even where overall performance can be measured , the amount attributable to federal funding often cannot be separated out .

and some programs have ultimate outcome goals , such as increasing highway safety , which are measurable only through aggregate data .

more importantly , performance data cannot answer the full range of questions that are likely to arise during congressional oversight .

to determine how , and in what respects , a program is working well or poorly , we have found that congress is likely to need not only performance information but also descriptive information sufficient to convey a sense of the variety of conditions under which the program operates and how federal funds are actually being used .

 ( our earlier study found that general summaries of activities performed or clients served do not meet this need. ) .

for flexible grants , information that shows how grant funds fit into the context of other programs is of particular interest .

information about program implementation , including attention to whether feasibility or management problems are evident and whether the methods used to deliver services are of known or likely effectiveness .

information concerning positive or negative side effects of the program .

information that will help them determine whether this program's strategy is more effective in relation to its costs than others that serve the same purpose .

some of this information may be available from federal agency staff , particularly if the agency plays an active oversight or technical assistance role .

of sites under controlled conditions that could not be obtained through grantee reporting .

we found evaluation studies in programs of every type .

information on the effectiveness of service delivery methods comes largely from research and demonstration studies .

knowledge to support effective practice is well established in some of the subject areas covered in our sample of grants , and was incorporated into program provisions ( such as service standards ) or in companion technical assistance or knowledge dissemination programs .

finally , aggregate measures of social , environmental , educational or health outcomes can be useful .

however , since no single program is likely to have much of an impact on these measures they are most useful for judging the combined results of programs that share a common goal .

to close this section , let me note that each of the sources mentioned is more likely to be available when backed by statutory authorization and budget resources than when it is not .

as we observed in our earlier study , congress is more likely to get the information it asks for and pays for .

in summary , the design of a flexible grant program involves choosing among policy options that , in combination , establish the degree of flexibility afforded to states or localities ; the relevance of performance objectives for grantee accountability ; whether accountability for performance rests at the federal , state , or local level ; and prospects for measuring performance through grantee reporting .

fortunately , performance measures are not the only source that congress can draw on in making program oversight decisions .

we have developed an exhibit that depicts the grant design policy choices discussed in this testimony and factors that might be considered at each point in the form of a decision tree .

each choice has implications regarding the degree of flexibility provided states or local entities , the type of performance information that can be available , and the level at which this information can be used for accountability purposes .

our framework assumes that the decision to establish a formula grant program ( as opposed to another type of program , such as a demonstration ) has already been at least tentatively made .

statement balancing flexibility and accountability: grant program design in education and other areas programs ? .

form ? .

objectives ? .

revise if needed statement balancing flexibility and accountability: grant program design in education and other areas needed ? .

oversight ? .

will contribution of federal funds be distinguishable ? .

to illustrate how the exhibit flows , let's consider how it would apply to the title vi innovative education program strategies grant program .

the objectives of the grant , to support local education reform and innovation , are primarily fiscal , putting us on the upper decision path on our diagram .

funds may be used to support local projects ( such as magnet schools ) , but title vi's purpose does not require that project - level performance objectives be set so we continue to the step of designing provisions to match fiscal objectives .

title vi has such provisions , stating that grant funds may not be used to supplant funds from non - federal sources and the state must maintain prior levels of fiscal effort .

to obtain information required for accountability , the program requires local districts to describe their intended uses of funds and how these will contribute to the grant's objectives of supporting reform .

states , drawing on district records , must report biennially on general uses of funds , types of services furnished , and students served .

as these data are of limited utility for program oversight , the congress mandated national evaluation reports on this program in 1986 and 1994 .

the 1994 report provided information about federal share , the size of state and local grants , how funds were used , the minimal performance accountability requirements imposed by states , and the difficulty of evaluating a program that provides supplemental resources for other activities .

to further illustrate , let's consider the safe and drug - free schools and communities grant , focusing on funding at the local level .

grant funds support activities that serve national performance objectives of preventing violence in and around schools and the illegal use of alcohol , tobacco and drugs .

the presence of these objectives puts us on the lower , performance - oriented path of the diagram .

funded activities are not implemented through a national operating program , but rather through state and local programs — reflecting at least the hope that national objectives could be achieved through these programs .

however — and here's an example of some of the federalism issues we mentioned earlier — some national program provisions do apply .

local programs must be comprehensive and convey the message that the illegal use of alcohol and other drugs is wrong and harmful .

these national requirements notwithstanding , the local education agencies are responsible for setting performance goals , deciding how to pursue them , and reporting to the state in terms of those goals .

moving along the state and local path on our diagram , we come to the question of whether drug and violence prevention programs function as distinct projects or like a funding stream .

a recent evaluation study — and here we jump ahead a little — suggests the latter .

examining what appeared to be comprehensive school - based drug prevention programs , this study found so much variation within districts in what was being done that local activities hardly met our definition of a 'program.' as to the feasibility question on the diagram , collecting performance data — beyond student counts — for drug prevention programs has proven difficult .

reporting requirements make reference to local program outcomes , but states are simply asked to provide whatever relevant data they can .

reflecting these limitations , provision has been made to gather data from other sources , including state - level data from national surveys of youth drug use , for program oversight .

although the department of education is required to produce a report on the national program every three years , the lack of uniform information on program activities and effectiveness may limit its usefulness .

an evaluation study covering the period 1990-1995 provided insight into resource adequacy , the extent to which activities reflect research findings , implementation issues , student outcomes , and state and local evaluations .

further evaluation studies are planned .

mr. chairman , this concludes my illustration of the decision diagram and also my prepared statement .

i appreciate the opportunity to share this information with you and would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the task force may have .

federal education funding: multiple programs and lack of data raise efficiency and effectiveness concerns ( gao / t - hehs - 98-46 , nov. 6 , 1997 ) managing for results: analytic challenges in measuring performance ( gao / hehs / ggd - 97-138 , may 30 , 1997 ) federal grants: design improvements could help federal resources go further ( gao - aimd - 97-7 , dec. 18 , 1996 ) safe and drug - free schools: balancing accountability with state and local flexibility ( gao / hehs - 98-3 , oct. 10 , 1997 ) block grants: issues in designing accountability provisions ( gao / aimd - 95-226 , sept 1 , 1995 ) block grants: characteristics , experience , and lessons learned ( gao / hehs - 95-74 , feb. 9 , 1995 ) program evaluation: improving the flow of information to the congress ( gao / pemd - 95-1 , january 30 , 1995 ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

