recent media reports have focused attention on instances of prisoners receiving supplemental security income ( ssi ) payments .

ssi is a means - tested program that provides cash payments to aged , blind , or disabled individuals to help them meet basic needs — food , clothing , and shelter .

prisoners are ineligible for ssi because prisons and jails meet these basic needs .

the ssi program , which is administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) , is federally funded , but some states provide supplemental payments .

in 1995 , about 6.5 million ssi recipients received nearly $25 billion in federal payments and $3 billion in state supplemental payments .

ssi is one of the fastest - growing federal entitlement programs .

because of your concern about prisoners receiving ssi payments , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine if ssa has made erroneous ssi payments to prisoners in selected large county and local jail systems , ( 2 ) if this has occurred , determine why , and ( 3 ) review ssa's efforts to prevent such payments .

to meet these objectives , we interviewed ssa officials and representatives from 23 county and local jail systems .

we also obtained computerized information on current prisoners from 12 of these large jail systems .

these prisoners represent about 20 percent of the nationwide prisoner population at county and local jails .

in addition , we obtained information on prisoners recently released from two jail systems ( including 1 of the 12 systems ) .

to determine whether ssa made erroneous payments , we matched each prisoner's social security number ( ssn ) with ssi payment records .

we carried out our work between september 1995 and june 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

 ( see apps .

i and ii for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) .

the ssi program is authorized by title xvi of the social security act .

to qualify for ssi , an individual must meet financial eligibility and age or disability criteria .

generally , ssa determines an applicant's age and financial eligibility ; the state's disability determination service determines an applicant's initial medical eligibility .

the maximum monthly benefit in 1995 was $458 per month for an individual , increased to $470 in 1996 .

an individual is ineligible for ssi in any given month if throughout that month he or she is an inmate of a public institution ( 42 u.s.c .

1382 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) .

the title xvi regulation defines an inmate of a public institution as a person who can receive substantially all of his or her food and shelter while living in a public institution .

ssa operating instructions provide that a prison is a public institution .

ssi recipients may receive their payments in one of several ways: ( 1 ) ssi checks can be mailed to them at their residences or , in some cases , to post office boxes ; ( 2 ) ssi checks can be direct - deposited into recipients' checking or savings accounts ; or ( 3 ) ssi checks can be sent to recipients' representative payees — individuals or organizations that receive checks on behalf of ssi recipients who are unable to manage their own affairs ( including legally incompetent people , alcoholics , drug addicts , and children ) .

a representative payee is responsible for dispensing the ssi payment in a manner that is in the best interest of the recipient .

many events can affect a recipient's eligibility or payment amount .

ssa requires that recipients voluntarily report these events and also monitors and periodically reviews recipients' financial eligibility .

ssi recipients are responsible for reporting information that may affect their eligibility or payment amounts .

if the recipient has a representative payee , the payee is responsible for reporting such information to ssa .

significant events to be reported include a change in income , resources , marital status , or living arrangements , such as admission to or discharge from a public institution .

a redetermination is a review of financial eligibility factors to ensure that recipients are still eligible for ssi and receiving the correct payment .

a redetermination addresses financial eligibility factors that can change frequently , such as income , resources , and living arrangements .

redeterminations are either scheduled or unscheduled .

they are conducted — by mail , telephone , or face - to - face interview — at least every 6 years , but may be conducted more frequently if ssa determines that changes in eligibility or erroneous payments are likely .

the redetermination process includes a question about whether the recipient spent a full calendar month in a hospital , nursing home , other institution , or any place other than the recipient's normal residence .

since the ssi program was established , ssa has recognized the potential for erroneous payments if ssi recipients become residents of public institutions , including state and federal prisons and county and local jails .

ssa headquarters has established computer - matching agreements with state prison systems and the federal bureau of prisons .

under these agreements , the participating states and the bureau can regularly provide automated prisoner information to ssa .

ssa matches the information against its payment records to identify ssi recipients incarcerated in state and federal prisons .

according to information provided by ssa , the process of matching prisoner information against the ssi payment records is a cost - effective way to identify ssi recipients who are in prison .

however , to succeed , ssa determined it is essential that field offices work closely with public institutions , both county and local , to facilitate the flow of information concerning the ssi population .

accordingly , ssa has , for years , instructed its field offices to ( 1 ) maintain regular contact ( for example , regular visits ) with prisons in their areas and ( 2 ) establish procedures for promptly obtaining information on events , such as admissions and discharges , that affect ssi eligibility and payment determinations .

on may 24 , 1996 , the commissioner of social security sent draft legislation to the congress .

this proposed legislation is designed to promote timely carrying out of ssi provisions requiring cessation of payments to prisoners .

the legislation would authorize the commissioner to enter into agreements with willing state and local “correctional facilities.” under these agreements , the commissioner would pay the facility for each report of a newly admitted inmate who has been a social security or ssi beneficiary but is not , as a prisoner , entitled to payments .

in august , the congress passed the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 .

the act authorizes the commissioner of ssa to enter into agreements with interested institutions .

under these agreements , the institutions would provide ssa with the names , ssns , and other information about their inmates .

ssa , subject to the terms of the agreements , would pay an institution for each inmate who ssa subsequently determines is ineligible for ssi .

the act specifies , however , that the institution's primary purpose must be to confine individuals for offenses punishable by confinement for more than 1 year .

this 1-year requirement would seem to preclude ssa from entering into agreements with , as well as making payments to , county and local jails , which generally incarcerate prisoners for shorter periods .

overall , in the jail systems we reviewed , we detected a total of $5 million in erroneous ssi payments to prisoners .

this includes $3.9 million to 2,343 current prisoners in 12 jail systems and $1.1 million to 615 former prisoners in 2 jail systems .

typically , an erroneous payment continued for 6 months or less and totalled about $1,700 .

ssa was unaware that many of these payments had occurred .

ssa had made erroneous payments to 2,343 prisoners , who were incarcerated in the 12 jail systems at the time of our work .

these 2,343 prisoners represent about 4 percent of the prisoners with verified ssns in these jail systems .

as shown in table 1 , ssa made payments to some prisoners in each of the 12 jail systems .

the percentage of prisoners who received ssi payments differed somewhat among these jail systems , ranging from 2 to about 7.7 percent .

in addition , there were 926 ssi recipients in jail at the time of our review who had not yet been there for 1 full calendar month .

collectively , these 926 prisoners were being paid about $387,000 a month .

to the extent these prisoners remain in jail for at least 1 calendar month and ssa remains unaware of their incarceration , ssi payments made after a full month of incarceration would be erroneous .

in the 12 systems we reviewed , as of the date we reviewed each system , we estimate that ssa paid $3,888,471 to the 2,343 current prisoners ( see table 2 ) .

the average amount paid to an individual prisoner varies among the jail systems , but the overall average is approximately $1,700 .

some payments are much larger .

erroneous payments to individual prisoners ranged from less than $100 to over $17,000 .

we determined that 136 prisoners received in excess of $5,000 , including 19 who received more than $10,000 .

the percentage of current prisoners by range is shown in figure 1 .

large erroneous payments to prisoners occurred because ssa paid some of them for long periods of time .

for example , one ssi recipient was arrested on june 27 , 1993 , and was still in jail on november 30 , 1995 .

ssa paid this prisoner monthly for this entire period .

the erroneous monthly payments totaled about $13,000 .

as of november 30 , 1995 , this ssi recipient was still in jail and ssa was continuing to pay him .

we determined that 85 percent of the 2,343 current prisoners had received erroneous payments for a period of 6 months or less , at the time of our review .

however , some were paid for longer periods .

we found a total of 94 prisoners that had been paid for more than 1 year , including 13 who were paid for more than 2 years .

the range of months during which payments continued is shown in table 3 .

the erroneous payments to current prisoners are likely to increase .

based on a review of ssa's records , we estimate that at the time of our review , ssa was unaware that 1,570 of the 2,343 recipients were in jail .

ssa therefore continued to erroneously pay them .

but ssa had stopped paying the remaining 773 and , for some of them , established an overpayment .

we obtained information , from two jail systems , for 15,998 former prisoners who were released from jail between january 1 and june 30 , 1995 .

we determined that of these former prisoners , 615 ( 3.8 percent ) received ssi while incarcerated .

in total , these former prisoners received about $1.1 million in payments .

the number of former prisoners , total erroneous payments , and average amount to individual prisoner by jail system are shown in table 4 .

included in the count of 419 former prisoners in cook county are 17 who were also in our population of current prisoners .

this indicates that these 17 were in prison and received ssi payments on at least two occasions .

in cook county , where we had data for both current and former prisoners , erroneous payments to former prisoners were higher .

in that county , about 73 percent of the former prisoners were erroneously paid $1,000 or more , compared with 48 percent of the current prisoners .

the difference is predictable because former prisoners have completed their time in the county or local jail and current prisoners have not .

in wayne county , where we only had data on former prisoners , 38 percent of the former prisoners were erroneously paid $1,000 or more .

based on a review of ssa's records , we estimate that ssa is unaware that it erroneously paid 454 ( 74 percent ) of the 615 former prisoners ( see table 5 ) .

as of december 1995 , ssa was making ssi payments to 340 of the 454 former prisoners .

however , ssa was not recovering these payments by withholding a portion of the current payments .

our review suggests that many of the erroneous payments to prisoners stem from the fact that ssa field offices were not following existing instructions .

these indicate that field offices should contact county and local jails to detect incarcerated ssi recipients .

other reasons for such payments include ssi recipients ( or their representative payees ) not reporting incarcerations and redeterminations not identifying some incarcerated ssi recipients .

at the start of our review , we contacted 23 county and local jail systems to determine if they were regularly providing prisoner information to ssa .

only 1 county was , although a few said ssa contacted them occasionally to determine if specific people were incarcerated .

in addition , 1 other county indicated that it initiated contact with ssa , but had not provided data .

ssa had contacted 6 additional systems about regularly obtaining information on prisoners , but these had not yet provided any data .

the remaining 15 systems reported that they had not been contacted by ssa about regularly providing information on prisoners .

for example , according to an ssa branch office manager , no one from ssa had visited the jails in the office's service area in more than 20 years .

our review of ssa records indicates that although some ssi recipients or their representative payees report incarceration to ssa as required , many do not .

we determined that of the 615 former prisoners who were erroneously paid , 217 had representative payees while in prison .

we also determined that of these representative payees , 164 did not report the ssi recipient's incarceration .

about 87 percent of the representative payees who did not report were relatives ; 1 percent were social agencies or other types of public and private organizations ; and 12 percent were “other” types .

similar reporting problems were noted for current prisoners .

in the redetermination process , ssa attempts to verify that recipients remain financially eligible for ssi and receive the correct payment .

ssa records indicate that while in jail , 88 prisoners each had one redetermination and 4 prisoners each had two or more .

we found that 32 of these 92 prisoners continued to be incarcerated and receive ssi payments after the redeterminations .

according to ssa records , 22 of these redeterminations involved face - to - face contact between an ssa employee and the recipient or the representative payee .

according to ssa officials , it is possible for inmates who are temporarily free , on work release or some other similar arrangement , to appear for a redetermination and subsequently return to jail .

in addition , representative payees may complete the redeterminations , including face - to - face , on behalf of the ssi recipient .

the identity of the actual individual who appeared at the face - to - face redetermination is not included in ssa's computerized record , and a detailed review to determine who appeared at the interview was beyond the scope of our work .

ssa's operating instructions contain provisions for field offices to contact local jails in order to obtain prisoner data from them .

however , ssa only recently began implementing this program systematically .

according to agency officials and internal documents , most of the jails nationwide had been contacted by april 1996 to obtain information on current prisoners and future admissions , but not on former prisoners .

according to agency officials , in march 1995 , ssa field offices were instructed to contact local jails in their service areas and report to their regional offices concerning which jails would agree to provide ssa with prisoner data .

however , the field offices did not consistently comply with these instructions , these ssa officials stated .

in october 1995 , after the start of our review , ssa headquarters issued a follow - up memo to the regional offices , directing them to instruct their field offices to ( 1 ) complete a detailed census of all jails in their jurisdictions and ( 2 ) report to headquarters by november 30 , 1995 .

it was during this period of time that the agency initiated a concerted effort to contact all county and local jails nationwide .

according to agency officials , prisons and jails are being contacted in the following order: ( 1 ) all state prisons , ( 2 ) the 25 largest county and local jails nationwide , and ( 3 ) all other county and local jails .

according to ssa documents , as of march 1996 , ssa had identified 3,878 county and local jails: ssa had obtained written agreements covering 2,647 of these and had agreements pending with 235 .

in addition , 843 jails were already reporting to ssa or held prisoners for less than 30 days ; 153 jails had not responded or had refused to cooperate .

ssa has requested that facilities it has contacted provide lists of their inmates to the local field offices .

the agency has offered flexible reporting guidelines for frequency and format of the lists ( computerized or on paper ) .

in general , ssa has requested that facilities that have provided data to it previously or on a trial basis continue providing data .

in addition , ssa has requested that facilities that have not provided any lists in the past provide ( 1 ) a current census of their inmates and ( 2 ) continuing lists of new admissions to the facility .

specifically , we found that ssa has contacted the 25 largest jail systems in the country and requested prisoner data from them .

most of these systems had agreed to supply ssa with prisoner data beginning in early to mid - 1996 .

one system ( orange county , calif. ) began providing data in april 1995 , and another system ( new york city ) has agreed to a pilot project including data beginning with january 1995 .

for many years , ssa has lacked an effective program to detect ssi recipients in county and local jails .

it has relied primarily on ( 1 ) the recipients or their representative payees to voluntarily report incarceration and ( 2 ) redeterminations .

neither of these mechanisms has been completely effective ; as a result , ssa has erroneously paid millions of dollars to thousands of prisoners in county and local jails .

ssa was unaware of most of these payments .

the number of ssi recipients who received ssi while in jail , including those with representative payees and those with redeterminations , raises numerous questions , including whether payments were obtained fraudulently .

ssa's recent initiative — to obtain better information on ssi recipients currently in county and local jails — is a positive step .

however , the effort is not comprehensive enough .

in general , ssa has begun to obtain information on current prisoners and new admissions .

but ssa has not attempted to develop information , when available , on ssi recipients who may have been incarcerated and received payments in prior years .

we found that this information is available and can provide ssa the means to identify and initiate recovery of many more erroneous payments .

in order to identify ssi recipients who have been erroneously paid in prior years , we recommend that the commissioner of ssa direct ssa field offices to obtain information from county and local jails on former prisoners .

ssa should then process this information to ( 1 ) determine if it made erroneous payments to any of these former prisoners , ( 2 ) establish overpayments for the ones it paid , and ( 3 ) attempt to recover all erroneous payments .

ssa commented on a draft of our report in a letter , dated july 16 , 1996 , and acknowledged that investigation of the productivity of securing information on former prisoners appears desirable and worthy of further examination .

however , ssa expressed concerns about the availability of data , the potential negative effect of requests for more data on existing reporting arrangements with county and local jail officials , the cost - effectiveness of processing data on former prisoners who may no longer be receiving ssi payments , and other matters .

ssa believes these concerns need to be resolved before implementing our recommendations .

 ( the full text of ssa's comments is included in app .

iii. ) .

during its recent initiative to identify current prisoners , ssa identified local officials who know what data are available and can be provided .

it should not be difficult or time - consuming , therefore , for ssa to contact these officials and determine if information on former prisoners is available .

in addition , to identify information on former prisoners , ssa need not establish that “the majority” of county and local jail systems have such information , given that the largest jail systems account for the majority of prisoners .

during the course of its initiative , ssa expanded the number of agreements with local correctional facilities to report prisoner information .

according to ssa , some of these facilities were initially reluctant to enter into these agreements because ssa does not have the authority to pay for this information .

however , unlike information on current prisoners , which requires monthly or quarterly reporting , information on former prisoners only requires a onetime effort by the local jail systems .

therefore , ssa need not assume that requesting such data will jeopardize existing agreements .

if county and local jail systems are initially reluctant to provide data on former prisoners , ssa could emphasize the potential benefit to state programs ( such as the recovery of erroneously paid state supplements ) that such data exchanges may provide .

we agree that ssa stands a better chance of recovering erroneous payments if the former prisoner is still receiving ssi .

however , the fact that he or she is not currently receiving ssi should not prevent the implementation of our recommendation .

to ensure program integrity , ssa has a responsibility to identify erroneous payments and collect overpayments .

once established , overpayments made to former prisoners remain in the record and could be recovered if the person again begins to receive ssi .

furthermore , ssa has the authority to recover ssi debts through a tax refund offset .

ssa also took issue with the fact that we reported that until recently , identifying prisoners was not a priority at ssa .

according to ssa , however , policies and operating procedures call for field offices to ( 1 ) maintain contacts with local institutions and ( 2 ) determine prisoner eligibility for payments .

in our review , we found that field offices had not been following this guidance .

we made minor changes to the text of the report to clarify this point .

ssa also expressed concern about a statement in the report that erroneous payments to prisoners may be partially due to the vulnerability of redeterminations to abuse .

although we do not discuss the redetermination process in great detail , our review of ssa records indicates that 32 of 92 prisoners in our sample continued to receive benefits after a redetermination .

if this process had been working as intended , ssa would have determined that these prisoners were no longer eligible to receive benefits .

we made minor changes to the text of the report to clarify this point .

we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and subcommittees ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties .

this report was prepared under the direction of christopher c. crissman , assistant director .

other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iv .

to determine if jail systems provide information on prisoners to ssa , we contacted 23 large county and local jail systems that met the following criteria: ( 1 ) a minimum average daily prisoner population of at least 1,000 , with emphasis on the largest u.s. metropolitan areas , ( 2 ) geographic dispersion , and ( 3 ) populous ssa regions .

of the 23 systems we contacted , we subsequently requested data from the 13 that met the following additional criteria: ( 1 ) an ability to provide us with automated data tapes suitable for matching , ( 2 ) willingness to provide the data at no cost , and ( 3 ) not currently providing ssa with prisoner data .

based on the above criteria , between september 1995 and january 1996 , we obtained automated data on current prisoners from 12 county and local jail systems .

they collectively represent about 20 percent of the county and local prisoner population nationwide .

the jail systems that provided data to us are in 10 states , in 6 of ssa's 10 regions .

the jail systems that provided current prisoner data to us were: broward county ( fla. ) ; cook county ( ill. ) ; dade county ( fla. ) ; hamilton county ( ohio ) ; harris county ( tex .

 ) ; king county ( wash. ) ; los angeles county ( calif. ) ; maricopa county ( ariz. ) ; new york city ; orange county ( fla. ) ; santa clara county ( calif. ) ; and shelby county ( tenn. ) .

in addition , during february and march 1996 , we obtained data on former prisoners from cook county and from wayne county ( mich. ) .

from 12 of the county and local jail systems , we obtained data for prisoners who were under their jurisdiction on specific dates .

the dates were selected by the jail systems , based on their available resources .

jail systems also supplied available personal identifiers , including name , social security number ( ssn ) , date of birth , place of birth , mother's maiden name ( or next of kin ) , ethnicity or race , home address , and date of incarceration .

we received information on a total of 97,813 current prisoners and eliminated duplicate records .

this reduced the initial universe to 79,595 prisoners .

we processed the information on these prisoners through ssa's enumeration verification system ( evs ) , which uses key variables ( name and date of birth ) to verify the ssns provided or determine an ssn if none is provided .

we obtained verified ssns for 53,420 of the 79,595 prisoners .

we could not verify ssns for the remaining 26,175 prisoners .

to determine which prisoners had ssi records , we matched the verified ssns against the supplemental security record .

we identified 12,951 prisoners with ssi records .

we analyzed these 12,951 records to determine if any of the prisoners received benefits while they were incarcerated ; we then extracted and analyzed the records of these prisoners .

to test the accuracy of the current prisoner data provided by the counties , we selected a random sample of 240 current prisoners we had identified as having been paid ssi benefits while incarcerated ( 20 prisoners from each of 12 counties ) .

we supplemented the random sample with 100 judgmentally selected cases ( considering large payments to prisoners , long periods of incarceration , ssi eligibility date versus incarceration date , and other such factors ) .

we requested that the jail systems verify ( 1 ) the booking date ( the first day the prisoner was incarcerated ) and ( 2 ) whether the prisoner was continuously incarcerated between the booking date and the date on which the jail created the list of inmates in its system .

we requested that the jails verify the information from a source other than that used to produce the original data .

the results of our random sample indicate that overall , our data were reliable .

for five counties , no errors were found for the sample cases .

for three counties , one case that could not be verified was found for each .

for three other counties , minor errors were found in the data .

for the final county , some of the information we had originally been provided was incorrect .

at that time , the county had not yet entered the release dates for some prisoners into its computer system .

as a result , the original information showed 123 ssi recipients in jail on november 16 , 1995 ( the date on which the county produced the original data ) , when they actually had been released before that date .

we eliminated these cases from our review .

of the original 20 randomly selected cases in this county , 10 were unaffected , with the original information being correct .

to obtain information on former prisoners , we asked two county systems ( wayne and cook ) to provide us with automated lists of all the prisoners released from their systems in the first 6 months of 1995 .

we received information on 16,821 prisoners , with no duplicate records .

we processed these data through evs , and obtained 15,998 verified ssns .

we matched the verified ssns against the supplemental security record to detect former prisoners who received ssi , and extracted and analyzed their records .

the 10 ssa regions are shown in figure ii.1 .

as discussed in appendix i , we obtained our data from county and local jail systems in 10 states — new york , florida , tennessee , ohio , illinois , texas , arizona , california , washington , and michigan — in 6 regions — ii , iv , v , vi , ix , and x .

in addition to those named above , the following also made important contributions to this report: jeremy cox , evaluator ; mary ellen fleischman , evaluator ; james p. wright , assistant director ( study design and data analysis ) ; and jay smale , social science analyst ( study design and data analysis ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

