for school year 1994-95 , the department of defense dependents schools ( dodds ) system enrolled 88,569 students in 191 schools worldwide and had a budget of approximately $860 million .

most students were department of defense ( dod ) command - sponsored , military or civilian dependents for whom dodds is required by law to provide a free public education in overseas areas , and most were enrolled as space - required students .

about 6 percent , or 5,489 students , were enrolled as space - available students — that is , dependents who were not command sponsored and thus not eligible for space - required enrollment , but were allowed to enroll if space was available .

about 3,000 of these space - available students paid tuition , while the other 2,500 attended tuition free .

as part of our continuing review of dodds , as directed by the conference report accompanying the 1994 defense authorization act , we were asked to provide information on educating dod dependents overseas .

more specifically , we focused our efforts on ( 1 ) reviewing legislation that establishes eligibility and authorizes funding for students to enroll in dodds as space - available , ( 2 ) identifying the number of students enrolled as space - available and their locations , and ( 3 ) explaining the circumstances surrounding high space - available enrollments in some schools .

to do this work , we reviewed the law and dod regulations pertaining to eligibility criteria and funding for enrolling students in dodds on a space - available basis and analyzed statistical data on dodds' total student enrollments for school year 1994-95 .

we also interviewed officials at dodds headquarters , two regional offices , and nine district offices , and visited selected schools to clarify policies and procedures for enrolling students on a space - available basis in those schools .

as agreed , we will provide you with information on the special education program in dodds at a later date .

dodds was created pursuant to section 1402 of public law 95-561 , the defense dependents' education act of 1978 , which directed the secretary of defense to establish and operate a program to provide a free public education through secondary school for dependents in overseas areas ( 20 u.s.c .

921 ) .

dodds is a support organization within dod whose mission is to educate every child authorized transportation overseas by dod regardless of location or needs of the child .

due to the downsizing of the military overseas , dodds enrollments have decreased from 160,000 for school year 1990-91 to 88,569 for school year 1994-95 , and the number of dodds schools decreased from 270 to 191 .

dodds elementary and secondary schools are located in 14 countries worldwide and are administered by three regions and 12 district offices .

the dodds schools we visited were , indeed , american schools overseas .

the facilities , resources , teachers , and curriculum were what one would find in a typical american school in the states .

in addition , because the schools were located on military bases , they were very much a part of the community in which they were located .

students who were overseas on unaccompanied tours could not live in base housing and therefore the school was a link to the base — and american — community .

the secretary of defense has authority , granted by public law 95-561 , to allow classes or categories of students , other than space - required students , to enroll in dodds .

the secretary may also establish priorities among such classes , waive the tuition , and issue other regulations as deemed necessary .

no limit has been established for the number of space - available children who can be enrolled in dodds , and no regulatory criteria have been established on how space - available is to be determined .

however , the july 29 , 1985 , conference report instructed dod not to include the cost of educating tuition - free , space - available students in its budget requests .

section 1402 of public law 95-561 , which created dodds , defines a dependent as any minor who has not completed secondary school ; who is the child , stepchild , adopted child , ward , or spouse of a sponsor , or who is a resident in the household of a sponsor who legally stands in place of parents to the minor ; and who receives one - half or more of his or her support from this sponsor .

dod regulations define “space - available” as student accommodations that may be made available in dodds schools if the director of dodds or a designee determines that a school has adequate staff and other resources to permit the enrollment of nonspace - required students .

dod regulations establish categories of space - available students .

all space - available children fall into the two broad categories of tuition - paying or tuition - free .

tuition - paying students can be either federally connected , such as dependents of state department or other u.s. government agency sponsors , or nonfederally connected , including dependents of retired military or foreign national sponsors .

ninety - six percent of tuition - free , space - available students are the dependents of dod military or civilian sponsors who are not authorized government transportation and housing overseas for their dependents .

the remaining 4 percent fall into the category of special cases and include students whose sponsors died while on active duty .

the designation “tuition - free” for the class of students with sponsors on unaccompanied tours was made by the director of dodds in 1982 .

dodds classified and prioritized space - available students within the categories specified in the regulations as shown: tuition - paying , federally connected: sponsors employed by u.s. government agencies , interests , and foreign services .

tuition - paying , nonfederally connected: sponsors are u.s. citizens , foreign nationals , or retired military .

tuition - free: sponsors are dod military or civilians overseas , but their dependents are not authorized overseas .

for a more detailed explanation of these classifications , see appendix i .

neither the statute nor regulations address the issue of how available space is to be determined in schools .

our interviews showed that , in practice , the school principal usually determines whether space is available , using pupil - teacher ratios by grade level as criteria .

with the exception of those in korea , the schools we visited were generally able to meet the demand for space - available enrollments .

military drawdowns in europe have enabled the schools to easily accommodate those few students who applied for admission .

dodds schools in japan and okinawa were often already overcrowded with space - required students , but the demand for space - available enrollment was also low .

we were told the high cost of living in these areas often prohibits service personnel from bringing their families unless they have approved housing .

in addition , the military services' policies are to send members to these locations on accompanied tours , which classifies their children as space - required in the schools .

also , other private schools are available in these areas .

in korea , however , the situation is different .

the military commanders there told us that because many tours require the service members to be stationed in dangerous locations without accommodations for dependents , about 90 percent of the u.s. military personnel in korea are on unaccompanied tours .

nevertheless , because the cost of living is very low , it is feasible for a service member to support dependents on the local economy .

this occurs more commonly in those families where the spouse is a korean national .

in addition , private schools in korea are expensive , and korean law prohibits american dependents from attending korean public schools .

as a result , many of these children , for whom there is no available space in dodds schools , do not attend any school .

in korea , three of the six dodds schools have space - available , tuition - free enrollments ranging from 180 to 220 students — 14 to 34 percent of total school enrollments .

dodds officials told us they enrolled as many students as possible in korea because these children are without practical alternatives .

currently , there is no count of children on unaccompanied tours , but base officials estimate there are hundreds and possibly thousands .

because of the large number of children in korea on unaccompanied tours who are not attending any school at all , military commanders told us that dealing with serious behavior problems such as vandalism , theft , and drug abuse takes up an increasing amount of the post commanders' time .

although the commander must take over these discipline problems from the korean police , the commander has no direct authority over the civilian dependents — post commander authority lies only over the military sponsor .

in addition to the problems that occur in korea , the commanders feel a social responsibility because children sent back to the united states who have missed several years of school will likely have problems in the future .

for example , the command found one 14-year - old dependent who had not attended school for 7 years .

the sponsor was subsequently ordered to return to the united states .

the july 1985 conference report instructed dod to treat differently the two classes of space - available students in its budgeting process .

this report states that dod is allowed to take into account the cost of additional teachers , supplies , and other resources , except for construction of facilities , for tuition - paying students in its request for funds .

dod may not , however , take into account the extra costs for educating the tuition - free , space - available children .

since there is no limit to the number of space - available children who may be enrolled in the schools , this budgeting process would allow for as many space - available , tuition - paying children as would apply , without authorizing new facilities , but would limit the number of tuition - free students to a true space - available criterion .

in fact , however , dod does take into account the extra costs for educating space - available , tuition - free students in requesting funds , because it estimates its costs on the basis of the total student population of the previous year , including the space - available , tuition - free students .

requiring these students to pay tuition would produce a savings of between $21 million and $23 million .

however , some solution to the difficult situation in korea would have to be achieved in conjunction with enforcing such a requirement .

otherwise , realizing these savings would most likely keep even more children from attending school .

according to the dodds student information management system ( sims ) , for school year 1994-95 dodds enrolled 88,569 students in 191 schools in 14 countries worldwide .

about 6 percent , or 5,478 , of these students were enrolled as space - available .

figure 1 shows the percentage of space - available students by category within dodds' total enrollment .

we analyzed enrollment data for each of the dodds regions , districts , and schools to determine space - available enrollments by major category and subcategory .

the following table summarizes the distribution of space - available students within each of the three dodds regions .

the distribution of space - available enrollments was generally consistent between the european and pacific regions — about 5 percent overall and ranging from about 1 to 3 percent for each of the categories of students .

the panama region , however , has 22.3 percent space - available enrollment primarily due to a higher number of tuition - free dependents of dod civilians .

however , as stated earlier , in 1999 , the schools in panama will be turned over to panama for operation , according to the terms of the panama treaty .

because these schools are operated in accordance with the terms of the treaty and because of their temporary status in dodds , we did no further analysis of their enrollments .

a detailed analysis of space - available enrollments at individual schools , districts , and regions is in appendix ii .

most dodds schools — about 75 percent — have space - available enrollments of 5 percent or less .

however , for varying reasons relating to military policy or interests , a few schools have space - available enrollments of 16 percent or more .

four of these schools have space - available enrollments of 65 percent or more .

four schools — one in bahrain ; two in bonn , germany ; and one in ankara , turkey — have space - available enrollments of 65 percent or more .

each of these schools maintains these enrollments for specific reasons dictated by military policy .

dodds provided the following explanations .

bahrain: the bahrain school was established by dod in the late 1970s .

it has 958 students , of which 726 are space - available ( 75.8 percent ) .

bahrain was and still is a strategic area for u.s. military in the persian gulf region .

in exchange for the rights for the u.s. navy to port its ships in bahrain , the bahrain government asked dod to establish and operate an american school for dependents of bahrain government officials .

the establishment of the school was cleared through both the state department and dod .

bonn: the bonn elementary school has a total enrollment of 163 students , of which 82.2 percent ( 134 students ) are space - available , and the high school has 259 students , of which 78.8 percent ( 204 students ) are space - available .

these schools were established before dodds was created , when the dod schools were still the responsibility of the individual military services .

the state department asked dod to establish the schools for the large numbers of state department dependents located in bonn , formerly the capital of west germany , when germany was a divided nation .

the schools have remained open , despite the military drawdown in the area , to continue educating state department and other u.s. government agencies' dependents remaining in bonn since germany's reunification .

ankara: because the military is gradually moving out of the area , the ratio between space - required and space - available students has changed greatly in ankara in the past few years .

as of september 1994 , the enrollment was 190 students , of which 65 percent ( 124 students ) were space - available .

currently , the state department relies on the dodds school because there are no alternative english - speaking schools available .

in addition to these four schools , seven schools — three in the european region and four in the pacific region — have space - available enrollments of 18 to 36 percent .

nearly two - thirds of these students are tuition - paying , which allows dodds to include them in the budget process , thus allowing them space .

almost all of the remaining tuition - free students are in schools in korea , where , as we discussed , dodds attempts to enroll as many students as possible .

space - available enrollments in dodds schools are generally very low and do not present a problem for the school systems .

however , in korea a problem exists at several levels — at the program , military command , and social levels .

in trying to attend to the education of dependents on unaccompanied tours , dodds has enrolled a relatively large number of these children .

first , at the program level , dodds has not followed the stipulations of conference report 99-235 , which prohibit dod from requesting funds for teachers and resources to educate space - available , tuition - free students .

however , the situation is not straightforward .

if dodds does not include these students in its budget , more students will probably do without an education in korea because dodds will receive less funding .

second , at the local military command level , the many children who do not attend school may require increased time and resources to address growing behavior problems .

the command does not have the authority to keep noncommand - sponsored dependents out of korea because it only has authority over the actions of the sponsor , not the civilian dependents .

finally , on a social level , leaving children uneducated raises a social and ethical dilemma for dodds and the military .

sending children back to the united states after they have missed years of schooling places them at an educational disadvantage when they do return to school .

alternative solutions exist , however , such as ( 1 ) allowing dodds to request resources in special situations , such as that in korea , for space - available , tuition - free students , or ( 2 ) having the military take strong measures to discourage noncommand - sponsored dependents in areas such as korea .

each alternative has costs — financial , military readiness , or legislative — that need to be fully identified before the congress and dod can make an informed decision .

we recommend that the secretary of defense propose to the congress alternatives , and their costs , to bring dodds into compliance with budgetary guidelines that prohibit dod from requesting funds for space - available , tuition - free students and that consider the compliance , disciplinary , and social problems that currently exist .

the department of defense stated that , contrary to our position , it views itself as being in compliance with congressional budget guidance .

dod stated that it has never requested an appropriation based upon any enrollment data but instead bases its request on factors such as workyears , needed for teachers and other positions ; and the number of schools .

we recognize that the dod budget request is based on these factors .

however , at least one of the factors used , workyears , is based on total enrollment .

more specifically , dodds includes space - available , tuition - free students in the total enrollment information it provides dod for budget purposes .

for this reason , we continue to believe our recommendation is valid .

the full text of dod's comments is included in appendix iii .

we will send copies of this report to agency officials and to other interested parties .

we will also make copies available to others on request .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .

if you have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7014 .

the enrollment categories for students in dodds overseas schools are listed here along with a description of the types of students included in each category .

minor dependents of u.s. military personnel ( army , navy , marines , and air force ) , when those dependents are authorized transportation at u.s. government expense .

 ( 1a - d ) although the coast guard is not part of dod , coast guard dependents attend dodds on a space - required , tuition - free basis by special arrangement .

 ( 1e ) minor dependents of dod civilian employees who are full time ; are paid from appropriated funds ; are entitled to a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate , that is , whose dependents have been transported to the overseas areas or are authorized such transportation , at u.s. government expense ; and are u.s. citizens or are lawfully accorded permanent residence in the united states .

 ( 1f ) minor dependents of nonappropriated funds institutions employees , such as post exchange employees on base , who are full time , are u.s. citizens or valid green card holders , are overseas pursuant to a transportation agreement , and are receiving a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate .

 ( 1j ) .

minor dependents of dod sponsors who are assigned to the military assistance or foreign military sales programs .

the agency pays this tuition in order to collect the full cost of the program .

 ( 1g&h ) minor dependents of foreign national citizens who are enrolled in schools operated by the former canal zone government .

these students are space - required because their schools were incorporated into dodds as a result of the panama canal treaty of 1979 .

the panama canal commission pays the tuition .

 ( 1i ) .

minor dependents of u.s. government employees , provided the employee is a u.s. citizen or a person lawfully accorded permanent residence in the united states and is entitled to a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate , or who has been identified by his or her agency as being eligible for educational benefits on a tuition - paying basis .

includes u.s. government employees who are covered by an economy act agreement between the department of state and dod , or any component of such an agency and dod .

examples: dependents of u.s. citizen employees of all u.s. government agencies other than dod , such as the state department , agency for international development , department of agriculture , federal aviation administration , customs service , general services administration , and the smithsonian institution .

this also includes u.s. citizen employees of certain international organizations , such as the north atlantic treaty organization and the united nations .

 ( 2a ) minor dependents of dod nonappropriated funds institutions employees who are u.s. citizens ( or persons lawfully accorded permanent residence in the united states ) , are full - time employees , are not overseas pursuant to a transportation agreement , but are receiving a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate .

 ( 2b ) minor dependents of u.s. citizens who are employees of organizations overseas that serve significant defense - related interests and / or that have executed contracts or other agreements with the u.s. government that authorize dependent education in dodds on a tuition - paying basis .

for example: employees of permanent party american red cross , united service organizations , boy and girl scouts , post exchange concessionaire contractors , and stars and stripes .

also , university education personnel , u.s. government contractor personnel , and technical representatives , when the contract authorizes dependent education in dodds on a tuition - paying basis .

 ( 2c ) dependents of host nation or third - country national military or civilian personnel assigned or attached to the u.s. military services overseas at international or major dod commands , when recommended by the major overseas commander .

for example: third - country national military and civilian personnel service with u.s. armed forces overseas , north atlantic treaty organization , united nations , canadian , or other allied forces .

 ( 2d ) .

minor dependents of dod military sponsors ( army , navy , marines , air force , and coast guard ) who are stationed in an overseas area to which their dependents are not authorized transportation at u.s. government expense , but to which the sponsors have elected to transport their dependents at their own expense .

 ( 3a - e ) minor dependents of dod civilian sponsors who are u.s. citizens ( or persons lawfully accorded permanent residence in the united states ) who are full time , are paid from appropriated funds , but who are not entitled to a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate .

 ( 3f ) minor dependents of sponsors who have been granted a waiver of tuition costs by the secretary of defense ( or designee ) .

includes dependents of military or dod civilian sponsors who die while , or within 180 days of being , on active duty or while drawing compensation .

also includes u.s. citizens or green card holders who are employees of the u.s. mission or u.s. embassy in berlin .

 ( 3g ) .

other minor dependents of u.s. citizens .

examples are persons who would be space - available , tuition - paying , and federally connected but lack entitlement to a housing allowance at the “with dependents” rate or a contract providing for education benefits .

 ( 4a ) minor dependents of foreign national citizens for whom the secretary of defense determines that enrollment is in the national interest .

includes all foreign national dependents attending ankara , bahrain , and bonn schools unless excluded by the department of state .

 ( 4b ) all u.s. citizens not included in other categories , for example , u.s. retired military personnel .

 ( 4c ) dependents of local or third - country nationals when no significant u.s. interest is involved .

 ( 4d ) .

european region ( total schools = 143 ) ( continued ) ( continued ) ( continued ) ( continued ) pacific region ( total schools = 34 ) ( continued ) panama / islands region ( total schools = 14 ) ( continued ) total ( 191 schools ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) ( continued ) dod military ( 3a - 3e ) dod civilian ( 3f ) dod special ( 3g ) .

u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) ( continued ) u.s. government ( 2a ) dod nafi ( 2b ) u.s. organizations supporting dod ( 2c ) foreign nationals supporting dod ( 2d ) foreign nationals ( 4b ) other u.s. ( 4c ) other foreign ( 4d ) .

larry horinko , assistant director , ( 202 ) 512-7001 mary e. roy , evaluator - in - charge , ( 202 ) 512-7072 joan a. denomme , evaluator , ( 202 ) 512-7050 damaris delgado - vega , attorney thomas j. laetz , evaluator mary w. freeman , evaluator michael d. rohrback , evaluator daniel j. tikvart , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

