the federal government's $66 billion investment in a multitude of education , employment training , and worker protection programs is largely administered by the departments of education and labor through staff at headquarters and a complement of field offices .

in june 1995 , we outlined the field office structures of the departments of education and labor as part of information requested for a congressional proposal to merge these two departments with the equal employment opportunities commission .

this information raised concerns from several congressional members about the purpose of the departments' more than 1,100 field offices and the costs to maintain and manage them ; however , little information was available .

this report responds to those concerns by providing information about the field offices supporting the departments of education and labor , including the locations of education and labor field offices ; field office functions , staffing , space , and operating costs ; and recent changes in field office structure that the departments of education and labor made , or are planning , to improve efficiency .

we conducted this work under our basic legislative responsibility to provide information that will assist the congress in its oversight activities .

we are addressing this report to you because your congressional committees oversee the operations of these two departments .

in carrying out our work , we obtained location , space , and rental cost data on education and labor field offices from the general services administration ( gsa ) .

we obtained information from education and labor officials on field office functions ; staffing ; and salary , benefit , and other costs , such as travel , equipment , and supplies .

we also obtained information from the departments about their planned and ongoing field office restructuring activities .

we did not independently verify the data we received from gsa or the departments .

we conducted our work between january 1996 and july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

see appendix i for a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology .

the department of education manages the federal investment in education and leads the nation's long - term effort to improve education .

established as a separate department in 1980 , education's mission is to ensure equal access by the nation's populace to education and to promote improvements in the quality and usefulness of education .

for fiscal year 1995 , education was appropriated $32.4 billion and authorized 5,131 fte positions to administer and carry out its 240 educational assistance programs , including aid to distressed schools through the elementary and secondary education act , support for technical training through the carl d. perkins vocational and applied technology education act , support for special education programs for the disabled , and support for higher education through subsidized and unsubsidized loans and grant programs .

although education only became a department in 1980 , its field structure dates back to 1940 when the office of education had its own representatives in federal regional offices to assist in administering federal education laws .

historically , the major function of these offices has been to help local administrators understand federal education legislation and obtain available federal funds for education purposes .

the department of labor's mission is to foster , promote , and develop the welfare of u.s. wage earners ; improve their working conditions ; and advance their opportunities for profitable employment .

in carrying out this mission , labor — established as a department in 1913 — administers and enforces a variety of federal labor laws guaranteeing workers' rights to work places free from safety and health hazards , a minimum hourly wage and overtime pay , unemployment insurance , workers' compensation , and freedom from employment discrimination .

labor also protects workers' pension rights ; provides for job training programs ; helps workers find jobs ; and tracks changes in employment , prices , and other national economic measurements .

although labor seeks to assist all americans who need and want to work , special efforts are made to meet the unique job market needs of older workers , economically disadvantaged and dislocated workers , youth , women , the disabled , and other groups .

in fiscal year 1995 , labor had a budget of $33.8 billion and was authorized 17,632 fte positions to administer and carry out its activities .

in fiscal year 1995 , the department of education had 72 field offices and the department of labor had 1,074 .

these field offices were located in 438 localities across the 50 states , the district of columbia , and two territories ( see fig .

1 ) .

concentrations of offices are found in the 10 federal region cities , where a total of 279 education and labor field offices are located , with a total of 5,987 staff ( see table 1 ) .

about 245 localities had a single education or labor field office , and 148 localities had between two and five offices ( see fig .

2 ) .

six of education's 17 major components maintained field offices ( see table 2 ) .

each of the six education components with field offices had an office in all 10 federal region cities .

in total , 94 percent of education's field staff were located in these 10 cities .

the concentration of education's field offices in the federal region cities is a reflection of the role of education's field structure , which is principally to ensure the integrity of grant and loan programs and to ensure that federal programs are equitably accessible .

for example , the office of postsecondary education ( ope ) formulates policy and oversees the student loan program and other sources of federal support for postsecondary students and schools .

the ope field offices carry out technical assistance , debt collection , and monitoring activities that affect students , institutions , contractors , lenders , and guaranty agencies .

the mission of ocr is somewhat different in that its responsibility is to enforce civil rights laws in the nation's schools .

its regional offices carry out these functions .

two - thirds of the department of education's staff was located in headquarters in fiscal year 1995 .

of education's 5,131 authorized fte positions , 4,835 were actually used and 1,501 , or about 31 percent of this amount , were used to support education's field operations .

staff usage for three components — ocr , oig , and ope — taken together represented 90 percent of education's field strength in fiscal year 1995 .

ocr and oig used the preponderance of their staff resources in their field offices — about 80 percent for ocr and 68 percent for oig ( see fig .

3 ) .

ope had about a third of education's total field staff positions .

in fiscal year 1995 , 1,074 field offices supported 17 of labor's 26 components ( table 3 ) .

of labor's total authorized staffing of 17,632 ftes , about 63 percent ( 11,095 ) were allocated to field offices .

labor's field offices were in a total of 437 localities across the nation .

about 21 percent ( 229 offices ) of labor's field offices and 42 percent of on - board field staff were located in the 10 federal region cities ; together these offices were supported by 4,486 staff .

most of labor's components with field offices had more than half of their staff resources assigned to the field ( see fig .

4 ) .

msha has the highest proportion of its staff positions in the field , 91 percent , to inspect mines and protect the life and health of the nation's miners .

similarly , the occupational safety and health administration had about 82 percent of its staff positions allocated to its field offices .

esa had 84 percent of its 3,677 staff resources allocated to its 396 field offices .

the concentration of labor's staff in its field offices reflects the primary mission of these components' responsibilities .

for example , esa , msha , the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) , and the pension and welfare benefits administration are all focused on ensuring workers' rights to safe , healthful , and fair workplaces through their enforcement and inspection activities .

the occupational series that predominated in both departments varied by component and were related to the mission of the component .

for example , half the field staff of education's office of special education and rehabilitative services were rehabilitation services program specialists , about half the staff of ocr were equal opportunity specialists , and about 60 percent of oig's field staff were auditors ( see table 4 ) .

similarly , labor's field staff occupational series were related to a component's primary functions .

for example , in fiscal year 1995 , esa had three major subcomponents , each with a different mission ; thus , a third of its staff were wage and hour compliance specialists , a quarter were workers' compensation claims examiners , and about 20 percent were equal opportunity specialists ( see table 5 ) .

two - thirds of osha's staff were safety / health specialists or industrial hygienists .

field office staff at both departments were composed primarily of employees in general schedule ( gs ) or general management ( gm ) grades 11 through 13 , representing about 60 percent of both education and labor field staff ( see fig .

5 ) .

seven percent of both education and labor field staff were senior managers ( gs - 14 and – 15 ) .

together education and labor spent about 1.3 percent ( $867 million ) of their combined budget of approximately $66 billion in support of their field operations ; more than three quarters of this amount was for staff salaries and benefits .

according to gsa , education's 72 field offices occupied about 495,000 square feet of space .

approximately 357,000 square feet of education's field office space was leased from private entities , while 28 percent was federally owned .

in fiscal year 1995 , education spent about $112 million on field office costs such as rent and utilities , staff salaries and benefits , and other administrative costs ( see fig .

6 ) .

according to gsa , labor occupied a total of 3 million square feet of space , 2.1 million square feet of which was leased .

labor spent a total of $755 million on its field operations , mostly for staff salaries .

both education and labor have eliminated and / or consolidated a few field offices within the last 5 years to improve service delivery or office operations .

within education , such restructuring activities occurred in oig and ocr , while at labor , esa , the office of the american workplace ( oaw ) , and the office of the solicitor reported that they are reorganizing their field offices and functions along with the employment and training administration ( eta ) , msha , oig , the office of the assistant secretary for administration and management ( oasam ) , and the veterans' employment and training service ( vets ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , education's oig restructured its 10 regional and 11 field offices into four areas: the northeast area includes boston , new york , philadelphia , and the division of headquarters operations ; the capital area includes headquarters audit region and accounting and financial management staff ; the central southern area includes atlanta and chicago ; and the western area includes dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle .

the oig reduced the amount of rented space in 10 locations to lower its leasing costs and eliminated the baton rouge field office and the denver regional office as of june 30 , 1996 .

education's ocr is in the process of reorganizing its headquarters division and 1 field and 10 regional offices into four mega - regions called enforcement divisions .

these enforcement divisions will be ( 1 ) enforcement division a — new york , philadelphia , and boston ; ( 2 ) enforcement division b — atlanta , dallas , and the new washington , d.c. / metro office ; ( 3 ) enforcement division c — kansas city , chicago , and cleveland ; and ( 4 ) enforcement division d — seattle , san francisco , and denver .

 ( for a more complete discussion of education field office changes , see the component profiles in app .

ii. ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , labor's office of the solicitor examined its regional office structure in light of agencywide streamlining and reinvention initiatives .

the analysis led to the decision to close the solicitor's branch office in ft. lauderdale , florida .

by fiscal year 1999 , labor plans to have completed the reorganization of esa's wage and hour division and its office of federal contract compliance programs ( ofccp ) field operations .

wage and hour's eight regional offices will be reduced to five through the consolidation of its current ( 1 ) philadelphia , new york and boston regional offices into a northeast regional office and ( 2 ) chicago and kansas city regional offices into a single office .

labor also plans to reduce the number of wage and hour district offices and increase its area offices .

this will essentially involve redefining the duties of about 10 district offices to provide more frontline services and fewer management - related activities .

also , through employee attrition , management / supervisory staff buyouts , and selective staff hiring , labor plans to reduce the number of its wage and hour staff and its management - to - staff ratios to increase the proportion of frontline employees to better serve its many customers .

four of ofccp's regional offices will be combined into two .

its current chicago and kansas city regional offices will be merged to form one new office , and its dallas and denver regional offices will be combined to form the other .

also , labor plans to eliminate at least two ofccp district offices .

oaw is in the process of reorganizing to streamline field office management and operations .

the target field structure would consist of 20 field offices and 13 resident investigator offices divided into five geographic regions .

the reorganization is expected to eliminate two and , in some instances , three layers of program review , significantly expand supervisory span of control , and increase the number of resident investigative offices .

eta has begun to reassess its field structure and is considering realigning and / or consolidating certain programs , functions , services , and field offices .

eta is currently reevaluating its operations in the 10 federal region cities with a view to locating them in the same area or building where feasible .

eta has reduced its total staff by 20 percent , well above its streamlining goal of a 12 percent reduction in total staffing by fiscal year 1999 .

four other labor components — msha , oig , oasam , and vets — have also been involved in restructuring efforts .

in fiscal year 1995 , msha eliminated several of its coal mine safety and health subdistrict offices as a way to eliminate a managerial layer .

plans to restructure the oig's entire field structure were in process in fiscal year 1995 resulting in the elimination of eight field offices in fiscal year 1996 and a realignment of management functions and fewer gs - 15 positions .

the oig is currently evaluating its washington , d.c. , field offices .

oasam , while maintaining a physical presence in each of its regions , reduced its number of regional administrators from 10 to 6 .

vets is awaiting congressional approval to reduce the number of field offices that support its operations .

 ( for a more complete discussion of labor field office changes , see the component profiles in app .

iii. ) .

the department of education provided us with technical comments on a draft of this report , which we have incorporated as appropriate .

education's letter is printed in appendix vi .

the department of labor also provided us with comments on a draft of this report and made two specific comments .

first , it questioned our definition of a field office , and was concerned that using the same term to refer to all types of offices implied they were all of the same value and that this would be misleading to the reader .

the list of field offices we used in this report was provided to us by labor .

in addition , the definition of field office used in this report is consistent with the information contained in our june 1995 report , federal reorganization: congressional proposal to merge education , labor , and eeoc ( gao / hehs - 95-140 , june 7 , 1995 ) , upon which this report follows up .

the definition we used separately counts offices that had different functions or were part of different components , even if they were at the same location .

the information contained in appendix iii of this report explains the roles , functions , and differences between the various types of field offices associated with each of labor's components .

second , labor questioned the utility of using fiscal year 1995 data , noting that the department was making changes in its field operations that the use of fiscal year 1995 information would not capture .

we used fiscal year 1995 data because it was the most recent , comprehensive , and consistent information available on education's and labor's headquarters' and field operations .

the detailed discussion of labor's components , their staffing , costs , and field office functions contained in appendix iii was designed to provide a current and up - to - date picture of the department's field operations .

it also contains a separate discussion of field office and organizational changes that have occurred since september 30 , 1995 , and notes future changes that labor told us were planned .

labor also provided us with technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate .

labor's comments are printed in appendix vii .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of education and labor ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-7014 or sigurd r. nilsen , assistant director , on ( 202 ) 512-7003 if you have any questions about this report .

gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix viii .

we designed our study to gather information on the departments of education and labor field office structures .

specifically , we gathered data on the location , staffing , square footage , and operating cost for each department in total and its field offices .

for purposes of our review , we defined a field office as any type of office other than a headquarters office — for example , a regional office , district office , or area office — established by an education or labor component .

to perform our work , we obtained and analyzed general services administration ( gsa ) facility data and the departments' staffing , cost , and location data .

we did our work between january and july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

data were obtained from a variety of sources because no one single source maintained all the information we sought .

gsa provided data on the amount of space occupied , space usage , and rent and utilities costs for each of labor's components by city and state .

gsa also provided total space and rent and utility cost information for education , without component breakouts .

education provided information on the square footage occupied by its field offices and their rent and utility costs .

education also provided information on full - time equivalent ( fte ) staff positions ; on - board staff ; personnel costs ( salaries and benefits ) ; other operating costs , such as travel and supplies ; and office locations by field office .

all information received from labor was obtained through the office of the assistant secretary for administration and management ( oasam ) .

labor provided data on ftes by component .

to calculate on - board staff counts , we obtained an extract of labor's personnel management information system showing personnel by component by city and state location .

these data were augmented with information from labor's components .

additionally , labor provided departmentwide and field information on personnel and other costs by component — but not by field office .

to analyze field office space and rent and utility cost data , we obtained an extract of gsa's public building service information systems ( pbs / is ) and national electronic accounting report system ( nears ) databases covering all labor and education space rented or owned by gsa as of september 30 , 1995 .

the pbs / is database contained square footage allocations and information on space usage and the status and duration of the lease or rental .

the nears database contained rent and utilities cost information .

both files were organized by gsa assignment number — that is , the unit used by gsa for billing the departments .

the file contained 1,056 unique assignment numbers for labor and 62 for education .

these assignment numbers do not necessarily indicate different locations or individual field offices .

the focus for this review was on field office rather than headquarters function and space .

the gsa files used for our square footage , space usage , and rent and utility cost analyses did not contain information linking square footage with the organizational level — for example , area , district , regional , or headquarters — of the specific office .

this created a special problem for identifying washington , d.c. , field offices .

thus , because we were unable to separate washington , d.c. , field offices from headquarters , for the purposes of identifying square footage and rent and utility costs , we treated all offices located in washington , d.c. , as headquarters.eliminating the d.c. offices from this analysis resulted in the exclusion of 18 cases for education and 17 for labor , giving us 44 assignment numbers for education and 1,039 for labor in our analytic file .

because the level of detail of gsa's information on education's space was not equivalent to that provided for labor — that is , for education we could not identify organizational level , or component , associated with square footage or cost , nor could we identify square footage by use category — we augmented the data for education with information directly from the department .

in presenting detailed square footage estimates for labor in appendix iii , we used gsa's four use categories — total square footage ; office space ; storage ; and special square footage , which includes training areas , laboratories and clinics , automated data processing , and food service space .

discussions of square footage for education in appendix ii are in the 3 categories as forwarded to us by the department — office , parking , and storage .

total agency square footage estimates presented in the body of the report for both labor and education — including rent and utilities costs — were provided to us by gsa .

to determine the number of education and labor field offices and their locations , we used data prepared for us by the departments .

this information was in the form of listings , organized by component , linking organizational level — such as regional office or district office — with the relevant city and state where an office was located in fiscal year 1995 .

these listings identified 72 education ( as of april 20 , 1995 ) and 1,037 labor field offices ( as of august 1 , 1995 ) .

additional labor field offices were identified in other documents provided by the department .

as a result , our field office database increased to 1,056 labor field offices .

we based our analyses on this count of labor offices along with the 72 education field offices .

after education and labor reviewed a draft of this report , labor revised its count of field offices , amending its previous list of field offices operational in fiscal year 1995 as provided to us on august 1 , 1995 .

our final field office database contained 1,074 labor and 72 education field offices .

the departments differed in their ability to provide fte data .

we obtained from education the number of ftes used — not authorized — by component and field office because education does not allocate authorized ftes below the component level .

we obtained from labor , authorized and used ftes by component , but not by field office because labor does not track either authorized or used ftes at this level .

both departments provided us with agencywide fte data .

for on - board staff , the departments provided nonidentifying data on the grade , occupational series , organizational , and geographic location for each employee as of september 30 , 1995 .

our analysis of labor field office on - board staff was based on information extracted from the department's personnel management information system , which indicated 10,632 on - board staff as of september 30 , 1995 .

after reviewing a draft of this report , labor revised its count of on - board staff to 10,654 on the basis of input by its components .

personnel cost data ( salary and benefits ) along with other cost information for items such as supplies , materials , and travel was provided by the departments in summary form by component at the national level .

for both location and staffing information , we aggregated the data and prepared summary statistics by component , city , and state .

similarly , we developed summary statistics of city and state localities for field offices and field staff .

some individuals were employed at locations other than an official field office .

therefore , the total number of localities for field staff is greater than the number of localities for field offices .

unlike education , labor does not centrally maintain information on its components' field office locations , staffing , and costs .

instead , each component maintains such information itself and provides oasam with information as requested .

thus , much of the information we requested from labor for the individual components had to be obtained from the components by oasam .

although each component was asked to give the same information , there is no assurance that all the information provided used consistent definitions and collection methods .

thus , some variation in data quality and consistency is possible .

we were unable to report data for those labor field offices that were housed in state - owned buildings because our analysis of field office space and costs was limited to available gsa data .

additionally , because we could not directly identify square footage and rent and utility costs associated with field office functions located in headquarters space , we eliminated all washington , d.c. , locations from our field office analysis of space and rent and utility costs .

this results in the estimates of costs and space for field locations to be understated by the amount allocated to field offices within the district of columbia .

actual total field office space and rent and utility costs , therefore , may be somewhat higher than reported here .

additionally , square footage use categories reported for labor were provided by gsa , while education provided the information itself .

because these data were obtained from two different sources , the resultant calculations cannot be directly compared .

we did not visit the field offices and could not evaluate the adequacy of the reported space provided , nor could we determine whether the number and skill levels of the staff were sufficient to perform field office activities .

in addition , we did not verify any of the data provided on field office location or staffing by the departments , nor did we independently verify the accuracy of the data provided by gsa .

this appendix provides a snapshot of the department of education's field offices as of september 30 , 1995 .

each profile shows the locations of and describes the mission and activities performed by the field offices supporting six education components in fiscal year 1995 .

in addition , each profile provides the following information about the field offices: ( 1 ) staffing , ( 2 ) space occupied , ( 3 ) costs to operate , and ( 4 ) field office restructuring activities or plans .

 ( see table ii.1 for a summary of staffing , space , and cost data for all six components. ) .

in these profiles , regional , area , district , state , and other types of offices are referred to generically as field offices .

unless otherwise noted , we used education data to estimate the amount and cost of field office space by component because gsa does not provide square footage totals and rent / utility costs for units within education .

we also used education data to identify the locations of official field offices ; the fte usage and on - board personnel strength of each component ; salary , benefit , and other field office costs ; and information about field office restructuring activities within the department .

space ( square feet ) costs ( dollars in millions ) office of the inspector general office of intergovernmental and interagency affairs office of special education and rehabilitative services space is provided by the office of intergovernmental and interagency affairs .

space rental costs are included with rental costs for the office of intergovernmental and interagency affairs ; staff salaries and benefits and other costs are not available .

the primary mission of the office for civil rights ( ocr ) is to enforce civil rights laws in america's schools , colleges , and universities .

ocr focuses on preventing discrimination from occurring .

staff in ocr's 11 field offices ( see fig .

ii.1 ) investigate and resolve individual and class complaints of discrimination filed by members of the public and initiate compliance reviews of local and state educational agencies or higher education institutions .

field office staff provide targeted technical assistance in priority areas and respond to individual requests for information and assistance .

according to ocr officials , field offices are maintained because compliance activities often require on - site investigations at educational agencies and institutions throughout the country .

when conducting compliance activities , it is beneficial for ocr field staff to have the support of state and local educational institutions .

table ii.2 provides key information about the 10 regional offices and 1 field office that compose ocr's field office structure .

ocr has had a field office presence in all 10 federal region cities ( boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle ) in addition to an office in cleveland , ohio , before the establishment of the department of education in 1980 .

ocr field offices in the regions are located with all other education field offices in the regions .

as of september 30 , 1995 , more than half of ocr's field employees were equal opportunity specialists , attorneys , and investigators .

most of the remaining staff performed administrative and managerial duties , such as program manager , management assistant , and administrative officer ( see fig .

ii.2 ) .

two - thirds of the employees ranged between gs - 11 and gs - 13 ( see fig .

ii.3 ) .

ten of the 11 ocr field offices were regional offices .

the atlanta regional office ( region iv ) had the most on - board staff ( 102 ) , and the cleveland field office in region v had the fewest staff ( 27 ) ( see table ii.3 ) .

boston ( regional office ) new york ( regional office ) philadelphia ( regional office ) atlanta ( regional office ) chicago ( regional office ) cleveland ( field office ) dallas ( regional office ) kansas city ( regional office ) denver ( regional office ) san francisco ( regional office ) seattle ( regional office ) .

ocr occupied about 154,848 square feet of education's total field office space .

of that space , ocr leased 99,806 square feet ( 64 percent ) in privately owned buildings , and 55,042 square feet ( 36 percent ) was in gsa - owned buildings .

ocr used about 99 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage ( see fig .

ii.4 ) .

ocr's total field office costs were $43.7 million in fiscal year 1995 .

field office costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as travel , equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $3.2 million , staff salaries and benefits totaled $35.7 million , and other costs totaled $4.8 million .

currently , ocr is reorganizing its headquarters division and field office into four mega - regions , called enforcement divisions , consisting of 12 sites .

the enforcement divisions will be split into enforcement division a , which includes new york , philadelphia , and boston ; enforcement division b , which includes atlanta , dallas , and the new washington , d.c. / metro office ; enforcement division c , which includes kansas city , chicago , and cleveland ; and enforcement division d , which includes seattle , san francisco , and denver .

the redesign of ocr's field management structure is proposed to increase efficiency in complaint resolution , provide for better resource coordination and allocation , and reassign a significant percentage of headquarters staff to case - specific duties .

according to education , the change will also reduce administrative layers and supervisory staff to address the goals of the vice president's national performance review .

the primary mission of the office of inspector general ( oig ) is to ( 1 ) increase the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of education programs and operations and ( 2 ) detect and prevent fraud , waste , and abuse in them .

staff in 21 field offices are responsible for auditing and investigating activities related to education's programs and operations in their respective geographic locations ( see fig .

ii.5 ) .

staff perform program audits to determine compliance with applicable laws and regulations , economy and efficiency of operations , and effectiveness in achieving program goals .

auditors and investigators inspect entities about which there are indications of abuse significant enough to warrant a recommendation to curtail federal funding .

staff also investigate allegations of fraud by recipients of program funds and employee misconduct involving education's programs or operations .

because program effectiveness audits require on - site work to accurately assess program results , according to education , field offices help to save travel dollars .

a field presence also encourages the development of strong working relationships with state and local officials .

the information gleaned from these officials increases the oig's effectiveness .

table ii.4 provides key information about the 10 regional offices and 11 suboffices ( known within education as field offices ) that compose oig's field office structure .

oig maintained a field office presence in many of its regions prior to the establishment of the department of education in 1980 .

in fiscal year 1995 , oig operated more field office locations than all the other education components .

only two ( oig and ocr ) of education's six components maintained field offices other than regional offices .

oig staff were located in nine federal region cities: the washington , d.c. , headquarters office ; and 11 field locations ( boston ; new york ; philadelphia ; atlanta ; chicago ; dallas ; kansas city ; denver ; san francisco ; seattle ; puerto rico ; pittsburgh ; district of columbia ; nashville ; plantation , florida ; st. paul ; austin ; baton rouge ; long beach ; and sacramento ) .

oig field offices in the federal regions are located with all education field offices .

as of september 30 , 1995 , auditors and criminal investigators made up approximately 92 percent of oig's field office staff .

the remaining staff performed managerial and administrative duties , such as management services specialist , investigative assistant , administrative officer , and clerk ( see fig .

ii.6 ) .

seventy - two percent of the employees were in grades ranging from gs - 11 to – 13 ( see fig .

ii.7 ) .

the chicago regional office had the most on - board staff ( 28 ) , and two offices — nashville and seattle — had the fewest staff ( 4 persons each ) ( see table ii.5 ) .

boston ( regional office ) new york ( regional office ) puerto rico ( field office ) philadelphia ( regional office ) pittsburgh ( field office ) washington , d.c. ( field office ) atlanta ( regional office ) plantation , fla. ( field office ) nashville ( field office ) chicago ( regional office ) st. paul ( field office ) dallas ( regional office ) austin ( field office ) baton rouge ( field office ) kansas city ( regional office ) denver ( regional office ) san francisco ( regional office ) long beach ( field office ) sacramento ( field office ) seattle ( field office ) washington , d.c. ( regional office ) .

oig field offices occupied 74,594 square feet of education's total field office space .

of that space , oig leased 45,050 square feet ( 60 percent ) in privately owned buildings , and 29,544 square feet ( 40 percent ) of space was in gsa - owned buildings .

oig used about 84 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for parking and storage ( see fig .

ii.8 ) .

oig's total field office costs were $18.3 million in fiscal year 1995 .

field office costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as travel , equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $1.3 million , staff salaries and benefits totaled $14.2 million , and other costs totaled $2.8 million .

as of july 1995 , oig restructured its 10 regional and 11 field offices into four areas: the northeast area ( includes boston , new york , philadelphia , and the division of headquarters operations ) ; the capital area ( includes headquarters audit region and accounting and financial management staff ) ; the central southern area ( includes atlanta and chicago ) ; and the western area ( includes dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle ) .

as of june 1996 , oig completed cost - cutting initiatives as follows: reduction of space in selected areas to minimize leasing costs , including the identification of four nonheadquarters sites for possible rent savings thus far: austin , nashville , seattle , and st. paul .

the elimination of one field office ( baton rouge ) and one regional office ( denver ) where the amount of work no longer justifies an on - site presence .

a number of auditor and investigative positions will be filled at other locations where the workload warrants additional staff .

the primary mission of the office of intergovernmental and interagency affairs ( oiia ) is to provide intergovernmental and public representation of the secretary and the department except in matters where assistant secretaries or their equivalents manage regional operations .

oiia is responsible for providing overall leadership in coordinating regional and field activities .

oiia has a secretary's regional representative in each of its 10 regional offices who serves as the secretary's field office representative .

 ( see fig .

ii.9. ) .

the primary mission of the office of management ( om ) is to provide the administrative services required to assist field office staff .

according to education , regional staff ( 1 ) administer the federal real property assistance program , to ensure maximum utilization of surplus federal property for educational purposes , and ( 2 ) provide personnel services to regional employees in other program offices .

table ii.6 provides key information about the 10 regional offices that compose oiia and om's field office structure .

education did not provide separate costs information for om .

education does not maintain information on headquarters office rent by component .

rent for om field office staff is included with oiia rental costs .

oiia and om had staff in the 10 federal region cities ( boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , the total on - board staff in oiia's and om's 10 field offices was 69 ( 47 for oiia and 22 for om ) .

as of september 30 , 1995 , oiia and om staff performed duties in 10 job categories .

oiia had staff in six of those categories and om had staff in five .

staff in clerical job categories supported both oiia and om .

three - fourths of regional oiia staff were classified as secretary's regional representative , program assistant / clerk , and public affairs specialist .

approximately 73 percent of om staff performed duties as personnel management specialists .

the remaining staff performed other managerial and administrative duties , such as personnel assistant , secretary , clerk , realty specialist ( om ) , education program specialist ( oiia ) , and administrative officer ( oiia ) ( see figs .

ii.10 and ii.11 ) .

om had no staff at the gs - 15 level ; however , 21 percent of oiia staff were gs - 15s — representing the largest percentage of staff at any one grade level in the component .

these gs - 15s generally served as secretary's regional representatives .

oiia staff were almost evenly distributed among grades gs - 1 through – 13 .

most om staff were in grades gs - 11 through – 13 ( see figs .

ii.12 and ii.13 ) .

all 20 of the oiia and om field offices were regional offices ( see table ii.7 ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , oiia occupied 46,315 square feet of education's total field office space .

of that space , oiia leased 28,561 square feet ( 62 percent ) in privately owned buildings and 17,754 square feet of space ( 38 percent ) was in gsa - owned buildings .

oiia used 99 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage ( see fig .

ii.14 ) .

oiia's total field office costs were $4.6 million in fiscal year 1995 .

field office costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as travel , equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $948,000 , staff salaries and benefits totaled $2.8 million , and other costs totaled $915,000 .

om cost information for field office staff salaries and benefits and other costs was unavailable .

none .

the primary mission of the office of postsecondary education ( ope ) is to administer postsecondary education and student financial assistance programs .

programs of student financial assistance include pell grants , supplemental educational opportunity grants , grants to states for state student incentives , direct loans to students in institutions of higher education , work - study , and the guaranteed student loan program .

ope programs also provide assistance for increasing access to postsecondary education programs , improving and expanding american educational studies and services , improving instruction in crucial academic subjects , and supporting international education .

ope maintains 10 field offices to perform activities associated with ( 1 ) training , technical assistance , and oversight of student aid programs , ( 2 ) loan servicing and debt collection , and ( 3 ) overseeing specific higher education projects ( see fig .

ii.15 ) .

field staff conduct program reviews of institutions to determine compliance with title iv requirements , provide training and technical assistance for financial aid and business officers at institutions , and monitor operations at guaranty agencies .

staff also collect defaulted loans and other debts , contract with servicers , monitor collection contracts , and help in the preparation of legal actions .

regional staff also serve as focal points and as experts assisting with field readings for ope's higher education programs .

staff may also be called on to work on school - to - work initiatives .

according to education , because field office staff gain in - depth knowledge of the institutions in their regions , effectiveness is increased .

regional training facilities provide hands - on use of computer programs needed toward student aid and determine student eligibility .

they are also a place for institutions , lenders , and guaranty agencies to call upon for technical assistance and specific help on an individual basis .

in addition , several oversight activities are supported by information gathered from on - site reviews .

table ii.8 provides key information about the 10 regional offices that constitute ope's field office structure .

in fiscal year 1995 , ope's field operations service and division of project services had staff in all 10 federal region cities , and debt collection service had staff in three region cities — atlanta , chicago , and san francisco .

half of all ope employees were specialists in one of the following: job categories lender review specialist , institutional review specialist , contract monitor specialist , training specialist , paralegal specialist , education program specialist , computer specialist , or accounts resolution specialist / clerk .

the remaining staff included management analysts , student financial accounts examiners , program manager , data transcriber , administrative officer , and clerk ( see fig .

ii.16 ) .

about half of the employees were in grades ranging between gs - 11 and – 13 .

most of the remaining employees were in grades ranging from gs - 7 through – 10 ( see fig .

ii.17 ) .

the chicago regional office had the most on - board staff , and boston had the fewest staff ( see table ii.9 ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , ope occupied about 125,456 square feet of education's total field office space .

of that space , ope leased 82,587 square feet ( 66 percent ) in privately owned buildings and 42,869 square feet of space ( 34 percent ) in gsa - owned buildings .

ope used about 99 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for parking ( see fig .

ii.18 ) .

ope's total field office costs were $38.5 million in fiscal year 1995 .

field office costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as travel , equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $2.5 million , staff salaries and benefits totaled $28.4 million , and other costs totaled $7.6 million .

none .

the office of special education and rehabilitative services ( osers ) administers comprehensive coordinated programs of vocational rehabilitation and independent living for individuals with disabilities .

osers programs include support for the training of teachers and other professional personnel ; grants for research ; financial aid to help states to initiate , expand , and improve their resources ; and media services and captioned films for people who are hearing - impaired .

the rehabilitative services administration ( rsa ) is the only osers unit with field offices .

rsa coordinates vocational rehabilitation services programs that help individuals with physical or mental disabilities to obtain employment through the provision of such supports as counseling , medical and psychological services , job training , and other individualized services .

in addition , rsa coordinates and funds a wide range of formula and discretionary programs in areas such as training of rehabilitation personnel , rehabilitation research and demonstration projects , independent living , supported employment , and others .

the 10 osers field offices ( see fig .

ii.19 ) that support rsa activities provide leadership , technical assistance , monitoring , consultation , and evaluation services and coordinate rsa and other resources used in providing services to disabled individuals through state - federal administered programs and through grantees receiving discretionary project funds .

these offices are also responsible for helping colleges , universities , and other organizations and agencies to develop , implement , improve , and expand training programs designed to prepare a wide variety of rehabilitation workers who provide services to disabled individuals .

according to education officials , an osers regional presence encourages interactions with states and providers of services and provides unique insights into the issues involved in the rehabilitation of people with disabilities .

it enables federal - state interactions closer to the point of service delivery where the unique circumstances and considerations of each state and grantee are best understood .

regional office staff have more frequent and extended contacts with state agency staff and other grantees , resulting in long - term , customer - oriented relationships and trust .

table ii.10 provides key information about the 10 regional offices that make up osers' field office structure .

osers had staff in all 10 federal region cities ( boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle ) .

osers' field offices in the regions are located with all other education regional offices .

as of september 30 , 1995 , almost half of all osers on - board staff were classified as rehabilitation services program specialists .

almost one - third were employed as financial management specialists and grant management specialists the remaining staff were classified as clerks , staff assistants , and secretaries ( see fig .

ii.20 ) .

most employees were in grades ranging from gs - 11 through – 13 ( see fig .

ii.21 ) .

all 10 of the rsa field offices were regional offices .

the seattle regional office had the fewest on - board staff ( 4 ) , and the remaining offices had between 5 and 10 employees ( see table ii.11 ) .

on september 30 , 1995 , osers occupied 28,632 square feet of education's total field office space .

osers leased 17,735 square feet ( 62 percent ) in privately owned buildings and 10,897 square feet ( 38 percent ) in gsa - owned buildings .

osers used 97 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and parking ( see fig .

ii.22 ) .

osers' total field office costs were $6.4 million in fiscal year 1995 .

field office costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as travel , equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $553,000 , salaries and benefits were $4.8 million , and other costs were $1.1 million .

none .

this appendix provides a snapshot of the department of labor's field offices as of september 30 , 1995 .

each profile shows the locations of and describes the mission and activities performed by the field offices supporting 10 labor components in fiscal year 1995 .

in addition , each profile provides the following information about the field offices: ( 1 ) staffing , ( 2 ) space occupied , ( 3 ) costs to operate , and ( 4 ) field office restructuring activities or plans .

 ( see table iii.1 for a summary of staffing , space , and cost data for all 10 components. ) .

in these profiles , regional , area , district , state , and other types of offices are referred to generically as field offices .

because neither gsa nor labor maintains information about field offices located in state - owned buildings , we were unable to identify the exact amount and cost of all space that labor field staff occupied in fiscal year 1995 .

 ( labor is not billed for the use of space in state - owned buildings. ) .

unless otherwise noted , we used ( 1 ) gsa data to estimate the amount and cost of labor field office space and ( 2 ) labor information to identify the locations of official field offices ; the numbers of ftes and on - board personnel for each component ; and salary , benefit , and other field office costs .

labor also provided information about field office restructuring activities .

space ( square feet ) costs ( dollars in millions ) .

many small organizations within the department are consolidated for administrative purposes in a departmental management ( dm ) account .

this account consolidates a wide range of agencywide managerial , administrative , technical , and support activities carried out by approximately 20 different units .

our discussion of labor's dm function includes only the following units that were supported by field offices in fiscal year 1995: ( 1 ) assistant secretary for administration and management ( oasam ) , ( 2 ) office of the solicitor ( sol ) , ( 3 ) office of administrative law judges ( alj ) , ( 4 ) office of public affairs ( opa ) , ( 5 ) office of congressional and intergovernmental affairs ( ocia ) , and ( 6 ) the women's bureau ( wb ) .

figure iii.1 shows the locations of the 62 field offices that supported labor's dm function in fiscal year 1995 .

table iii.2 provides key information about dm's 47 regional , 8 field , and 7 branch offices .

as shown in table iii.3 , field offices in the 10 federal region cities and 11 other localities supported dm in fiscal year 1995 .

camden ( n.j. ) newport news ( va. ) metairie ( la. ) .

long beach ( calif. ) nashville ( tenn. ) birmingham ( ala. ) arlington ( va. ) the field offices that support the dm function generally perform the following activities: office of the assistant secretary for administration and management .

oasam staff are responsible for providing a centralized source of administrative , technical , and managerial support services .

each of oasam's 10 regional offices — located in the federal region cities — provides a full range of services to all labor components in their field offices in the following areas: financial management , including payroll , travel , accounting and voucher payment services ; personnel classification , recruitment , training , and position management services ; general administrative support , including procurement , property and space management , communications , and mail services ; automatic data processing management , including programming support ; and safety and health services , including safety inspections of regional job corps centers and support for wellness fitness programs for labor field office employees .

in addition , staff in oasam's regional offices helped to manage and direct affirmative action and equal employment opportunity programs within labor , ensuring full compliance with title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 ; title ix of the education amendments of 1972 , as amended ; title i of the civil rights act of 1991 ; section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , as amended ; the age discrimination act of 1973 , as amended ; and the investigation of certain complaints alleging discrimination on the basis of disability arising under the americans with disabilities act .

according to labor , oasam's field presence in all of these areas allows the personal contact with program managers and employees that enhances the department's ability to provide effective and efficient support services .

oasam's staff work in localities with the greatest concentrations of labor managers and employees .

office of the solicitor .

sol is responsible for providing the secretary of labor and other department officials with the legal services required to accomplish labor's mission and the priority goals set by the secretary .

sol devotes over two - thirds of its resources to labor's major enforcement programs ( for example , osha and msha ) .

its eight regional offices and seven branch offices provide legal services and guidance to each of the labor component's regional administrators .

within a specific geographic area , each regional or branch office primarily performs trial litigation support for labor's enforcement programs and provides legal support and services to selected labor components that perform work in the area .

office of administrative law judges .

judges at the eight field offices primarily preside over cases related to labor's black lung and longshore programs .

these programs provide income support for workers disabled in coal mining and longshore operations .

federal regulations require that hearings be held within 75 miles of a black lung claimant's residence .

labor applies this standard also to longshore cases .

approximately 60 percent of all black lung cases each year are handled by the three alj offices in the camden , new jersey , cincinnati , ohio , and pittsburgh , pennsylvania , field offices .

four other field offices handle 75 percent of labor's longshore cases annually .

according to labor , alj's field presence allows the judges to establish better working relationships with local attorneys .

as a result , compliance with labor laws is achieved more readily because the local bar is more familiar with case law in specific localities .

office of public affairs .

staff at opa's 10 regional offices , located in the federal region cities , provide , for example , ( 1 ) media relations services , such as issuing press releases and arranging media coverage of labor programs and law enforcement actions ; ( 2 ) public information services designed to educate and inform workers , employers , and the general public about their rights and responsibilities under the laws and programs administered by labor ; and ( 3 ) publicity services that advertise public meetings , conferences , and special projects sponsored by labor's components .

according to labor , opa's field offices allow staff to identify local news media and reporters that have an interest in particular labor programs or events .

field staff are then able to alert reporters to news releases and respond to questions in a timely manner .

office of congressional and intergovernmental affairs .

ocia's function is generally performed by one person — the secretary's representative .

these representatives ( 1 ) serve as the ongoing liaison in the region with governors , mayors , state officials , congressional offices , organized labor , and the business community ; ( 2 ) represent labor at educational forums , meetings , and regional conferences ; ( 3 ) educate public officials and constituents about the policies , programs , and initiatives of the secretary of labor and the agency ; ( 4 ) provide regional perspective and feedback to headquarters on policies and programs ; and ( 5 ) carry out special projects in the regions for the secretary .

women's bureau .

wb's 10 regional offices play a key role in administering two federal programs: the nontraditional employment for women act ( p.l .

102-235 ) and women in apprenticeship and nontraditional occupation act ( p.l .

102-530 ) .

in addition , regional office staff ( 1 ) make presentations to the public and the media on a variety of issues such as women's job rights , labor force participation , job training activities , and work place safety and health issues ; ( 2 ) work with federal , state , and local government officials on behalf of working women ; ( 3 ) provide technical assistance and education services to women in the workforce ; and ( 4 ) organize public meetings on working women's issues .

dm staff represented over 40 different professional and administrative job categories .

attorneys and judges made up approximately 30 percent of the dm field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.2 ) .

the remaining staff were paralegal specialists , personnel management specialists , personnel classification clerks , fiscal clerks , and accountants .

approximately 34 percent of dm field office staff were grades gs - 11 , – 12 , and – 13 .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 7 grade levels constituted 22 percent of its field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.3 ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , dm field offices occupied space in 59 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 482,648 square feet .

according to gsa data , 207,813 square feet of space was owned by gsa and 274,835 square feet was leased from privately owned sources .

most of the space used by the dm functions was used for offices and the remainder for storage and other uses , such as training , conferences , and data processing ( see fig .

iii.4 ) .

dm field costs totaled $47.2 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $8.7 million , which was 18 percent of the function's total field office costs .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $32.9 million and other costs totaled $5.6 million , which were about 70 and 12 percent , respectively , of the total field office costs for this function .

in fiscal year 1995 , sol examined its regional office structure in light of agencywide streamlining and reinvention initiatives .

this analysis led to the decision to close the sol branch office in ft. lauderdale , florida .

effective in fiscal year 1996 , while maintaining a physical presence in each of its regions , oasam will have reduced its number of regional administrators from 10 to 6 .

the primary mission of the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) is to collect , process , analyze , and disseminate data relating to employment , unemployment , and other characteristics of the labor force ; prices and consumer expenditures ; wages and other worker compensation , and industrial relations ; productivity and technological change ; economic growth and employment projections ; and occupational safety and health .

these basic data — practically all supplied voluntarily by business establishments and members of private households — are issued in monthly , quarterly , and annual news releases ; bulletins , reports , and special publications ; and periodicals .

statistical data are also made available to the general public through electronic news service , magnetic tape , diskettes , and microfiche , as well as through the internet .

bls conducts many of its mission - related activities through its eight field offices ( see fig .

iii.5 ) .

according to labor , bls' field structure maximizes the effectiveness of bls' data collection activities , saves travel expenditures , and accommodates workload requirements .

table iii.4 provides key information about bls' eight regional offices .

in fiscal year 1995 , bls maintained regional offices in the following cities: boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , and san francisco .

bls regional offices ( 1 ) issue reports and releases usually presenting locality or regional issues and ( 2 ) assist business , labor , academic , and community groups with using the economic statistical data bls produces .

regional office staff also supervise the work of part - time field staff who ( 1 ) collect data for the consumer price index and occupational compensation surveys and ( 2 ) survey firms for the producer price and export and import price programs .

these “outstationed” staff performed their bls duties in over 70 locations throughout the united states .

bls employed only about 9 percent of all labor on - board field office staff in fiscal year 1995 , but had the largest proportion of part - time staff among labor components with field offices — 34 percent of bls staff worked part time .

part - time staff in the other components represented less than 10 percent of these components' on - board staffs .

bls staff represented over 15 different professional and administrative job categories .

economists and economic assistants made up approximately 80 percent of bls's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.6 ) .

the remaining staff included statisticians , computer specialists , public affairs assistants , and clerical support staff .

approximately 46 percent of bls' field office staff were gs - 11s , – 12s , and – 13s .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels made up about 23 percent of bls' field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.7 ) .

from one to five bls staff persons worked in 84 percent of the u.s. localities with bls staff .

nine of these localities had over 30 bls employees .

generally , economic assistants in grades gs - 5 through – 7 provided the bls presence in those localities with only one staff person .

in several cases , a gs - 11 or – 12 economist represented bls in the locality .

in fiscal year 1995 , bls field offices occupied space in 84 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 219,324 square feet .

over 83,600 square feet was owned by gsa and 135,659 was leased from private sources .

 ( we were unable to determine how much space , if any , bls occupied in state - owned buildings. ) .

bls used 195,663 square feet — or about 89 percent — of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and other uses ( see fig .

iii.8 ) .

at 50 of the 84 buildings bls occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

field costs for bls totaled $51.1 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $4.8 million , which was 9 percent of bls' total field office costs .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $36.5 million and other costs totaled $7.9 million , which were about 71 and 15 percent , respectively , of bls' total field office costs .

none .

the employment standards administration ( esa ) is responsible for administering and directing programs dealing with minimum wage and overtime standards ; registration of farm labor contractors ; determining prevailing wage rates to be paid on federal government contracts and subcontracts ; family and medical leave ; nondiscrimination and affirmative action for minorities , women , veterans , and government contract and subcontract workers with disabilities ; and workers' compensation programs for federal and certain private sector employers and employees .

the field structure for esa — a total of 396 field offices — supports three program areas — the wage and hour division , the office of federal contract compliance programs , and the office of workers' compensation programs ( see fig .

iii.9 ) .

the largest division within esa is the wage and hour division ( whd ) with its 8 regional offices , 54 district offices , 45 area offices , and 192 field offices .

according to labor , in order to enforce federal standards for working conditions and wages , whd focuses its investigative efforts mainly on industries that employ large numbers of workers in low - wage jobs because this is where wage , overtime , and child labor violations often occur .

whd field staff respond to complaints alleging violations and target their enforcement efforts at employers with a high likelihood of repeated and egregious violations .

whd field staff also detect and remedy violations of overtime , child labor , and other labor standards .

with over 280 offices nationwide , whd supports its mission by providing a local presence in most of the metropolitan areas of the country .

according to labor , whd's streamlining plan will make its mission more challenging because having fewer offices will increase travel costs and possibly impede access to some geographic areas .

the office of federal contract compliance programs ( ofccp ) , with its 10 regional offices , 45 district offices , and 10 area offices , conducts compliance reviews of supply , service , and construction companies with federal contracts and federally assisted programs for construction , alteration , and repair of public works .

ofccp ensures that prevailing wages are paid and overtime standards achieved in accordance with the provisions of the davis - bacon act ( 40 u.s.c .

276a ) as well as the service contract act ( 41 u.s.c .

351 ) , public contracts act , and contract work hours and safety standards act .

according to labor , ofccp's field structure provides a local contact for representatives of federal contractors to obtain information and technical assistance when establishing their affirmative action programs .

it also provides local contacts and local offices that help provide women and minorities with more employment opportunities as well as a place to file complaints against federal contractors .

labor maintains that these local offices decrease travel costs because ofccp staff make less frequent overnight trips .

the office of workers' compensation programs ( owcp ) is supported by 10 regional offices , 34 district offices , and 7 field offices that are staffed on a part - time basis .

owcp's primary responsibilities are to administer compensation programs that pay federal employees , miners , longshore , and other workers for work - related injuries , disease , or death .

these compensation programs are authorized by the federal employees compensation act , longshore and harbor workers compensation act and its various extensions , and the black lung benefits act .

owcp also administers the black lung disability trust fund and provides budget , automated data processing , and program technical support for the compensation programs .

owcp's field structure , according to labor , gives claimants and employers easier access to assistance when processing claims and provides faster and more efficient service .

field office locations are necessary to be near the homes and work places of the parties involved in claims to ensure timely reconciliation of claims and to minimize staff travel costs .

table iii.5 provides key information about the 28 regional offices , 133 district offices , 199 field offices , and 55 area offices that make up esa's field office structure .

esa's various field offices generally perform the following functions: regional offices .

whd , ofccp , and owcp regional offices generally provide the executive direction and administrative support for all other respective field offices operating in a particular region .

district offices .

a whd district office provides the day - to - day management and supervision of selected area and field offices .

whd district office staff provide education outreach and investigate alleged violations of the fair labor standards act ( 29 u.s.c .

201 ) and other labor standards laws .

ofccp district offices supervise and manage selected area offices .

within owcp , district office staff process either longshore and harbor workers , coal mine workers , or federal employees compensation act claims .

owcp district offices work with all parties involved in a claim to secure the information needed to disallow or accept the claim .

owcp district offices serve as information repositories for employers and employees about the various disability compensation programs that labor administers .

area offices .

whd area offices staff investigate alleged violations of the fair labor standards act and other labor standards laws .

labor considers whd area office staff “frontline” employees because they inspect work sites and interview employers and employees as part of their investigatory and enforcement activities .

whd area offices also make available to employers and workers information about the fair labor standards act , other laws , and their rights and responsibilities under the law .

staff at ofccp area offices investigate allegations of unfair bidding and hiring practices involving minority construction contractors and suppliers .

ofccp area offices also work with employers to ensure compliance with applicable federal contract laws and procedures .

field offices .

whd field offices are usually staffed by one or two compliance specialists who are also considered frontline workers by labor .

they perform the same investigatory and enforcement activities as the whd area offices but in many more locations .

owcp's field offices are maintained on a part - time basis by the black lung program and provide a local point of contact for claimants and other interested parties .

esa employed about 28 percent of all labor on - board field office staff in fiscal year 1995 .

esa staff represented over 30 different professional and administrative job categories .

wage / hour compliance specialists , workers' compensation claims examiners , and equal opportunity specialists made up the largest proportion of esa's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.10 ) .

the remaining staff included wage analysts , management and program analysts , and clerical and other support staff .

less than 2 percent of esa's staff worked part time .

approximately 64 percent of esa's field office staff were at the gs - 11 , – 12 , and – 13 grade levels .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted about 12 percent of esa's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.11 ) .

from one to five esa staff worked in almost 70 percent of the 280 u.s. localities with esa staff ( see table iii.6 ) .

gs - 11 and – 12 wage / hour compliance specialists primarily represented esa in those localities with only one esa staff person .

seventeen localities had over 30 esa employees — they generally were associated with an esa regional office .

in fiscal year 1995 , esa field offices occupied space in 335 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 769,237 square feet .

about 272,200 square feet was owned by gsa and about 497,000 square feet was leased from privately owned sources .

esa used about 671,000 square feet of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and other activities ( see fig .

iii.12 ) .

at 138 of the 335 buildings esa occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

field costs for esa totaled $179.2 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $14.9 million , which was about 8 percent of esa's total field office costs .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $156 million and other costs totaled $8.3 million , which were about 87 and 5 percent , respectively , of esa's total field office costs .

by fiscal year 1999 , labor plans to have completed the reorganization of esa's whd and ofccp field operations .

whd's eight regional offices will be reduced to five through the consolidation of its current ( 1 ) philadelphia , new york , and boston regional offices into a northeast regional office and ( 2 ) chicago and kansas city regional offices into a single office .

labor also plans to reduce the number of whd district offices and increase its area offices .

this will essentially involve redefining the duties of about 10 district offices to provide more frontline services and fewer management - related activities .

also , through employee attrition , management / supervisory staff buyouts , and the conversion of supervisory positions to senior technical positions , labor plans to reduce its whd staff and management - to - staff ratios to increase the proportion of frontline whd employees to better serve its many customers .

four of ofccp's regional offices will be combined into two .

its current chicago and kansas city regional offices will be merged to form one new office , and its dallas and denver regional offices will be combined to form the other .

also , labor plans to eliminate at least two ofccp district offices .

ofccp will continue to review additional district offices to determine whether more can be converted into area offices by fiscal year 1999 .

the employment and training administration ( eta ) fulfills responsibilities assigned to labor that relate to employment services , job training , and unemployment insurance .

eta administers , among others , the following: federal unemployment insurance system , u.s. employment service , federal activities under the national apprenticeship act , adult and youth training programs ( title ii of the job training partnership act ) , the dislocated worker program under the economic dislocation and worker adjustment assistance act ( title iii of the job training partnership act ) , job corps ( title iv of the job training partnership act ) , federal activities under the worker adjustment and retraining notification act , the trade adjustment assistance program , and the senior community service employment program ( title v of the older americans act ) .

eta's 146 field offices ( see fig .

iii.13 ) help to administer the nation's federal - state employment security system ; fund and oversee programs to provide job training for groups having difficulty entering or returning to the workforce ; formulate and promote apprenticeship training standards and programs ; promote school - to - work initiatives , one - stop career centers , and labor market information ; and conduct continuing programs of research , development , and evaluation .

according to labor , several reasons exist for the field structure of eta .

to fulfill its mission , many of eta's regional and field offices are located in the same area so as to reduce overhead and administrative costs .

their locations facilitate direct and more frequent contact on site with states and local entities and the provision of timely information and feedback .

field office staff can provide on - site technical assistance , which would be more costly , infrequent , and less efficient if staff were more centralized .

the close proximity of eta staff to its state and local grantees and contractors is essential to the agency's ability to oversee and maximize program integrity while minimizing travel costs .

table iii.7 provides key information about the 10 regional , 50 state , 8 area , and 78 local offices that constituted eta's field office structure .

eta's various field offices generally support its major program activities — training and employment services , job corps , unemployment insurance , and apprenticeship training through the bureau of apprenticeship and training ( bat ) .

the regional offices perform activities related to the job training partnership act and several other programs .

the balance of eta's field offices — state , area , and local offices — are part of the bat program .

bat is unique to eta in that it provides consultant services to employers , employer groups , unions , employees , and related business and trade associations using private - sector resources to improve the skills of the workforce .

the staff develop voluntary standards and agreements between the parties and work to ensure that the standards for work , training , and pay are mutually achieved for apprentices and their sponsors .

eta's field offices perform the following functions: regional offices .

regional office staff ensure the efficient administration of the training and employment services operated by state grantees under the job training partnership act , wagner - peyser act , trade act , and north american free trade agreement ; supports state and local one - stop career center and school - to - work system building efforts ; and provide consultation and guidance to state grantees for the planning and operation of state and federal unemployment insurance and related wage - loss compensation programs .

the bat regional offices are responsible for directing , planning , and administering effect bat programs and ensure that eta's school - to - work initiatives are incorporated in training programs when feasible .

job corps regional offices ensure that centers are safe learning and living environments for students ; implement program policies ; and coordinate with schools and training programs to support job corps programs .

state offices .

state office staff develop , coordinate , promote , and implement apprenticeship and allied employment and training programs in industry on a statewide basis .

they also provide technical assistance to industry , management , labor , education , and other groups concerned with economic development within a state .

area and local offices .

staff in these offices perform the same basic functions done by state office staff , except on a less - than - statewide basis .

eta staff represented 24 different professional and administrative job categories .

most of eta's field office workforce was composed of manpower development specialists , apprenticeship training representatives , unemployment insurance program specialists , and secretaries ( see fig .

iii.14 ) .

the remaining staff included job categories such as alien certification clerk and apprenticeship training assistant , computer specialist , executive assistant , and program analyst .

approximately 62 percent of eta's field office staff were middle managers: gs - 11s , – 12s , and – 13s .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted about 15 percent of eta's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.15 ) .

from one to five eta staff persons worked in 87 of the 98 localities with eta staff ( see table iii.8 ) .

ten localities — representing the locations of eta's regional offices — had over 30 eta employees .

generally , apprenticeship training representatives in grades gs - 11 , – 12 , and – 13 provided the eta presence in those localities with only one staff person .

in fiscal year 1995 , eta field offices occupied space in 127 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 226,649 square feet .

about 81,600 square feet was owned by gsa and 145,046 square feet was leased from privately owned sources .

eta used about 93 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and other activities ( see fig .

iii.16 ) .

at 98 of the 127 buildings eta occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

eta's field office costs totaled $66.4 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

eta paid more for these costs than five of the other nine labor components .

rent and utility costs were about $5 million , which was 7 percent of total rent and utility costs for all eta field offices .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $51.4 million and other costs totaled $10.1 million , which were about 77 and 15 percent , respectively , of eta's total field office costs .

eta has begun to reassess its field structure and is considering realigning and / or consolidating certain programs , functions , services , and field offices .

eta is currently reevaluating its operations in the 10 federal region cities with a view to locating them in the same area or building where feasible .

eta has reduced its total staff by 20 percent , well above its streamlining goal of a 12-percent reduction in total staffing by fiscal year 1999 .

the primary mission of the mine safety and health administration ( msha ) is to protect the safety and health of the nation's miners who work in coal , metal , and nonmetal mines .

msha's 155 field offices ( see fig .

iii.17 ) develop and enforce mandatory safety and health standards , ensure compliance with the standards , conduct inspections , assess civil penalties for violations , and investigate accidents .

in addition , msha field offices provide assistance in the development of safety programs , and improve and expand training programs in cooperation with the states and the mining industry .

in conjunction with the department of the interior , msha contributes to the expansion and improvement of mine safety and health research and development .

msha primarily performs its enforcement and assessment functions through a complement of offices known within the component as district , subdistrict , and field offices , not regional offices .

according to msha , the mine community as well as labor benefits from these offices .

the geographical distribution of msha's field offices facilitates the efficient and effective operation of msha's safety and health programs .

the distribution of the field offices minimizes the travel time and costs of the inspection and technical staff , which increases the time available for inspection and compliance assistance activities .

also , the proximity of the field offices to the nation's mines allows msha to be more accessible to the mining community and respond quickly to mine emergencies .

table iii.9 provides key information about the 16 district offices , 17 subdistrict offices , 108 field offices , 11 field duty stations , and one training center that compose msha's field structure .

msha's various offices generally perform the following functions: district offices .

a district office is responsible for keeping its fingers on the pulse of all active mining .

one set of msha district offices monitors coal mines , while the other oversees the activities of mines that produce metals and nonmetals .

a district office provides the managerial oversight and administrative support for the subdistrict and field offices .

subdistrict offices .

these offices provide the direct technical supervision of the field offices and field duty stations .

field offices .

a field office is under the direct supervision of a subdistrict office .

field office staff generally inspect coal or metal / nonmetal mines or supervise those who do .

field duty stations .

these offices generally perform the same functions as field offices , except no supervisors are on site .

one or two mine inspectors staff a field duty station and are supervised by a field office .

training center .

the national mine health and safety academy in beckley , west virginia , is responsible for providing training services and training programs for miners and msha employees .

other offices .

the safety and health technology center in bruceton , pennsylvania , provides engineering and scientific capability to assist msha , states , and the mining industry in identifying and solving technological mine safety and health problems .

msha's approval and certification center in triadelphia , west virginia , approves , certifies , and accepts machinery , instruments , materials , and explosives for underground surface mines .

both centers report to msha headquarters .

because most of the nation's coal mines are located in the appalachian area , 8 of the 10 district offices for coal enforcement were located in pennsylvania , virginia , west virginia , and kentucky in fiscal year 1995 .

the district offices for coal mines west of the mississippi and in the north central part of the nation were in colorado and indiana .

however , the district offices for metal / nonmetal mines were more widely distributed because these mines are more widely dispersed throughout the country .

according to msha , it continually assesses its field structure to best ensure the safety and health of u.s. mine workers and , when necessary , adjusts its office locations to match shifts in mining activity .

according to labor , district offices are generally staffed by district managers , technical staff and assistants , and administrative workers , while field offices are generally staffed by inspectors .

larger field offices have a supervisor inspector as well as a clerk .

msha employed nearly 20 percent of all labor on - board field office staff in fiscal year 1995 .

msha staff represented 50 different professional and administrative job categories .

mine safety and health inspectors and engineers made up over 60 percent of msha's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.18 ) .

the remaining staff supported these professionals and included job categories such as mine assessment / health clerk , office automation clerk , engineer technician , computer specialist , and financial management specialist .

approximately 71 percent of msha's field office staff were at the gs - 11 , – 12 , and – 13 levels , with half of all msha field office staff at the gs - 12 level .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels composed about 14 percent of msha's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.19 ) .

from 6 to 20 staff persons worked in 60 percent of the u.s. localities with msha staff ( see table iii.10 ) .

the 15 localities with over 30 staff generally supported msha's coal and metal / nonmetal district offices .

gs - 11 and – 12 coal mine safety and health inspectors primarily provided the msha presence in the seven localities with one person each .

in fiscal year 1995 , msha field offices occupied space in 123 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 575,865 square feet .

about 78,900 square feet was owned by gsa , and about 496,919 was leased from privately owned sources .

msha used 429,938 square feet for offices and the remainder for storage and other uses such as training , laboratory testing , and conferences ( see fig .

iii.20 ) .

at 20 of the 123 buildings msha occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

msha field office costs totaled $173.3 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were about $8.8 million , which was 5 percent of total field costs for msha .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $135.3 million and other costs totaled $29.2 million , which were about 78 and 17 percent , respectively , of msha's total field office costs .

during fiscal year 1995 , msha began eliminating coal mine safety and health subdistrict offices as part of a multi - year effort to restructure the field structure to eliminate a managerial level .

elimination of the metal and nonmetal subdistrict offices was completed in previous years .

in july 1993 , labor secretary reich created the office of the american workplace ( oaw ) to provide a national focal point for encouraging the creation of high - performance work place practices and policies .

during fiscal year 1995 , oaw's mission was implemented by three major subunits: the office of work and technology policy , the office of labor - management programs , and the office of labor - management standards ( olms ) .

of these three subunits , olms is the only one supported by field offices ( see fig .

iii.21 ) .

oaw's 34 field offices help to administer and enforce provisions of the labor - management reporting and disclosure act of 1959 ( lmrda ) , as amended , that establish standards for labor union democracy and financial integrity and require reporting and public disclosure of union reports .

they also help to administer related laws , which affect labor organizations composed of employees of most agencies of the federal executive branch and certain other federal agencies subject to similar standards of conduct .

to protect the rights of members in approximately 48,000 unions nationwide , oaw provides for public disclosure of reports required by the lmrda , particularly labor organization annual financial reports ; conducts compliance audits to ensure union compliance with applicable standards ; conducts civil and criminal investigations , particularly in regard to union officer elections and union funds embezzlement ; and provides compliance assistance to union officials and union members to promote knowledge of and conformity with the law .

according to labor , several factors affected its decision to establish olms field offices , such as the number and size of labor unions located in a geographic area and the level of statutorily mandated work historically performed in the area .

field offices allow staff to be within close proximity to the work and generally reduce travel costs .

table iii.11 provides key information about the 10 regional offices , 18 district offices , and 5 resident investigator offices .

oaw's various field offices generally perform the following functions: regional offices .

a regional office directly supervises the operations of specific district and / or resident offices .

a regional office also is staffed with investigators who conduct ( 1 ) civil and criminal investigations , particularly with regard to union officer elections and union funds embezzlement , and ( 2 ) investigative audits of unions .

district offices .

a district office is responsible for conducting olms' investigative work and providing public disclosure of reports that are in accordance with statutory requirements and guidance and assistance to labor organizations and others to promote compliance with the laws and requirements of the agency and the lmrda .

resident investigative offices .

investigators in these 1- to 2-person offices carry out oaw's activities performed at the regional and district offices , but in selected locations .

the offices typically have no on - site manager or clerical support person .

oaw employed 2.3 percent of all labor on - board field office staff in fiscal year 1995 .

oaw staff represented six different professional and administrative job categories .

investigations analysts made up over 80 percent of oaw's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.22 ) .

the remaining staff included auditors , computer clerks , and management assistants .

almost 80 percent of oaw's field office staff were frontline workers: gs - 11s , – 12s , and – 13s .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels made up about 11 percent of oaw's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.23 ) .

about 2 percent of oaw's field staff were part - time employees .

from 6 to 10 staff worked in 39 percent of the 33 u.s. localities with oaw staff ( see table iii.12 ) .

generally , gs - 12 investigations analysts provided the oaw presence in those localities with only one staff person .

according to gsa , oaw field offices occupied space in 38 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 67,465 square feet in fiscal year 1995 .

of this total , 28,953 square feet was owned by gsa , and 38,512 square feet was leased from privately owned sources .

oaw used 78 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and other activities ( see fig .

iii.24 ) .

at 31 of the 38 buildings oaw occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

oaw field costs totaled $18.6 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $1.3 million , which was 7 percent of total field office costs for oaw .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $14.1 million and other costs totaled $3.2 million , which were about 76 and 17 percent , respectively , of oaw's total field office costs .

oaw is in the process of reorganizing to streamline field office management and operations .

the target field structure consists of 20 field offices , some with resident investigative offices , divided into five geographic regions .

the reorganization is expected to eliminate two and , in some instances , three layers of program review , significantly expand supervisory spans of control , and increase the number of resident investigative offices .

a gm - 15 regional manager with redefined responsibilities will oversee each region .

consolidation and restructuring will eliminate 5 gm - 15 regional director , all 10 gm - 14 deputy regional director , and 22 gm - 13 supervisory investigator or district director positions .

district offices will be headed by a single manager , a gm - 13 or gm - 14 office director , except that the washington , d.c. , and new york offices will have two office managers — a district director and a supervisory investigator — because of the large numbers of international unions in those office jurisdictions and the resulting level of complex casework , including international compliance audit program cases .

all but those two gm - 13 supervisory investigator positions will be eliminated .

most gm - 13 supervisory investigator positions and gm - 13 district director positions in small offices will be converted to gs - 13 senior investigator positions , and a number of additional such positions will be established .

senior investigators primarily will have case - related duties and will serve as team leaders and resource persons to other investigators .

in offices without on - site managers , senior investigators will also serve as the local oaw representative .

no senior investigator will have managerial functions .

on - site manager positions will be eliminated in the minneapolis district office and the kansas city regional office .

the puerto rico and honolulu offices will retain small investigator staffs without supervisory or clerical staff , but because of their relative geographic isolation , will continue to maintain statutorily required reports for public disclosure .

without eliminating oaw's presence in areas where offices now exist , including all labor regional cities , the number of full - service regional and district offices will be reduced by converting a number of small offices to resident status without public report disclosure responsibilities .

oaw will convert full - service offices in houston , new haven , tampa , miami , and newark to resident investigative offices .

oaw will continue to consider whether additional resident investigative offices are needed on the basis of workload , customer service needs , and travel cost reductions .

these types of offices will be staffed with one or two investigators and will have no on - site mangers or clerical support , as is typical now among investigative resident offices .

the office of inspector general ( oig ) is responsible for providing comprehensive , independent , and objective audits and investigations to identify and report program deficiencies and improve the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of labor operations .

the oig is also responsible for ensuring employee and program integrity through prevention and detection of criminal activity , unethical conduct , and program fraud and abuse .

the oig provides labor participation in investigations under the department of justice's organize crime strike force program .

the oig fulfills its responsibilities through two major offices — audit and investigation — that are supported by 44 field offices ( see fig .

iii.25 ) .

the primary mission of the office of audit is to conduct and supervise audits of ( 1 ) programs administered by labor and ( 2 ) internal operations and activities .

two divisions within the office of investigation — program fraud and labor racketeering — carry out the mission of this office .

the primary responsibility of the division of program fraud is to investigate allegations of fraud , waste , and abuse reported by any citizen or labor program participant or employee .

the division of labor racketeering conducts investigations regarding employee benefit plans , labor - management relations , and internal union affairs .

the oig conducts many of its mission - related activities at its field offices for several reasons .

according to labor , the office of audit's field structure provides the greatest oversight of labor programs because it mirrors the department's decentralized structure and minimizes travel costs .

the field structure of the division of program fraud was set up to be compatible with labor's regional cities so that program fraud staff could have immediate access to labor program managers .

because travel is substantial for program fraud staff due to the large geographic areas covered by labor's many field offices and programs , labor believes that establishing central field office locations in major cities provides the most economic travel possible .

the division of labor racketeering has offices in those cities that have historically had serious organized crime problems .

labor racketeering agents , therefore , travel little because most of their work is in the cities where offices have been established .

table iii.13 provides key information about the 9 operating offices , 23 resident offices , and 11 field offices that support the oig's operations .

oig's various field offices generally perform the following functions: operating offices ( office of audit ) .

these offices lead and conduct economy and efficiency audits of labor programs and assess the ( 1 ) financial management and performance measures of labor programs , ( 2 ) program and financial results , and ( 3 ) organizations and operations of labor grantees and contractors .

resident offices .

resident office staff examine fraud complaints reported on the hotline or in person .

these types of offices are also staffed with labor racketeering investigators .

field offices .

field office staff develop and investigate labor racketeering cases in the largest organized crime centers in the united states and supervise the activities of investigators in selected resident offices .

oig staff represented 11 different professional and administrative job categories .

criminal investigators made up almost half of oig's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.26 ) .

the remaining staff were auditors and other clerical and support staff .

gs - 11s , – 12s , and – 13s represented almost 66 percent of the oig's field office workforce .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted less than 6 percent of the oig's field staff ( see fig .

iii.27 ) .

less than 2 percent of the oig's total on - board staff worked part time .

from 1 to 10 labor staff represented the oig in over 75 percent of the 28 u.s. localities with oig staff ( see table iii.14 ) .

a gs - 12 or – 13 criminal investigator and a gs - 7 investigator assistant provided the oig presence in four localities with only one staff person .

four localities had over 30 oig employees — these localities generally corresponded with the locations of the oig's office of audit operating offices .

in fiscal year 1995 , the oig maintained five field offices each in washington , d.c. , and new york .

according to gsa data , oig field offices occupied space in 32 buildings throughout the united states in fiscal year 1995 , totaling 79,977 square feet .

about 36,500 square feet of space was owned by gsa and 42,522 was leased from privately owned sources .

oig used 67,867 square feet for offices and the remainder for storage and other uses ( see fig .

iii.28 ) .

at 24 of the 32 buildings oig occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

field office costs for the oig totaled $28.9 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $1.8 million , which was 6 percent of total field office costs for the oig .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $23.8 million and other costs totaled $3.1 million , which were about 82 and 11 percent , respectively , of the oig's total field office costs .

plans to restructure oig's entire field structure were in process in fiscal year 1995 resulting in the elimination of eight field offices in fiscal year 1996 and a realignment of management functions and fewer gm - 15 positions .

oig will evaluate its washington , d.c. , field offices .

in fiscal year 1996 , oig reorganized the five new york field offices and has not replaced any losses at one - person offices .

the primary mission of the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) is to ensure a work environment for american workers that is free from safety and health hazards .

staff at the 107 field offices that support osha ( 1 ) inspect work places to ensure compliance with health and safety standards and ( 2 ) provide advice , assistance , and services to employers and employees to prevent work place injuries and illnesses .

osha field offices also provide technical assistance as needed to the 25 states with their own — yet federally approved — occupational safety and health programs .

the field offices also monitor work place activities not covered by the state plans .

figure iii.29 shows the locations of osha field offices .

among osha's field offices are a training facility , two laboratories , and five resource centers .

figure iii.29: locations of osha field offices , fiscal year 1995 states with occupational safety and health programs ( programs in new york and connecticut cover only state and local government employees. ) .

osha conducts most of its mission - related activities at its field offices for several reasons .

according to osha officials , the field offices provide greater visibility and access to employers and employees and allow osha to locate staff with the necessary expertise near specific industries ( such as the petrochemical companies in houston , texas ) .

as part of its responsibility to monitor state occupational safety and health programs , osha maintains area offices in the state capitals of the 25 states with their own programs .

in those states with no state occupational safety and health programs , osha attempts to establish field offices that are centrally located near large concentrations of industrial and other work sites .

the location of osha area offices near industrial concentrations not only permits osha to effectively schedule and use staff and travel resources but also enables its staff to respond rapidly to accidents and imminent danger notifications .

finally , federal policy and other considerations have dictated that field offices be placed in certain central city locations .

table iii.15 provides key information about the 10 regional offices , 83 area offices , 6 district offices , 5 resource centers , 2 technical centers , and 1 training facility that compose osha's field office structure .

osha's various field offices generally perform the following functions: regional offices .

a regional office provides the guidance and administrative support for all of the other osha field offices operating in a particular region .

area offices and resource centers .

an area office is organized geographically to serve as osha's primary link to employers and employees at local work sites .

staff stationed at these types of offices perform safety and health activities , such as routine work place inspections , and provide technical assistance to employers .

they also document complaints about unsafe work place practices and respond to accidents and imminent danger notifications .

offices in osha's san francisco region serve the same purpose but are identified as “resource centers” because they are organized functionally rather than geographically .

district offices .

a district office is a small outstation reporting to an area office .

district offices provide safety and health services in geographic areas that are remote from an area office but have a concentration of work places .

technical centers .

osha maintains these centers in salt lake city , utah , and cincinnati , ohio .

their primary function is to analyze air and substance samples taken during work place inspections and to calibrate the equipment that the inspectors use .

training institute .

this is a centrally located facility in des plaines , illinois , used to train occupational safety and health personnel from osha , its state counterparts , and other federal safety and health professionals , as well as the public on a space - available basis .

in fiscal year 1995 , every state and territory had at least one osha field office except south dakota , vermont , wyoming , and guam ( see fig .

iii.29 ) .

osha's field offices with the largest numbers of staff were in the federal region cities of boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle .

osha employed about 17 percent of all labor on - board field office staff in fiscal year 1995 .

osha staff represented almost 50 different professional and administrative job categories .

occupational safety and health managers / specialists and industrial hygienists made up approximately 66 percent of osha's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.30 ) .

the remaining staff included safety engineers ; chemists ; computer specialists ; program analysts ; accountants ; and clerical workers , such as safety / health assistants and clerks , program analysts , and secretaries .

approximately 70 percent of osha's field office staff were at the gs - 11 , – 12 , and – 13 grade levels .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted about 13 percent of osha's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.31 ) .

less than 1 percent of osha's on - board staff in fiscal year 1995 worked part time .

from 11 to 30 staff persons worked in 59 percent of the 97 u.s. localities with an osha presence ( see table iii.16 ) .

thirteen localities — which generally represented the locations of osha's regional offices — had over 30 osha employees .

in fiscal year 1995 , osha field offices occupied space in 115 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 550,535 square feet .

almost a third of the space ( or 115,804 square feet ) was owned by gsa , and almost 80 percent ( or 434,731 square feet ) was leased from privately owned sources .

osha used about 72 percent of this space for offices and the remainder for storage and other activities ( see fig .

iii.32 ) .

at 61 of the 115 buildings osha occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were located at the same address .

field office costs for osha totaled $146 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $10.7 million , which was 7 percent of osha's total field office costs .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $104.4 million and other costs totaled $31 million , which were about 72 and 21 percent , respectively , of osha's total field office costs .

none .

the primary mission of the pension and welfare benefits administration ( pwba ) is to help protect the retirement and benefit security of america's workers as required under the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) ( 29 u.s.c .

1000 note ) and the federal employees' retirement system act .

pwba is charged with ensuring the responsible management of nearly 1 million pension plans and 4.5 million health and welfare plans .

it also manages a vast private retirement and welfare benefit system .

pwba's major activities include evaluating and monitoring the operations of private sector pensions .

pwba conducts many of its mission - related activities through its 15 field offices ( see fig .

iii.33 ) .

pwba's field structure facilitates customer assistance to pension plan participants and beneficiaries in major metropolitan areas .

decisions about the number and location of pwba field offices are based on several factors: the number of employee benefit plans in a locality , the locations of major financial centers , and the existing labor administrative support structure .

table iii.17 provides key information about pwba's 10 regional offices and 5 district offices .

pwba's field offices generally perform the following functions: regional offices .

these offices conduct investigations of employee benefit plans .

when civil violations of title i of erisa are found , the regional office staff seek voluntary corrections and or recommend and support litigation by sol .

criminal investigations are conducted by staff at the direction of u.s. attorneys' offices which litigate the criminal cases .

regional staff also provide assistance to employee benefit plan participants and professionals who contact the office with questions or complaints .

district offices .

a district office carries out the same enforcement and customer service functions as a regional office .

district office staff are directly supervised by an affiliated regional office .

district offices , which have smaller staffs , provide a physical presence in select regions that may be larger geographically .

according to labor , this minimizes the travel time of investigators who conduct on - site investigations as well as provide a presence in additional metropolitan areas .

pwba staff represented 11 different professional and administrative job categories .

over 80 percent of pwba's field office workforce was composed of investment / pension specialists and auditors ( see fig .

iii.34 ) .

the remaining staff were in job categories that included employee benefit plan clerk or assistant , secretary , and computer specialist .

sixty - two percent of pwba's field office staff were in grades gs - 11 through – 13 .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted about 10 percent of pwba's field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.35 ) .

less than 3 percent of pwba total on - board staff worked part time .

table iii.18 shows that six or more staff persons provided a pwba presence in 15 u.s. localities .

localities with 21 or more pwba staff generally represented the component's regional offices in these areas .

in fiscal year 1995 , pwba field offices occupied space in 17 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 75,129 square feet .

gsa owned 9,068 square feet of this space , and 66,061 square feet were leased from private sources .

according to gsa , pwba used 65,321 square feet of its space in the field for offices and the remainder for storage and other purposes — such as conference and training activities and food service ( see fig .

iii.36 ) .

at 12 of the 17 buildings pwba occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

pwba field office costs totaled $27.5 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were $1.6 million , which was about 6 percent of total field office costs for pwba .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $21.8 million , and other costs totaled $4.1 million , which were about 79 and 15 percent , respectively , of pwba's total field office costs .

none .

the veterans' employment and training service ( vets ) is responsible for administering veterans' employment and training programs and activities to ensure that legislative and regulatory mandates are accomplished .

its primary mission is to help veterans , reservists , and national guard members to secure employment and their associated rights and benefits through existing programs and the coordination and implementation of new programs .

vets strives to ensure that these programs are consistent with the changing needs of employees and the eligible veteran population .

vets conducts much of its mission - related activities from 108 field offices ( see fig .

iii.37 ) for several reasons .

according to labor , the field offices are strategically located to minimize travel costs as well as to facilitate interagency liaisons and communications .

with vets' field offices located in 80 percent of america's 100 largest cities , field staff are close to employers , which helps to prevent reemployment rights claims and , when claims are made , facilitates their resolution .

field offices also allow vets staff to perform monitoring and technical assistance activities more effectively and efficiently with reduced travel costs .

table iii.19 provides key information about the 10 regional offices and 98 state offices that compose vets' field structure .

in fiscal year 1995 , vets maintained regional offices in each of the federal region cities: boston , new york , philadelphia , atlanta , chicago , dallas , kansas city , denver , san francisco , and seattle .

in addition , vets had a field office presence in every state — sometimes with as many as seven offices per state , such as texas .

vets' field offices generally perform the following functions: regional offices .

regional office staff primarily ( 1 ) resolve claims made by veterans , reservists , and national guard members when their reemployment rights have been denied by their civilian employers , ( 2 ) evaluate compliance by state employment security agency offices with veterans' services requirements as dictated by federal regulations through on - site visits ; ( 3 ) and monitor the performance of vets' grantees .

state offices .

state office staff work closely with and provide technical assistance to state employment security agencies and job training partnership act grant recipients to ensure that veterans are provided the priority services required by law .

they also coordinate with employers , labor unions , veterans service organizations , and community organizations through planned public information and outreach activities .

in addition , they give federal contractors management assistance in complying with their veterans affirmative action and reporting obligations .

vets staff represented five different professional and administrative job categories .

veterans employment representatives and program specialists made up approximately 70 percent of vets' field office work force ( see fig .

iii.38 ) .

the remaining staff included veterans reemployment rights compensation specialists , clerks , and other support staff .

approximately 42 and 25 percent of vets's field office staff were gs - 12s and – 13s , respectively .

staff at the gs - 5 and – 6 pay levels constituted about 24 percent of vets' field office workforce ( see fig .

iii.39 ) .

less than 1 percent of vets' on - board staff worked part time .

from one to five vets staff were located in 83 localities , and about 38 percent of these locations were staffed by one person .

generally , gs - 12 veterans employment representatives provided the vets presence in the localities with only one person .

no single locality had more than 10 vets staff stationed there ( see table iii.20 ) .

in fiscal year 1995 , vets field offices occupied space in 13 buildings throughout the united states , totaling 12,811 square feet .

gsa owned 5,634 square feet of vets field office space , and 7,177 square feet were leased from private sources .

vets used 12,423 square feet of its total field space for offices and the remainder for other uses ( see fig .

iii.40 ) .

at 11 of the 13 buildings vets occupied in fiscal year 1995 , other labor components were also located at the same address .

field office costs for vets totaled $16.7 million in fiscal year 1995 .

these costs included rent and utilities ; staff salaries and benefits ; and other costs , such as equipment , supplies , and materials .

rent and utility costs were about $289,839 , which was 2 percent of vets' total field office costs .

costs for staff salaries and benefits totaled $13.4 million , and other costs totaled $3 million , which were 80 and 18 percent , respectively , of vets' total field office costs .

vets is awaiting congressional approval to reduce the number of field offices that support its operations .

vets has also reduced staff through attrition .

south carolina ( continued ) .

table v.1: total labor field offices and staff by federal region 835 10,655 2 2 2 1 1 ( continued ) 10 ( continued ) 00 1 ( continued ) 0 ( continued ) no official field office .

employee supervised out of another office .

2 ( continued ) 1 ( continued ) 1 1 1 ( continued ) 1 1 2 32 2 ( continued ) 1 2 1 ( continued ) outstationed staff working out of home .

osha: potential to reform regulatory enforcement ( gao / t - hehs - 96-42 , oct. 17 , 1995 ) .

federal reorganization: congressional proposal to merge education , labor , and eeoc ( gao / hehs - 95-140 , june 7 , 1995 ) .

department of education: information on consolidation opportunities and student aid ( gao / t - hehs - 95-130 , apr .

6 , 1995 ) .

departent of labor: rethinking the federal role in worker protection and workforce development ( gao / t - hehs - 95-125 , apr .

4 , 1995 ) .

workforce reductions: downsizing strategies used in selected organizations ( gao / ggd - 95-54 , mar .

13 , 1995 ) .

labor's regional structure and trust funds ( gao / hehs - 95-82r , feb. 10 , 1995 ) .

department of labor: opportunities to realize savings ( gao / t - hehs - 95-55 , jan. 18 , 1995 ) .

multiple employment training programs: major overhaul needed to reduce costs , streamline the bureaucracy , and improve results ( gao / t - hehs - 95-53 , jan. 10 , 1995 ) .

department of education: long - standing management problems hamper reforms ( gao / hrd - 93-47 , may 28 , 1993 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

