this report , prepared at your request , is the first of two reports that examine states' implementation of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , which was authorized by public law 104-193 .

this report focuses on how states are restructuring their welfare programs to meet the objectives of tanf specified in the law .

the second report , to be issued later this year , will examine states' fiscal decisions for their tanf grants to determine whether states are taking steps to prepare for the effects of future economic downturns on their welfare programs .

we are sending copies of this report to the ranking minority member , committee on finance , u.s. senate ; the chairman and ranking minority member , committee on ways and means , and the ranking minority member of its subcommittee on human resources , house of representatives ; the secretary of health and human services ; the assistant secretary for children and families ; and other interested parties .

we will also make copies available to others on request .

if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or gale c. harris , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7235 .

other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments for this report are listed in appendix vi .

the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( p.l .

104-193 ) , enacted in august 1996 , replaced afdc with a block grant to the states , entitled temporary assistance for needy families .

as specified in the law , the objectives of tanf are to provide assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or in the homes of relatives ; end the dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting job preparation , work , and marriage ; prevent and reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies and establish annual numerical goals for preventing and reducing the incidence of these pregnancies ; and encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

all these goals are to be accomplished by providing states increased flexibility to design their own programs , thus allowing states to build on the initiatives they began experimenting with before federal reform .

however , the law sets some parameters: to avoid financial penalties , states must impose work requirements for adults , meet steadily rising rates of caseload participation in work activities , and enforce a 5-year lifetime limit on the receipt of federally funded assistance , along with several other provisions .

to enable hhs to monitor states' progress in meeting key program objectives , the law also requires states to meet new data reporting requirements .

on november 20 , 1997 , hhs issued proposed regulations for implementing tanf in accordance with the new federal law ; however , as of may 1998 , these regulations had not yet been finalized .

under afdc , states were required to provide benefits to all economically needy families with children who applied and were eligible under federal law and whose income and assets were within state - prescribed limits .

in fiscal year 1996 , over $20 billion in combined federal and state funds were paid in cash assistance to a nationwide caseload that averaged about 4.6 million families a month .

within afdc , states were required to establish welfare - to - work programs , called job opportunities and basic skills training ( jobs ) , to ensure that afdc families obtained the education , training , and employment that would help them avoid long - term welfare dependence .

federal matching funds for jobs were available as a capped entitlement set at $1 billion in fiscal year 1996 .

historically , many families were exempt from participating in jobs , and less than a third of those required to participate actually were able to participate because of limited state funding .

in addition , within afdc , unlimited federal matching funds were available for states opting to provide emergency assistance for families to avoid the destitution of a child or to provide for a child's living arrangements .

emergency assistance could be authorized for up to 30 days in any 12-month period , and eligibility criteria often differed from those of the regular afdc program .

as of 1995 , all states but alaska and mississippi had implemented emergency assistance programs , spending about $3.2 billion on these programs nationwide in fiscal year 1996 .

to ensure states adhered to the goals and requirements of the law governing these programs , hhs was given oversight responsibility to be exercised through its approval , review , and audit functions .

before passage of the new federal welfare reform law , hhs had authority to waive certain statutory program requirements for afdc , and most states had begun experimenting with various reforms intended to move more recipients from welfare to work .

between january 1987 and the passage of welfare reform in august 1996 , 46 states had received approval to implement waivers affecting their afdc and jobs programs — in some cases , statewide ; in others , only in selected sites .

these waiver initiatives included time limits , strengthened work requirements , and teen - parent requirements related to school attendance and living in supervised settings — provisions similar to those subsequently embodied in the new federal law .

 ( see app .

ii for a summary of states' waiver provisions approved before passage of the federal welfare reform act. ) .

because these waivers had been approved and implemented at different times , states were in different stages of implementing their reform efforts when the federal reform law was enacted .

some states continued their waiver programs implemented before federal reform , while other states enacted new legislation to redesign their programs after passage of the new federal law .

oregon , for example , enacted legislation in 1995 and implemented its welfare reform program statewide in july 1996 .

in contrast , california did not pass welfare reform legislation until mid - 1997 , with statewide implementation of its new program effective in january 1998 .

the 1996 federal welfare reform law made sweeping changes to the nation's cash assistance program for needy families with children .

title i of the law ended the entitlement of families to welfare benefits and replaced the afdc program , including jobs and emergency assistance , with block grants to the states under tanf .

the fixed amounts of states' grants under the new law are based on the amount of their grants received in specified fiscal years under prior law , supplemented for population increases under certain circumstances .

for fiscal year 1997 , federal grants available to the states ranged from $21.8 million in wyoming to over $3.7 billion in california , totaling $16.7 billion nationwide .

with respect to state funding , the federal reform law included a “maintenance - of - effort” provision requiring states to provide 75 to 80 percent of their historic level of funding .

subsequent legislation provided additional federal funds totaling $3 billion over 2 years for welfare - to - work grants to be allocated to states for increased support of activities helping to place and keep individuals in unsubsidized jobs .

federal law also makes federal funding available to states for child care subsidies for low - income families , authorizing $2.9 billion for fiscal year 1997 and up to $3.7 billion in the year 2002 .

under the new reform law , states are required to ensure that a significant percentage of these funds are used to provide child care assistance to current or potential tanf recipients .

the federal welfare reform law also made significant changes to medicaid — a federal / state - funded program that provides medical assistance to low - income families .

before welfare reform , afdc recipients were automatically enrolled in medicaid on the basis of their eligibility for cash assistance under afdc .

the new law severed the connection between eligibility standards for medicaid and cash assistance , allowing states to set their own eligibility standards for medicaid within certain parameters .

however , most families who would have been eligible for medicaid before welfare reform continue to qualify for services .

because of congressional concern that welfare had become a way of life for some recipients , a key purpose of the new law was to promote work over welfare and self - reliance over dependency .

in support of this goal , the law provides that states must require able - bodied recipients to participate in work or work - related activities and must impose a 5-year lifetime limit on federal assistance .

states must require adults in families receiving tanf - funded assistance to participate in work or work - related activities after receiving assistance for 24 months , or sooner , as defined by the state .

if recipients fail to participate as required , states must at least reduce the families' grant and may opt to terminate the grant entirely .

to avoid financial penalties , states must ensure that a certain specified minimum percentage of their caseloads are participating in work or work - related activities each year .

these percentages are referred to as “minimum mandated participation rates.” to count toward states' mandated rates , adult recipients in families must participate a certain minimum number of hours in work or a work - related activity as prescribed in the law — such as job readiness workshops ; on - the - job training ; and , under certain circumstances , education .

the required number of hours of participation and the percentage of a state's caseload that must participate to meet mandated rates increase over time , as shown in table 1.1 .

finally , to help ensure the temporary nature of assistance and to provide further impetus for moving recipients to self - reliance , the law prohibits the use of tanf funds to provide assistance for families with adults who have received assistance for more than 5 years , cumulative over their lifetimes .

families with no adult receiving assistance ( commonly referred to as “child - only” cases ) are not subject to this limit , and up to 20 percent of a state's average monthly caseload may be exempt on the basis of hardship or having been subjected to domestic violence .

states with time - limit waivers inconsistent with these provisions may delay implementing the 5-year lifetime limit until their waivers expire .

also , states may opt to continue to provide assistance beyond the 5-year limit using state funds .

to address concerns about the growing number of children born to unwed mothers and the impact on welfare caseloads , another key purpose of the new law was to reduce out - of - wedlock pregnancies and encourage the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

to this end , the law included provisions requiring hhs and the states to establish goals and take action to reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies , especially among teens , and to provide annual progress reports to the congress beginning this month .

in addition , citing studies that indicate that the increase of teenage pregnancies among the youngest girls has been particularly severe and linked to predatory sexual practices of men who were significantly older , the law also requires states to conduct programs to provide education and training on the problem of statutory rape .

to expand their reach to males , these programs are to be provided through law enforcement agencies , the education system , and other relevant counseling services .

instead of prescribing in detail how programs are to be structured , the new law authorizes states to use their block grants in any manner reasonably calculated to accomplish the purposes of tanf .

for example , states are allowed to set forth their own criteria for defining who will be eligible and what assistance and services will be available , provided states ensure fair and equitable treatment .

states may opt to deny assistance altogether for noncitizens , drug felons , minor teen parents , or those determined to be able to work .

alternatively , these groups could be provided a different array of assistance and services funded by tanf or a separate state - funded program .

states may also choose when to require adults to participate in work activities , what types of activities are allowed , whom to grant good cause for failure to participate , and whether or not to terminate grants to entire families for noncompliance .

the law balanced this increase in state flexibility , however , with an increase in state accountability for working toward the goals of reform and hhs' responsibilities for tracking state performance and family outcomes .

to enable hhs to rank the states annually on performance and make decisions concerning bonuses and penalties , states are required to submit a detailed quarterly data report .

using the state - reported data , hhs is required to rank the states annually according to the most and least successful work programs , taking into account ( 1 ) placements in long - term private sector jobs , ( 2 ) overall caseload reductions , ( 3 ) diversion of individuals from applying for and receiving assistance , ( 4 ) the number of children living in poverty , and ( 5 ) the amount of federal assistance provided to the state .

hhs is also required to rank the states annually on the basis of the percentage of out - of - wedlock births in families receiving assistance and the reductions in the percentage of out - of - wedlock births from the prior year .

these state - reported data also provide the basis for awarding financial bonuses to the states to promote key program objectives .

the federal reform law provides $200 million per year for 5 years for bonuses to reward states with high performance in achieving the goals of tanf .

states may be awarded bonuses in amounts up to 5 percent of their grants in fiscal years 1999 through 2003 .

the law also provides $100 million per year for 4 years for bonuses to reward states that demonstrate net decreases in the number of out - of - wedlock births .

up to five states may be awarded these bonuses of $20 million in fiscal years 1999 through 2002 .

 ( if fewer than five states qualify , bonuses are increased to $25 million. ) .

the law specifies that the reduction in the number of out - of - wedlock births is to be determined for the most recent 2-year period for which such information is available and that only those states with no increase in abortion rates since 1995 are eligible for the bonuses .

data from the quarterly report are also to be used to determine whether or not the state will be assessed a penalty .

the law , as amended , specifies 14 grounds for penalties , including failure to meet the maintenance - of - effort state funding requirement , failure to satisfy the minimum mandated participation rates , failure to implement the 5-year lifetime time limit , and failure to submit a quarterly data report .

the total penalty in a single year can range up to 25 percent of a state's grant .

 ( see app .

iii for a description of all 14 penalties. ) .

under some circumstances , hhs may determine that a state has “reasonable cause” for failing to meet some requirement and will not impose a penalty .

proposed regulations indicate , however , that if a state diverts cases to separate state programs or is continuing with inconsistent provisions under waiver , it may not be able to avoid a penalty through a reasonable cause exception .

in addition to the quarterly report , states are required to submit their child poverty rates annually , along with a corrective action plan if the rate increases by 5 percent or more from the prior year .

and beginning in 1999 , hhs is required to submit annual reports on the circumstances of families reaching their time limits and families headed by teen parents .

to ensure evaluation of states' programs under welfare reform , hhs is mandated to conduct research on the costs and benefits of operating different state programs , including effects on welfare dependency , illegitimacy , teen pregnancy , employment rates , child well - being , and any other area deemed appropriate .

hhs must also evaluate any innovative approaches it assists states in developing and may help fund states' evaluation efforts .

finally , hhs is required to work with the states to study and analyze outcome measures for evaluating the success of states' efforts to move families from welfare to work as alternatives to the minimum mandated participation rates .

the chairmen of the senate committee on finance and the subcommittee on human resources , house committee on ways and means , asked us to monitor and report on states' efforts to implement programs to meet the stated objectives of title i of the new federal welfare reform law .

specifically , this report ( 1 ) describes states' efforts to require and encourage welfare recipients and potential recipients to assume greater personal responsibility , ( 2 ) examines how states are providing services to support the objectives of tanf , and ( 3 ) reviews early reported data to assess states' progress in achieving program objectives .

to obtain information for this request , we judgmentally selected for in - depth tracking seven states that reflect a diversity of circumstances based on various program indicators and demographics: california , connecticut , louisiana , maryland , oregon , texas , and wisconsin .

key factors considered in our selection of states included previous afdc grant levels , afdc funds per child in poverty , unemployment rates , child poverty rates , urban / rural population , presence of large cities , geographic region , experience with waivers , and whether programs are administered at the state level or by counties .

table 1.2 provides a summary profile of each state selected .

to describe states' efforts to design new programs and provide services , and to assess states' progress in achieving program objectives , we obtained and analyzed available program documents and data in each of the case study states .

we also interviewed state and local program officials and members of welfare advocacy groups in the states we visited .

we relied on the states for descriptions of their applicable laws .

table 1.3 lists the sites visited in each case study state .

in addition , we analyzed data collected by hhs and other organizations to provide information on other states — and on all 50 states when available .

for example , we analyzed hhs data on afdc family characteristics and participation in the jobs program to better identify states' practices before reform .

we also reviewed , and included where appropriate , nationwide data on states' tanf programs gathered and summarized by hhs , the congressional research service ( crs ) , the urban institute , the rockefeller institute , the american public welfare association ( apwa ) , and the national governors' association .

to help us formulate the methodology for our study , we consulted with gao's welfare advisory committee , comprising 11 nationally recognized experts in the welfare area .

 ( see app .

i for a list of members. ) .

to provide quantitative data on the programs in the seven states we visited , we relied on data used by these states to manage their programs .

in addition , we obtained comments on a draft of this report from the seven states and hhs .

we conducted our work between february 1997 and april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

consistent with the thrust of the federal welfare reform law of 1996 , states are shifting away from a welfare system that focuses on a family's entitlement and eligibility determination to one focused on moving recipients — and potential recipients — to self - sufficiency .

this shift is reflected in states' efforts to strengthen the work focus of their programs , modify policies concerning eligibility and grant levels to encourage self - reliance , and implement strategies to help reduce the need for welfare .

states have generally strengthened their focus on work as a central feature of their reform efforts .

under prior law , limited numbers of afdc recipients were referred to the jobs program to prepare for and accept employment .

beginning under waivers and culminating with the enactment of tanf , the afdc and jobs programs have been replaced by a single , integrated program .

now , in many states , when people apply for welfare , they are simultaneously enrolling in a welfare - to - work program , and welfare offices across the country are being transformed into job placement centers .

in an effort to place individuals as quickly as possible into jobs , these new work - focused welfare programs generally require participation in activities leading more directly to employment , require a higher percentage of recipients to participate , require participation sooner , and impose more stringent sanctions for failure to participate .

in implementing this transformation of welfare programs to a more work - focused approach , states have encountered numerous challenges .

for example , increasing the percentage of recipients required to participate in work - related activities has required states to change caseworker roles from emphasizing eligibility determination to helping recipients address barriers to work by providing more and different services to those previously exempted from work requirements .

how states have changed their programs to meet these challenges is discussed further in chapter 3 .

under most states' welfare reform programs , recipients are expected to participate in work or work - related activities leading more directly to employment , such as job readiness and job search .

in response to tanf's restrictions on the types of activities that count toward minimum mandated participation rates , some states are shifting participants from education and training activities to community service .

and in a few states , the number of hours recipients are required to participate has increased to better reflect hours comparable to full - time employment .

under states' welfare reform programs , a higher percentage of adult recipients are being required to participate in work activities and find jobs .

before reform , parents or caretaker recipients caring for a child under age 3 ( or under age 1 , at state option ) , along with those living in remote areas or with mental or physical impairments , were generally not required to participate in jobs .

now , many states' reform programs have lowered the age - of - youngest - child exemption to 1 year or even younger and require other traditionally exempt recipients to address their barriers , engage in work activities , and look for jobs .

the new federal reform law generally allows states to exempt whomever they choose from participating in their welfare - to - work programs.however , virtually all adult recipients except for single custodial parents caring for a child under 1 year of age are to be included in the calculation of the state's participation rate .

as a result , the extent to which states exempt recipients for other reasons could affect states' ability to meet prescribed minimum participation rates and avoid financial penalties .

nevertheless , nearly all states are continuing to provide exemptions from participation requirements under some circumstances .

in a shift away from blanket exemptions of broad categories of recipients , however , about half the states are making such determinations on a case - by - case basis or describing exemptions as deferrals , delays , or temporary exclusions that will end with resolution of the problem .

among our seven case study states , the percentage of adult recipients required to participate in work activities increased from an average of 44.2 percent in 1994 to 64.8 percent in 1997 ( see fig .

2.3 ) .

percentages were highest in states such as connecticut , maryland , and oregon , where expanded participation requirements had been implemented previously under waivers .

percentages were lowest in states such as california , where the state's welfare reform program had not yet been implemented , and texas , where the age - of - youngest - child exemption is higher than in most other states .

some case study states are requiring recipients with significant barriers to participate but are allowing a broader range of activities and fewer hours of participation than specified under tanf .

for example , in california , oregon , and wisconsin , program rules allow recipients with a mental health or substance abuse problem to be assigned initially to treatment or counseling programs , and those with very young children to be assigned fewer than 20 hours of participation per week .

in california , as long as such recipients comply with their assigned requirements , they are eligible to continue to receive assistance under tanf up to the 5-year time limit , but they are not counted when determining the state's participation rate .

in oregon , proposed rules would allow such recipients to receive assistance under tanf as well as count toward the participation rate because of the state's waiver , which will not expire until the year 2002 .

during the last quarter of fiscal year 1997 , oregon reported 22 percent of its participants had been assigned to drug , alcohol , mental health , or other counseling programs .

under states' welfare reform programs , participation requirements are being imposed sooner than under jobs , with many states requiring participation in job search activities immediately upon application for assistance .

before reform , recipients could wait months — or even years — before being required to participate , and many never were required to participate because of the lack of sufficient services and staff .

now , in many states , new program rules call for applicants to be assigned to job search and placement activities as soon as they walk through the door and are initially screened as potential recipients .

as a result , some find jobs and are diverted from receiving monthly cash assistance , as discussed later in this chapter .

the new federal reform law specifies that states must require recipients to engage in work activities either when the state determines they are ready to do so or after 24 months of assistance , whichever occurs earlier .

according to tanf plans submitted nationwide , as of november 1997 , 33 states had adopted the 24-month federal maximum , while 21 indicated that they would require recipients to engage in work activities sooner — including 11 states that require recipients to participate immediately upon application .

two of our seven case study states have adopted the 24-month federal maximum ( louisiana and maryland ) , and five require recipients to participate immediately if they are not exempt ( california , connecticut , oregon , texas , and wisconsin ) .

for example , texas implemented a policy in december 1997 requiring most applicants to attend workforce orientation sessions as a condition of completing the application process .

nonexempt recipients are required to participate in follow - up employment sessions and job readiness and job search activities .

california's plan also calls for all nonexempt recipients to be assigned immediately to job search activities .

even in the two case study states that do not impose immediate requirements according to their state plans , program officials indicated the states are requiring nonexempt recipients to engage in work activities as soon as possible .

for example , maryland state officials told us their program requires individuals to engage in work activities from the moment they come in contact with the local welfare departments .

in louisiana , officials told us that case managers assess recipients' skills and assign them to a work activity as soon as possible .

many states' welfare reform programs call for imposing stronger sanctions on recipients who fail to participate in their assigned activities than the sanctions that were allowed before reform .

under jobs , if a recipient failed to comply with work requirements without good cause , grants could be reduced only by the amount attributable to the noncomplying recipient , and conciliation processes were required to try to secure cooperation before the sanction could be imposed .

now , in many states , program rules call for terminating the entire family's grant , and conciliation processes have been streamlined or , in some cases , eliminated .

the new federal reform law stipulates that if an adult recipient refuses to engage in work activities as assigned , the state must , at a minimum , reduce the family's grant by an amount prorated on the basis of the individual's failure to participate ; the state may opt to reduce the grant more , up to and including terminating the entire family's grant .

under waivers prior to federal reform , 26 states had implemented provisions to terminate the entire family's grant for failure to participate , commonly referred to as “full family sanctions.” according to a summary of state plans compiled by the urban institute , a total of 36 states have adopted such provisions under tanf .

however , many states have maintained their conciliation processes even though they are no longer required .

five of our seven case study states have adopted full family sanctions: connecticut , louisiana , maryland , oregon , and wisconsin .

because louisiana had only implemented its policy in march 1998 , calling for a partial sanction for 3 months followed by a full - family sanction for continued failure to comply , no louisiana families had received a full - family sanction at the time of our review .

in the remaining four states , full - family sanctions had been adopted previously under waivers and had been in effect for at least a year .

in these states , we found the number of cases in which full - family sanctions were imposed for failure to comply with work requirements varied widely but that the number never exceeded 1 percent of each state's total caseload per month ( see table 2.2 ) .

nationwide data on full - family sanctions imposed under tanf have not yet been issued by hhs and may differ significantly from the experiences of these states .

the structure of states' sanction and conciliation policies varies .

for example , wisconsin's policy requires providing cash assistance prorated by applying a sanction for hours missed without good cause , multiplied by the federal minimum wage , and the conciliation process has been eliminated .

when initially implemented in march 1996 , the policy also required providing no cash assistance if families' participation fell below 25 percent of scheduled hours .

after initial implementation , a relatively high number of wisconsin families received no cash assistance as a result of sanctions , in part , because no effort was made to contact the families and resolve any barriers to participation before denying assistance .

effective june 1997 , wisconsin eliminated the portion of its policy that required providing no cash assistance to families when participation fell below 25 percent of scheduled hours without good cause , and the number of full - family sanctions imposed has dropped significantly .

in october 1997 , 220 wisconsin families received no cash assistance as a result of sanctions , compared with an average of about 550 per month during initial implementation .

wisconsin officials told us they believe their policy of reducing grants on a prorated basis for work hours assigned and not performed and eliminating the conciliation process before imposing sanctions work well as motivators that mirror the real world .

in contrast , county officials in maryland told us their rigorous conciliation processes resulted in fewer terminations of families' grants , and oregon officials told us they had terminated very few grants for the same reason .

while the threat of grant termination served as a motivator to some extent , welfare office workers in these states said that conciliation processes take the teeth out of sanctions if they provide families an opportunity to keep their grants simply by agreeing to cooperate .

workers said they hoped their conciliation processes would be changed to shorten the process and to prevent recipients from “gaming the system” by agreeing to cooperate and then failing to do so .

in connecticut , relatively few families had their grants terminated after initial implementation , primarily because of the state's program structure of graduated sanctions .

while only 83 families received full - family sanctions during the first 9 months of implementation , 377 families received full - family sanctions over the next 3 months .

however , more recent sanction data indicate that the number of sanctions may be subsiding now that the program has been fully implemented .

in may 1997 , only three cases received full - family sanctions , compared with an average of as many as 126 a month earlier in the implementation process .

the early peak in the number of sanctions most likely reflects the conversion of the state's existing caseload to the new program rules , as well as initial doubts among both recipients and caseworkers that grants actually would be cut off .

in imposing full - family sanctions , on the one hand , state officials maintain that if families are experiencing hardship caused by the loss of cash assistance , all they have to do is cooperate to have their grant reinstated .

on the other hand , states have usually taken steps to address concerns raised by welfare advocacy groups about the well - being of children in families whose entire grant has been terminated for noncooperation .

for example , states have generally adopted safeguards to ensure that families fully understand the implications of their actions , that services are available to help them participate , and that exemptions may be provided under certain circumstances .

to ensure the children are not at risk of placement in foster care if grants are terminated , some states , such as oregon , require a home visit before terminating a family's grant for noncooperation and may continue to pay rent and utilities directly on behalf of a family to prevent destitution .

in other states , including three of our case study states , such concerns have resulted in continuing with only a partial reduction in grant amounts for noncooperation instead of imposing full - family sanctions .

all three of these states nevertheless strengthened their sanction processes in other ways .

for example , both louisiana and texas eliminated conciliation .

california shortened its conciliation process and required assistance to be provided as vouchers for rent and utilities for those families sanctioned for more than 3 months .

in california's san bernardino county , families accepting a reduced grant rather than attempting to participate were automatically referred to the fraud unit for investigation of possible unreported sources of income .

despite these changes , officials we spoke with were skeptical about whether reduced grants alone would be a sufficient motivator for recipients to participate and were concerned that their inability to terminate such cases might affect their state's ability to meet minimum mandated participation rates over time .

because of the way participation rates are calculated , states can achieve higher rates by closing cases of families who fail to comply with work requirements for more than 3 months .

states' reform programs have generally included various policy changes to reinforce the expectation that recipients will move from welfare to work and that welfare should be temporary , not a way of life .

by changing policies on the calculation of cash assistance payments and the provision of support services , many states are attempting to ensure that “work pays” — that is , that recipients who find jobs are better off financially than recipients who do not find jobs .

in addition , states have taken steps to limit the time cash assistance can be received — most states have chosen limits consistent with the new law , but some have shorter limits than the federally mandated 5-year lifetime limit .

many states have also adopted various extension and exemption policies as a safety net for families reaching these limits , at least under some circumstances .

finally , while making policy changes to help make work pay and cash assistance temporary , few states have opted to use their increased flexibility under tanf to restrict eligibility for certain groups or to lower grant levels .

in fact , several states have expanded eligibility by simplifying income standards and liberalizing the criteria for two - parent families .

making work pay involves the interaction of many factors , including grant levels , the impact of earned income on cash assistance , the availability of support services , the earned income tax credit , and child support .

under the prior system , these factors could interact in such a way that families were financially better off on welfare than working at a low - wage job , and families already on welfare had few incentives to work .

as a result , reforms to increase incentives for families to choose work over welfare were among the first reforms that states began making under waivers .

under tanf , states are provided broad discretion in defining policies to help make work pay , such as determining how to calculate payment amounts and grant levels and whether to provide services to those not receiving monthly cash assistance .

to be eligible for assistance , families must have income and resources below certain limits defined by the states and referred to as income standards .

in determining a family's eligibility and calculating the amount of the cash assistance payment , allowances can be made for certain assets , such as a home or a car , and if a family member is employed , a portion of earned income can be excluded , or “disregarded,” in the calculation .

under afdc , the limits on a family's earnings , savings , and other assets were widely viewed as too low , creating a barrier to families' attempts to move toward self - reliance .

for working families with incomes low enough to still qualify for assistance , after 12 months the afdc grant would be reduced dollar for dollar for earnings , except for a $90 monthly allowance for work expenses .

as a result , to help families prepare for a future without monthly assistance payments , and as part of a general move to “make work pay,” many states adopted waivers to increase their asset limits and change their “earnings disregard” policies to allow families to keep more of their grants when working , or to keep them longer.according to states' tanf plans as of october 1997 , 39 states had increased their countable asset limits , 48 states had increased their vehicle allowances , and 42 states had changed their earnings disregard policies , as compared with what was allowed under afdc .

all our case study states have implemented changes to their asset limits , vehicle allowances , or earnings disregard policies to help make work pay ( see table 2.3 ) .

under the new federal welfare reform law , states can also opt to allow recipients to establish individual development accounts to accumulate assets for further education , purchasing a home , or starting a business and not have these assets count in determining their eligibility for assistance .

according to tanf plans as of october 1997 , 22 states had opted to allow recipients to accumulate assets under restricted savings accounts of some type , including 3 of our 7 case study states: california , louisiana , and oregon ( see table 2.3 ) .

texas also had plans to implement individual development accounts as authorized by 1997 state legislation .

in addition , by making support services available to families who are not receiving monthly cash assistance ; by encouraging clients to take advantage of the earned - income tax credit ; and , in a few instances , by adjusting grant levels , states are more able to ensure that the working poor are better off than those families relying on welfare and not working .

for example , oregon and wisconsin provide child care services primarily on the basis of income , regardless of an individual's status as a welfare recipient or nonrecipient , and oregon uses state funds to make income - based medical coverage available to low - wage workers who do not meet medicaid eligibility criteria .

in states with policies to provide services on the basis of income rather than welfare status , families may no longer have an incentive to stay on welfare simply to gain better access to such services , and some families may be diverted from receiving monthly cash assistance , as discussed later in this chapter .

also , when clients attend orientation sessions in some states , they are presented with charts to illustrate how they could be better off working for wages than they are receiving welfare grants — financially as well as psychologically .

for example , in both wisconsin and oregon , a single mother with two children could expect to nearly double her monthly income if working at an unsubsidized job for 40 hours per week , as compared with receiving a cash assistance grant and not working ( see fig .

2.4 ) .

according to a california welfare advocacy spokesperson , grant levels and income disregards were lowered , in part , to help ensure that the nonwelfare working poor would be better off than those on welfare .

to promote the temporary nature of cash assistance and encourage families to move toward self - reliance , the new federal reform law prohibits states from using federal tanf funds to support families for more than 5 years .

this time limit is cumulative , for life , for all adult recipients .

however , states may continue to use federal funds to provide assistance for up to 20 percent of their caseloads beyond this 5-year limit if families are facing hardship and may continue to provide assistance for additional families using only state funds .

states' welfare reform programs generally include provisions to place time limits on assistance , but they often count months differently and provide different time frames and consequences for those families reaching the limits , compared with those required for claiming federal eligibility under the new law .

officials told us that tracking both state and federal time limits , especially across state lines , poses new and significant challenges for many states .

under federal reform , states are allowed to establish their own eligibility policies for specific groups and to determine grant levels , but most states have not made significant changes .

changes to eligibility policies generally have been limited to simplifying the criteria for two - parent families and denying assistance to convicted drug felons .

further , at least for the present , states generally have maintained grant levels , dispelling concerns that they would immediately engage in a “race to the bottom” by lowering the amount of grants and redirecting those savings to other programs .

states' reform programs have also included various efforts to reduce the need for cash assistance through heightened expectations of self - reliance and personal responsibility .

in this spirit , states have pursued strategies to divert individuals from applying for cash assistance ; enhance child support collections from noncustodial parents ; and prevent out - of - wedlock pregnancies , especially among teens .

a major new strategy states are using to reduce the need for welfare is “diversion” — that is , families are diverted from receiving monthly cash payments if they can be assisted through other means .

before reform , when families walked through the door of a typical welfare office , the emphasis was on determining their eligibility for assistance and completing their application .

now , in states with diversion programs , the emphasis is on determining what families need to support themselves — perhaps without monthly cash assistance payments .

in some cases , a one - time cash payment ; support services such as child care , transportation , or health benefits in lieu of cash ; or help in finding a job can enable a family to maintain its self - sufficiency without ever going on the welfare rolls .

according to tanf plans submitted as of november 1997 , 30 states indicated they have diversion programs , including 5 of our 7 case study states: california , maryland , oregon , texas , and wisconsin .

in fiscal year 1996 , only about 13 percent of the 7.4 million afdc child support cases nationwide received at least one child support payment , according to preliminary data from hhs .

recognizing that child support is important to a family's self - reliance and that both parents should be held financially responsible for their children , states' welfare offices have taken steps to enhance child support collections on behalf of current and potential recipient families .

among our case study states , we found the following: ( 1 ) policies that terminate the entire family's grant for failure to cooperate with child support enforcement efforts without good cause , ( 2 ) policies that allow welfare families to receive more of the support collected on their behalf to encourage greater cooperation , and ( 3 ) efforts to work with the courts to require noncustodial parents to participate in work activities to bolster their ability to pay child support .

prior law allowed states to sanction or deny assistance to adults who failed to cooperate with child support enforcement requirements without good cause , but not to deny assistance to the children .

the new federal law requires states to reduce a family's grant amount by at least 25 percent for such failure to cooperate and provides the option for states to deny assistance to the entire family .

before federal reform , nine states had adopted waiver provisions to terminate a family's entire grant for such failure to cooperate , including two of our seven case study states: connecticut and maryland .

after reform , a survey conducted by apwa in the summer of 1997 found that the number of states with policies to terminate grants on this basis has grown to 16 ; however , nationwide data on the number of grants terminated under tanf for failure to cooperate with child support enforcement requirements have not yet been compiled .

to encourage cooperation , prior law also required states to give a recipient family the first $50 of current support collected per month on the family's behalf , with the remainder used to offset the amount of the welfare payment being provided .

the new law eliminated this requirement , but states can opt to continue the practice with their own funds.according to tanf plans as of october 1997 , 22 states were continuing policies to pass through some portion of any child support payment received .

among our case study states , california , connecticut , texas , and wisconsin were continuing such policies , with connecticut increasing the amount of the pass - through to $100 and wisconsin adopting provisions to pass through the entire amount of the child support payment to the custodial parent .

under prior law , participation in the jobs program was generally limited to afdc applicants and recipients and did not include noncustodial parents.before passage of federal reform , however , 23 states had received waivers allowing noncustodial parents to participate in the jobs program , either on a voluntary basis or as required by the courts , including 5 of our 7 case study states: california , connecticut , maryland , oregon , and wisconsin .

in addition , under the new federal reform law , states are required to report the number of noncustodial parents participating in work and work - related activities under the states' tanf programs .

during our site visits , we found that several local welfare offices had implemented efforts to work more closely with the courts to require noncustodial parents to participate in programs designed to place them in jobs and increase their ability to pay child support .

for example , in both fresno and santa clara counties , california , the welfare agencies had initiated such programs .

officials in santa clara told us that they not only expected to increase child support collections by placing more noncustodial parents in jobs , but they also believed that such an effort would identify a significant amount of previously unreported income .

similarly , in wisconsin , one facet of the “children first” program is to help fathers meet child support obligations by providing them services that are designed to enable them to obtain and retain employment .

because of the strong link between teenage childbearing and welfare receipt , states are trying to reduce the need for welfare through efforts to prevent out - of - wedlock pregnancies , especially among teens .

most states have had such programs under way for more than 25 years as part of their family planning services programs , funded under title x of the public health services act of 1970 .

and since 1978 , adolescent family planning services have been specified in the statute as one of its essential services .

more recently , however , states have begun to focus attention on other strategies to reduce teen pregnancies , such as abstinence education , the enforcement of statutory rape laws , and male involvement programs .

under federal welfare reform , states are required to include in their tanf plans a description of how they intend to establish goals and take action to prevent and reduce the incidence of out - of - wedlock pregnancies , especially among teens , and to conduct programs that provide education and training on the problem of statutory rape .

hhs will rank the states annually on the basis of their reductions in out - of - wedlock births among families receiving tanf assistance and will award bonuses to up to five states for reductions in out - of - wedlock births among the general population .

in addition , hhs is required to develop a national strategy to prevent out - of - wedlock teen pregnancies and ensure that at least 25 percent of communities in this country have teen pregnancy programs in place .

in response to this mandate , in january 1997 , hhs issued a national strategy emphasizing the need to prevent teen pregnancies by encouraging teens to postpone sexual involvement , stay in school , and prepare for work .

a report to the congress is due this month .

at the same time that states are requiring more welfare recipients to participate in work activities , they are modifying their programs to better support recipients in their work - related efforts .

states have expanded the roles of welfare workers and reorganized local offices to better support employment .

further , states are using the flexibility provided by the new law , along with additional budgetary resources , to help welfare applicants and recipients address problems that interfere with work , including the lack of transportation and child care , and mental and physical health problems .

expanding partnerships with other organizations — especially employers — is yet another way that states are attempting to support recipients' work efforts .

finally , some states have restructured program administration by giving local administrative entities greater flexibility to tailor programs to the needs of their recipients .

states are expanding the roles of welfare workers and reorganizing local welfare offices in an attempt to change the “culture” of welfare offices to reflect the greater emphasis on work .

training workers to perform their expanded roles has been among the most challenging and widespread implementation issues reported by states .

recognizing that the success of their programs depends in large part on how well welfare workers implement reform policies , the states we visited have generally expanded workers' roles to meet new program objectives .

this expansion of roles is an attempt to shift the emphasis of staff from determining eligibility and issuing benefits to helping applicants and recipients obtain work and become more self - sufficient .

state and local officials cited a range of new responsibilities for welfare workers , including communicating to recipients their responsibility to become employed , motivating recipients to seek work , exploring the potential for diverting applicants from the need for monthly cash assistance , and collecting more information about applicants and recipients to determine what services would facilitate their becoming more self - sufficient .

as expressed by a worker in texas , staff interactions with recipients have shifted away from a pattern of “ms .

jones , has anything changed ? .

no ? .

okay , see you in 6 months,” to a much greater focus on helping recipients obtain work .

training staff to perform their new roles has been one of the major challenges of welfare reform .

members of welfare advocacy groups in several states we visited voiced concerns about what they viewed as inadequate training of welfare staff in states' new program policies and cited examples of staff providing inaccurate information about these policies to applicants and recipients .

state and local officials highlighted two key aspects of the challenge of training staff to perform their new roles: the need to change the perspective of staff and to help them cope with workload pressures .

many of the workers whose roles have been expanded are current or former eligibility workers , who were originally trained to apply complex rules to make accurate determinations of welfare eligibility and benefit levels .

in some instances , workers have encountered difficulties in making the transition to broader responsibilities that involve learning more about the lives of welfare recipients and making decisions about the most appropriate course of action for these recipients .

for example , the director of one wisconsin office told us that workers were uncomfortable with the considerable amount of discretion they had in their new roles that required them to use their judgment to determine the appropriate work component in which to place recipients .

the director said that he has attempted to help staff make the transition to their broader roles by working to keep them focused on client empowerment and employment .

officials in portland , oregon , told us that the process of shifting workers' perspectives to focus more on helping families become self - sufficient had taken several years .

many factors helped facilitate this process , including making the expanded role a higher job classification to provide salary increases and providing training based on needs as identified by the workers themselves , according to portland officials .

welfare workers and managers cited a number of factors that contributed , to varying degrees , to the workload pressures that impinged upon workers' abilities to perform their new responsibilities .

in addition to traditional problems , such as large caseloads and substantial amounts of time required to determine eligibility and benefit levels and process sanctions , workers cited the extra time now required for initial meetings with applicants , the additional time required to keep abreast of policy changes , and the limited time for training .

for example , officials in the two maryland counties we visited reported that much of welfare workers' time was consumed with processing paperwork to sanction noncompliant clients , which limited the time available to work with other clients .

workers in new orleans told us that the amount of time required to interview applicants had tripled under the state's welfare reform program , in large part because there is now much more information to be communicated to applicants .

a worker in wisconsin told us that much more time is now needed for initial meetings with applicants — from 2 to 5 hours — to learn more about them in order to make appropriate decisions .

some states have taken steps to reduce such workload pressures .

for example , oregon has streamlined the paperwork for determining eligibility to allow staff more time for case management .

another way in which some states and localities have attempted to enhance their ability to serve welfare recipients is by reorganizing local welfare offices to consolidate service delivery .

in some instances , this has taken the form of moving various welfare - related staff from various sites to one site .

for example , at the time of our review , fresno county , california , was in the process of bringing together eligibility workers and employment specialists at various sites to facilitate information sharing among staff and help recipients obtain employment more quickly .

fresno county officials told us that having these staff at the same location would also enable eligibility workers and employment specialists to hold joint orientations for applicants that focus on diverting applicants from monthly cash assistance .

service consolidation is also occurring on a larger scale as welfare offices are being integrated into the workforce development system .

as part of its effort to encourage states to consolidate workforce development services , the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) has given 46 states grants to implement “one - stop career centers,” as of march 1998 .

one - stop career centers are intended to transform the fragmented array of employment and training programs into an integrated service delivery system for job seekers and employers .

for example , wisconsin and texas have efforts under way to shift from welfare offices to one - stop centers as the service delivery mechanism for their welfare reform programs .

these centers will provide access to a range of employment - related services , such as labor market information , job listings and referrals to employers , job search assistance , career counseling and job training , and case management .

serving welfare recipients through one - stop centers is a way of reinforcing the message that recipients are responsible for seeking employment and that staff at the centers are expected to facilitate recipients' efforts toward this objective .

in addition , by making services available to all job - seekers , one - stop centers may help remove some of the “welfare stigma” previously encountered when services were provided out of a welfare office , according to state officials .

recent declines in welfare caseloads , combined with the tanf block grant formula and the state maintenance - of - effort requirement in the new welfare law , have given most states more budgetary resources for their welfare programs than they would have had under prior program funding rules .

further , the new welfare law gave states flexibility to design their welfare programs and to allocate financial resources in substantially different ways than were allowed under prior law .

the states we reviewed were using some of these additional resources in combination with increased flexibility in spending rules to enhance support services for applicants , recipients , and those leaving welfare for work .

the law also provided federal funding for child care subsidies , and all seven states we reviewed had increased spending on child care for low - income families during fiscal year 1997 .

the welfare legislation dramatically changed the way the federal government and states fund programs and services for needy families with children .

previously , the federal government and the states shared the costs of afdc , emergency assistance , the jobs program , afdc / jobs child care , transitional child care , and at - risk child care .

unlimited federal funds were available for all of these programs except jobs and at - risk child care , for which federal funds were capped .

as shown in figure 3.1 , tanf block grants to the states replaced the federal portion of the funding for the afdc , jobs , and emergency assistance programs .

each state's tanf block grant allocation was determined by the federal expenditures for these three programs in a base year from 1992 to 1995 .

the law also required that states continue to spend state funds on low - income needy families at an amount at least equal to 80 percent of their fiscal year 1994 spending for all six of the programs .

this maintenance - of - effort requirement is reduced to 75 percent for states meeting their required work participation rates .

the welfare reform law also provides states with federal funding to help meet the child care needs of low - income families .

as shown in figure 3.1 , federal child care funding through the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) was based on prior federal spending for the three now repealed child care programs as well as the existing child care and development block grant .

like tanf , the amount of federal funds available for child care is now capped .

total program costs for afdc each year were largely determined by the number of individuals receiving assistance , and states received federal funds for a portion of total program costs .

under tanf , the amount of federal funding is no longer determined by the number of individuals receiving assistance .

instead , states receive a fixed amount of federal funds each year and are required to contribute at least a minimum level of state funds , the amount of which is based on past spending levels .

since tanf block grants to the states were based on expenditures for historically large welfare caseloads , the recent decline in caseloads has resulted in most states having more total budgetary resources available for their welfare programs than they would have had under prior funding rules .

in order to estimate the additional resources available for states' programs under tanf , we constructed estimates of the 50 states' baseline program budgets under prior funding requirements and compared these with the states' estimated budgetary resources under tanf .

for the united states as a whole , we estimated that if all states had received a full year's tanf allotment in 1997 and had maintained state funding at 80 percent of historic levels , they would have had about $4.7 billion more than we estimate they would have spent in 1997 under prior methods of financing .

on average , given the actual caseload size in 1997 , we estimated that states would have had about 25 percent more budgetary resources under tanf than they would have had under afdc funding rules .

table 3.1 shows these additional federal and state budgetary resources for the seven states reviewed , compared with estimates of expenditures these states would have made in 1997 under prior program funding .

among these states , the estimated increase in resources ranges from 1 percent in connecticut to 65 percent in wisconsin .

while current circumstances provide states with additional budgetary resources , there is no guarantee that this situation will continue into the future .

even if , for example , economic conditions weaken and more families need assistance , the tanf block grant amount will not increase , and it will be up to each state to decide what level of benefits to provide and to whom , and to provide additional resources as it determines necessary .

in addition to changing the way the federal government funds assistance for needy families with children , the new welfare law gives states flexibility to spend program resources in ways that are substantially different from those available under prior law .

the law gives states authority to use tanf funds in ways that were allowed under the earlier programs and , unless subject to a prohibition , “in any manner that is reasonably calculated to accomplish the purpose of the tanf program” for families with children .

as discussed earlier , states do face many limits on how they use federal tanf funds — notably time limits .

and federal law restricts expenditures for medical services and assistance to certain individuals and families , including certain aliens and teen parents .

states are , however , liberated from many other detailed rules about the types of poor families that can be served and the types and amounts of assistance to be provided .

as a result , states have more freedom to tailor services to families' unique situations , individual needs , and local environments .

further , states can expand eligibility to provide tanf services to a broader range of families than had been served under afdc .

this means that supportive services , which in the past had been linked to eligibility for cash assistance , can now be provided in the absence of a welfare check , further freeing states to tailor services to individual need .

states have even more flexibility in how they spend their maintenance - of - effort funds .

for example , these funds are not subject to time limits and thus can be used to provide services indefinitely and to certain legal aliens for whom federal funds cannot be used .

the seven states we visited are using some of their additional budgetary resources to provide services to help families address barriers to employment , including lack of child care and lack of transportation , as well as more complex mental and physical health problems .

states are also continuing to provide services to families that have left the welfare rolls as a result of employment , including , in some cases , providing case management services to help ensure that families can deal with problems that might put parents' jobs at risk .

in addition , some states are providing services to low - income working families that are not receiving cash assistance and that , under previous law , might not have been eligible for such assistance .

while states can use tanf resources for child care , one of the largest sources of federal funds for child care subsidies for low - income families is the child care and development fund .

the welfare reform law combined four federal child care programs with different target populations into one program with a single set of eligibility criteria and requirements , now called the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) .

the new ccdf provides federal funds to states for child care subsidies for families who are working or preparing for work and who have incomes of up to 85 percent of a state's median income .

the ccdf provided states with about $3 billion in federal funds in fiscal year 1997 .

in a separate study of child care under the ccdf , we reported that all of the seven states reviewed used federal and state funding under the ccdf to increase overall expenditures in their fiscal year 1997 child care subsidy programs , with increases over fiscal year 1996 expenditures ranging from about 2 percent in maryland to 62 percent in louisiana .

six of the seven states also reported an increase in the number of children served under their child care subsidy programs .

all seven states expected to meet the fiscal year 1997 child care needs of families required to work under welfare reform as well as those of families moving off welfare .

however , the states did note difficulties with locating a sufficient supply of certain types of care — infant care , nonstandard hour care , care for sick children , and care for children with special needs .

states were also uncertain that supply would be adequate in the longer term and had varied initiatives under way to expand supply .

some states are taking advantage of the new consolidated program to develop a more integrated child care system to support the work efforts of welfare and nonwelfare families .

for example , wisconsin and oregon's child care programs , which are primarily based on income eligibility , are integrated programs that enable all potentially eligible families to access program services under the same procedures , criteria , and requirements .

such programs are important to ensure that families who have never been on welfare are treated the same with regard to child care subsidies as those who have been and that families can move from welfare to employment without fear of losing eligibility for subsidized child care .

under the jobs program , it was common practice for states and localities to contract with other organizations to provide education , training , and support services to welfare recipients .

as states and localities now strive to move more recipients into work activities and reduce welfare dependence , they are placing greater emphasis on expanding their partnerships , especially with employers .

for example , california requires that counties , in producing their local welfare plans , describe their partnerships with the private sector — including employers and employer associations — and indicate how these partnerships will identify jobs for recipients .

yet even in the strong national economy that currently exists , persuading employers to hire welfare recipients can sometimes be challenging .

moreover , some areas have weaker economies than others .

the states and localities we visited are using a range of approaches to expand their partnerships with employers and other organizations .

approaches that states and localities are using to strengthen linkages with employers include enlisting top state officials to solicit employers , giving employers a central role in designing local welfare - to - work programs , assessing the effectiveness of different strategies for obtaining employer involvement , and offering incentives to businesses to promote economic development .

in some instances , the impetus for partnering with employers has come from top state government officials .

for example , connecticut kicked off its welfare reform program with a large - scale direct - mail campaign to more than 35,000 businesses in the state that included a letter from the governor encouraging them to send in job orders for welfare recipients .

in addition , the state commissioners of insurance and banking initiated partnerships of insurance companies , banks , the state department of social services , and other organizations to provide welfare recipients classroom training , internships , and job opportunities in the banking and insurance industries .

some states , such as wisconsin and texas , have sought to institutionalize the involvement of employers by giving them a central role in designing local welfare - to - work programs .

for example , local welfare agencies in wisconsin are required to establish community steering committees , which are responsible for developing strong ties to local employers , creating and identifying job opportunities , and performing other roles that will benefit program participants .

these committees must include representatives of local business interests .

at the time of our site visits , welfare agencies in milwaukee were just beginning to form their committees , but fond du lac county had already established its committee two years earlier under previous welfare reforms .

the director of the welfare agency in fond du lac county told us that , while the committee encountered some early difficulties in determining its role and developing an action plan , the committee has been extremely beneficial for welfare recipients in developing employment opportunities because its members have much greater influence with area employers than welfare officials ever could .

another approach has been to assess the effectiveness of different strategies for obtaining employer involvement .

in connecticut , the department of social services hired the connecticut business and industry association to determine what incentives and services would encourage small businesses to hire welfare recipients .

the association conducted pilot projects in three regions of the state and tested employer incentives , such as training subsidies and tax credits , and services , such as prescreening recipients' education and skills ; peer mentoring ; and hiring through the use of temporary agencies , chambers of commerce , and business consortiums .

the lack of job growth in some locations has stimulated efforts to promote economic development .

for example , the welfare reform program in the city of baltimore faces a situation of low job growth .

maryland's department of human resources , in conjunction with a university research partner , has projected the number of jobs that will be created in “target industries” — those in which recipients of cash assistance are most likely to obtain employment — in each jurisdiction statewide .

these projections were then compared with projections of the number of adults that would have to engage in work activities in order for the state to achieve mandated federal participation rates .

this analysis showed strikingly different labor market conditions in the two localities we visited .

washington county is projected to have three times as many new jobs in target industries as work activity positions needed .

in contrast , baltimore is projected to have only about 4 percent of the number of newly created jobs in target industries that are needed for work activity positions ( see table 3.2 ) .

there have been various efforts to promote economic development in baltimore .

for example , the federal government has provided funds to designate sections of the city as “empowerment zones” and thereby attempt to attract and retain businesses by providing tax incentives and regulatory relief .

as part of his effort to generate new jobs in the city , the mayor of baltimore lobbied successfully for the passage of legislation that would provide businesses incentives to clean up and redevelop commercial and industrial sites impaired through past activities .

while partnering with employers has been a major focus , states and localities have also sought to develop and expand partnerships with other organizations to help address the needs of welfare recipients .

for example , in august 1997 , maryland funded seven proposals for demonstration projects to be administered by private , nonprofit organizations .

these projects seek to help welfare recipients obtain and retain employment but differ considerably in planned approaches and populations targeted .

one of the largest of these projects , located in prince georges county , enlists multiple program partners and community resources in an effort to serve teenage mothers , victims of domestic violence , long - term recipients , substance abusers , and other hard - to - serve cases .

in california , santa clara county is working with community - based organizations to establish services that will help welfare recipients retain jobs .

for example , the county has established a 24-hour hot line that recipients can call for support when they encounter job - related problems , such as obtaining child care .

in addition , the silicon valley council of nonprofits received a grant to work on strengthening the capacity of the nonprofit sector to participate in the county's welfare reform efforts and other objectives .

in some instances , states have encountered obstacles in their efforts to expand community involvement .

for example , maryland encountered resistance from some religious organizations when it solicited their involvement in administering noncash assistance to families whose cash assistance had been terminated because of noncompliance with program requirements .

these organizations cited various concerns , such as that the state was attempting to pass off to religious organizations its obligations to poor families , that administering such assistance would constitute for some religious organizations a conflict of interest by making them agents of the state , and that religious organizations could be exposed to liability .

although state law regarding the provision of noncash assistance was subsequently modified , religious organizations have played little role in administering noncash assistance in maryland , according to members of advocacy groups in the state .

states and localities have also found opportunities to benefit welfare recipients through partnerships with federal agencies .

for example , the weed and seed program in hartford , connecticut , is a joint effort of hud , the u.s. department of justice , and the state department of social services that places social service programs directly in the community being served — in this case a public housing development .

about a third of the program's caseload consists of tanf recipients .

the program focuses on eliminating crime and drug use in the housing development and changing the way people live .

the program targets young people and seeks to address their barriers to employment by providing services such as life - skills training , substance abuse treatment , and english language instruction .

in baltimore , the city department of social services is working with hud to address the issue of how welfare recipients in the city can use their federal housing vouchers to move to a neighboring county and pursue job opportunities .

while housing vouchers are transferable to other locations , officials from the two agencies are working to develop strategies to publicize and facilitate such transfers .

just as the 1996 welfare reform law provided states greater flexibility to design and administer their assistance programs for needy families , some states have in turn given local administrative entities greater flexibility to design programs tailored to the needs of their recipients .

devolution of responsibility is a distinguishing feature of welfare reform in four of the states we examined: california , maryland , texas , and wisconsin .

in wisconsin , this devolution was accompanied by a privatization initiative that resulted in private organizations taking over administration of the tanf program in some localities .

a central issue these states faced in implementing these changes in program administration was how to maintain local accountability .

they are addressing this issue through such methods as providing financial incentives for local administrative entities and establishing performance measures that focus more on desired outcomes .

the devolution of responsibility in california , maryland , texas , and wisconsin is reflected primarily in expanded local flexibility to tailor welfare - to - work programs to local needs and available resources .

however , eligibility standards and cash assistance levels are still set at the state level in each of these states .

as states shift responsibilities to localities and privatize the administration of welfare programs , they confront the challenge of how to maintain local accountability .

this challenge is heightened because states now operate their programs with fixed federal block grants and are subject to various federal financial penalties and rewards based on their performance .

similar to the federal effort to promote state accountability under tanf , california , maryland , texas , and wisconsin are working to promote local accountability in ways such as creating financial incentives for local administrative entities and establishing performance measures that focus more on desired outcomes .

states have established financial rewards and penalties to encourage local administrative entities to achieve desired program objectives .

for example , maryland's state law provides that 45 percent of any savings from caseload reductions or other reductions in the total amount of cash assistance payments is to be allocated to local departments on the basis of their achieved levels of cost savings .

california's law stipulates that each county will receive 75 percent of the state share of its savings resulting from the following outcomes: ( 1 ) recipients exiting the welfare program because of employment that lasted at least 6 months , ( 2 ) increased earnings by recipients resulting from employment , and ( 3 ) diversion of applicants from the welfare program for 6 months in addition to the number of months equivalent to state diversion payments .

on the other hand , any federal penalties for failure to meet federally mandated participation rates are to be shared equally by the state of california and those counties failing to meet the rates .

in wisconsin , local welfare agencies get to keep a certain percentage of any “profit” they generate but also are at risk of having to put up some of their own funds if their fixed block grants from the state are insufficient .

if their surplus is less than or equal to 7 percent of their total expense allocation from the state , they receive the entire surplus as profit .

any surplus in excess of 7 percent is to be distributed as follows: 10 percent to the local agency for unrestricted use , 45 percent to the state , and 45 percent to the local agency for reinvestment in the community for services to low - income people .

state contracts with local welfare agencies also have a $5,000 “failure to serve” penalty for failure to provide specified services .

with respect to performance measures , wisconsin's written contracts with local welfare agencies specify performance requirements for various process measures .

for example , a financial and employment planner must meet the applicant within 5 business days of the date the application is signed .

the contracts also note that the state will develop outcome measures for future contracts , including measures related to the delivery of all required services within total expense allocations , percentages of applicants and recipients moved to unsubsidized employment , recidivism , quality of job placements as measured by wage rates and availability of employer - provided benefits , and administrative cost per case .

texas established employment entrance rates and earnings gains as the key performance measures for local workforce development boards .

a large decrease in the size of the national welfare caseload indicates a significant reduction in families' dependence on cash assistance .

in addition , states' progress in restructuring their welfare programs is reflected by increased levels of participation in work activities , including unsubsidized employment , among both families receiving and leaving welfare .

nonetheless , little is known about the impacts states' programs are having on the well - being of children and families .

some states , however , have efforts under way to track families that have left welfare , and the welfare reform law includes various provisions that are likely to generate national information about program impacts in the future .

as states have reformed their welfare programs first under waivers and then under tanf , welfare caseloads nationwide have declined to an extent unprecedented since world war ii .

in addition , data from the states we visited show that these states generally have increased their job placement rates and the percentages of their caseloads participating in work and work - related activities , as compared with their earlier jobs programs .

after growing in the early 1990s and peaking in 1994 , the national welfare caseload decreased by 30 percent between january 1994 and september 1997 .

moreover , the caseload has been decreasing by a larger percentage each year , and most of the reduction has occurred since january 1996 ( see fig .

4.1 ) .

between january 1996 and september 1997 , caseloads declined in all states and territories except hawaii and guam , with reductions ranging from 1 percent in nebraska to 77 percent in idaho .

twenty - five states had caseload reductions of 25 percent or more ( see app .

iv ) .

while economic growth and state welfare reforms have been cited as key factors to explain nationwide caseload declines , there is no consensus about the extent to which each factor has contributed to these declines .

among our case study states , oregon and wisconsin , which were early implementers of welfare reform , have seen the largest caseload declines from january 1996 to september 1997 — 42 percent and 52 percent , respectively .

officials in these two states said that , along with favorable economic conditions , implementing their welfare reform programs — which included instituting “work first,” diversions , and full - family sanctions ; emphasizing full - time jobs and exiting welfare ; and expanding child care assistance — has contributed to their large caseload declines .

national data are not yet available on the extent to which caseload declines have occurred as a result of increased employment and income for families , as opposed to other factors , such as full - family sanctions or fewer families applying for assistance .

“work first” policies and more stringent work requirements may lead some families to obtain jobs and leave welfare more quickly than otherwise ; these policies might also discourage other families from applying for assistance .

time limits and stronger sanctions may reduce the length of time some families receive assistance , by either motivating them to obtain jobs and leave welfare or leading to the involuntary termination of their cases .

changes in eligibility rules and earnings limits can also affect the size of caseloads .

for example , in september 1997 , wisconsin began implementing its wisconsin works program , under which clients judged to be job - ready are not eligible to receive cash assistance .

the state's cash assistance caseload dropped by 55 percent from september 1997 to february 1998 .

state policies on earnings limits can also affect the extent to which caseloads decrease when recipients obtain employment .

in california , where a three - person family can earn up to $1,551 a month and still remain eligible for cash assistance , 23 percent of families that obtained employment left welfare in state fiscal year 1997 .

in contrast , a three - person family that earned more than $616 a month in oregon would no longer be eligible for cash assistance , and 70 percent of families there that obtained employment left welfare during the same period .

tanf caseloads can also decline because of administrative changes .

for example , in 1997 , wisconsin removed about 5,000 child - only cases from its tanf program and transferred them to a kinship care program administered by local child welfare agencies under the supervision of the state department of health and family services .

these were cases in which the custodial adults were not the legally responsible parents and cash assistance was paid only for the children .

in contrast , oregon has retained the child - only cases in its tanf program , and they constituted 28 percent of the state's tanf caseload in 1997 .

five of our seven case study states reported significant increases in the rates at which people in their programs found jobs , as compared with their rates under their jobs programs , according to our estimates .

as shown in the last column of table 4.1 , california , louisiana , and maryland more than doubled their job placement rates from 1995 to 1997 , and oregon and wisconsin increased their rates by more than 70 percent .

texas reported a slight decrease in its job placement rate , which a state official attributed to a delay in state appropriations for the program that left many staff positions vacant for much of fiscal year 1997 .

although comparable data for connecticut were not available , data on case closures suggest progress with regard to job placements: the number of families in connecticut that exited the welfare rolls because of increased income rose by 32 percent from september 1996 to september 1997 .

officials in oregon attributed the state's success with job placements in large part to the maturity of its program .

in fiscal year 1997 , the number of job placements in oregon nearly equaled the number of cases remaining on cash assistance at the end of the year .

state officials said that most of the cases that remained on cash assistance either had significant barriers to employment , such as drug , alcohol , and mental health problems , or were child - only cases not subject to work requirements .

economic conditions and unemployment rates varied among states and counties within states , and in some cases state officials reported progress in job placements even in areas of high unemployment .

for example , despite having the highest statewide unemployment of our case study states — 7.2 percent as of june 1997 — louisiana reported one of the biggest increases in job placement rates since implementing the work component of its welfare reform program in may 1997 .

the state achieved an annualized job placement rate of 300 per thousand cases from may to september 1997 — more than triple its job placement rate for all of fiscal year 1996 — and 77 percent of recipients placed in jobs over this 5-month period exited welfare .

however , louisiana officials said they were having difficulty with job placements in rural areas , where jobs are particularly scarce .

in oregon , the rural eastern counties , where unemployment rates ranged from 7 to 22 percent , had a higher overall job placement rate than the rest of the state in fiscal year 1997 .

state officials cited several factors that contributed to the performance of these counties , including that they worked closely with local employers and assisted clients with out - of - area job searches and relocation costs , had a strong sense of community responsibility , and had service jobs despite the high overall unemployment rate .

available data for our case study states indicate that the states generally have increased the percentages of their caseloads participating in work and work - related activities , compared with their performance under their prior jobs programs .

in addition , while all seven states indicated that they would meet their required tanf all - families participation rates for fiscal year 1997 , two reported that they would not meet their tanf participation rates for two - parent families by wide margins .

the recent sharp decreases in welfare caseloads raise questions about the broader impacts of states' welfare reform programs on children and families .

for example , to what extent do families who have left welfare return to welfare , how economically stable are they , and where do they stand on various measures of well - being ? .

moreover , how do children fare after losing assistance because their parents did not comply with new program requirements ? .

little information is available to begin answering such important questions .

however , some states have efforts under way to collect data on such topics , and the welfare law also includes various provisions to help ensure that national information on program impacts is collected .

some of our case study states have efforts under way to collect data on families that leave welfare .

for example , maryland is tracking a random sample of over 2,000 families that exited welfare during the first 12 months of the state's welfare reform program ( oct. 1996 to sept. 1997 ) .maryland has issued two reports with interim findings .

oregon has been tracking welfare recidivism to provide data for one of the state's performance measures: the percentage of families that remain off welfare for 18 months after case closure because of employment .

california law mandates an evaluation of the direct and indirect effects of the state's welfare reform program , including effects related to employment , earnings , and self - sufficiency as well as those pertaining to child well - being , such as entries into foster care , at - risk births , school achievement , child abuse reports , and rates of child poverty .

data on welfare recidivism indicate that some families are returning to welfare , but it is too early to determine whether recidivism patterns differ from those under afdc .

in tracking families that left welfare because of job placements , oregon found that 35 percent of families had returned to cash assistance sometime within 18 months but that only 10 percent were receiving cash assistance 18 months after case closure .

according to oregon officials , it sometimes takes two or three job placements before recipients are able to hold a job and remain off welfare .

this is reflected by findings from an evaluation of oregon's post - employment services demonstration , which found that after the first year of the demonstration ( 1994-95 ) , 61 percent of participants were no longer at their first job because they had left for a better job , quit without other job prospects , or been fired or laid off .

the 1998 maryland study found that 19 percent of all families who left welfare returned to the rolls within 3 months and 23 percent returned within 12 months , which suggests that families who return tend to do so fairly quickly .

the study also found that families whose cases were recorded as closed because they started work or because their incomes exceeded eligibility limits had significantly lower 3-month recidivism rates: 3 percent and 11 percent , respectively .

little is known about the well - being of children and families after they leave states' welfare reform programs .

the 1998 maryland study found that of the cases that closed during the first 9 months of the program , 51 percent of adults reported earnings in the quarter after they left welfare .

the average earnings of these adults were about twice as high as maryland's maximum cash assistance payment for a family of three .

among our case study states that tracked the average wage for job placements in 1997 , wages ranged from $5.60 to $6.60 an hour .

a low - wage job combined with the earned income tax credit , food stamps , and subsidized child care may lift a family above the federal poverty line , but families may continue to be hard - pressed , especially in areas with high housing costs and in states that limit transitional child care and medical assistance to 1 year .

prior research on the afdc program has indicated that recipients on average experienced little rise in wages over time.however , oregon officials have found some evidence in the state's welfare reform program that those placed in jobs who have remained employed have experienced a growth in wages .

oregon matched job placements with data on employer - reported wages between 1993 and 1996 and found that those who remained employed 3 years later had a wage growth averaging 14 percent per year .

early results from the 1998 maryland study indicate that case closures have not been associated with significant increases in the size of foster care caseloads .

of the 3,467 children in families that left welfare in the first 11 months of the program , only 15 children ( 0.4 percent ) were placed in foster care after their families left welfare .

approximately 3 percent of the 3,467 children had been in foster care at some point before their families left welfare .

the welfare law tasked hhs with collecting various information that will help policymakers and researchers evaluate the impacts of tanf .

for example , hhs is required to develop a formula to reward “high performing” states — those that achieve the goals of the law .

while the formula for fiscal years 1999 to 2003 has not been finalized , hhs issued guidance to states in march 1998 on the performance measures that will be used for fiscal year 1998 .

in addition to job placements , these measures include job retention and wage progression , which would provide information on the economic stability of families after they are placed in jobs .

the welfare law also directs hhs to conduct research on the benefits , effects , and costs of the state programs funded under tanf to determine effects on welfare dependency , illegitimacy , and other areas .

hhs is also required to evaluate innovative programs designed to decrease welfare dependency and increase child well - being .

a key element in hhs' pursuit of this research mandate is its continued funding of evaluations of state waiver programs , which assess the impacts of provisions such as time - limited assistance and work requirements .

furthermore , beginning in 1999 , hhs is required to submit annual reports to the congress on the circumstances of families reaching their time limits and families headed by teen parents .

the welfare law also appropriated $10 million per year beginning in 1996 for 7 years for the bureau of the census to continue to collect data on a national sample of families surveyed in the 1992 and 1993 panels of the survey of income and program participation to obtain information on the impacts of tanf .

the law directs census to pay particular attention to the issues of out - of - wedlock births , welfare dependence , how long people remain on welfare , causes of welfare recidivism , and status of children .

census has subsequently developed an expanded survey , called the survey of program dynamics , to collect information on these topics .

states are transforming the nation's welfare system into a work - focused , temporary assistance program for needy families .

they are modifying their policies to require or encourage welfare recipients and potential recipients to work ; rely on alternatives to cash assistance when appropriate ; use welfare as temporary , rather than long - term , assistance ; cooperate with child support enforcement requirements ; and not become pregnant outside of marriage .

at the same time , states are modifying their programs to better support welfare recipients in meeting these expectations , such as by expanding the role of welfare workers to include job counseling , transforming local welfare offices into job centers , enhancing support services , expanding efforts to establish partnerships with employers and other organizations , and giving local administrative entities more flexibility to tailor programs to local needs .

the confluence of a strong national economy and the availability to most states of greater budgetary resources under tanf than they would have received under prior law has created an optimal time for states to reform their welfare programs .

increases in job placement rates and levels of participation in work activities are early encouraging signs of progress toward some of the objectives of the federal welfare reform law .

however , any comprehensive assessment of states' welfare reform programs must also take into account what happens over the longer term with respect to some critical issues , such as the following .

states are helping many families leave or avoid welfare by providing a range of services to support their work efforts , including medicaid and child care assistance .

however , these families' prospects for achieving some measure of economic stability remain an important issue , in light of prior research showing that welfare recipients , who often find jobs with low wages , generally have experienced little rise in wages over time after they began working .

to the extent that these families' earnings do not increase over time and their employment - based fringe benefits are limited , their ability to maintain employment and support themselves may depend to a great extent on the availability of income supports , such as subsidized medical and child care and the earned income tax credit .

federal and state policies and programs for assisting low - income working families are likely to play a critical role in the future success of welfare reform .

as more recipients leave welfare for work , the characteristics of states' caseloads can be expected to change .

data from states that have implemented early reforms and experienced large caseload reductions indicate that many of the remaining recipients face multiple barriers to participation in work activities , such as mental health and substance abuse problems and domestic violence .

as a result , even under continued favorable economic conditions , states' initial successes with moving applicants and recipients into employment will probably slow over time .

in response , states will need to adjust their approaches to better enable families with a range of problems to take steps toward becoming more self - supporting .

although states can exempt up to 20 percent of tanf families from the federal time limit on assistance on the basis of hardship , even with more intensive supports , there may be some recipients who cannot be placed in the workforce because of the severity of their problems .

in addition , there may be some adults whose lack of compliance with program requirements , for whatever reasons , puts their children at risk of a range of negative outcomes .

given time limits on assistance and pressure on states to meet rising federally mandated work participation rates , monitoring how these recipients and their children fare in states' welfare reform programs will be especially important .

as we have seen , some states have given localities greater flexibility to design programs tailored to the needs of their recipients or privatized some functions of their welfare programs , such as eligibility determination .

by encouraging experimentation , or in some cases , competition , these initiatives may hold some promise of developing more effective and efficient ways of serving needy families .

however , these initiatives also heighten the challenges states face in ensuring local accountability and avoiding unintended negative results .

therefore , it is essential to pay attention to how well states are performing such tasks as specifying clear program goals and developing effective systems to monitor local performance .

a comprehensive perspective on states' tanf programs cannot be obtained until it is known how they perform in both a strong economy and a weak one .

yet little is known about how a weak economy would affect states' programs .

for example , some adults who had previously left welfare for work could become unemployed .

while they could be eligible for unemployment insurance , some could once again apply for cash assistance after their unemployment insurance ran out .

furthermore , if caseloads did increase significantly in a worsening economy , it is unclear what budgetary responses states would take in an environment of fixed federal tanf funding .

they would have a range of options , such as using any reserve funds that they might have set aside ; appropriating additional state funds ; accessing tanf loan or contingency funds ; or reducing program funding by cutting cash assistance levels , restricting eligibility , or reducing expenditures on services .

since these options are subject to varying constraints and could have very different effects on poor families , it will be important to pay close attention to how states respond in the event of an economic downturn .

we obtained comments on a draft of this report from hhs and the seven case study states .

hhs stated that the report provides a useful and comprehensive description of how states are implementing various reforms under tanf and provided two general comments .

first , hhs noted that there were some inconsistencies between the information that it had regarding policies and activities in the seven states and the information included in the draft report but acknowledged that the states were reviewing the draft report .

in their comments , the states generally agreed with the report's findings and provided additional technical information about their welfare reform programs , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate .

second , hhs suggested that the report should indicate that , while states were permitted to make their own reasonable interpretations of the 1996 welfare reform law prior to the publication of final rules for the tanf program , some of the state policy interpretations reflected in the report may not be sustained when hhs issues final rules .

in response , we added this information to the report .

hhs also provided additional technical information , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate .

