during the past year , several bills were introduced in the congress to reform the nation's welfare system .

most of these reforms call for providing increased education , training , and supportive services to welfare recipients .

to finance the increased costs of these reforms , some proposals , such as h.r .

4 — currently before the 104th congress — would restrict public assistance benefits to certain groups of legal immigrants .

such proposals may have stemmed from concerns raised about the sheer number of legal immigrants receiving benefits , about 1.4 million in 1993 .

other proposals , such as the administration's proposal , would require certain categories of immigrants to wait longer before receiving public assistance .

these proposals stem from concerns raised about the number of immigrants that end up receiving public assistance , even though they were admitted into the country with a promise of financial support from a sponsor .

these proposals would affect several public assistance programs and you specifically asked us to focus on two key programs: supplemental security income ( ssi ) and aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

the ssi program provides cash benefits to poor aged , disabled , and blind individuals .

ssi is federally funded , with some states providing a supplement .

in 1993 , federal and state expenditures for the almost 6 million ssi recipients were nearly $24 billion .

the afdc program provides cash benefits to poor families with children who lack support from one or both of their parents and is jointly funded with federal and state dollars .

in 1993 , about 14.1 million recipients received over $22 billion in federal and state afdc payments .

a recipient cannot receive both ssi and afdc benefits .

this report examines ( 1 ) how legal immigrants' utilization of ssi and afdc compares with that of citizens , ( 2 ) the trends in the numbers of legal immigrants receiving ssi or afdc benefits , ( 3 ) the characteristics of immigrant recipients relevant to determining eligibility under the welfare reform proposals , and ( 4 ) the possible impacts of the proposals to restrict immigrants' ssi and afdc benefits on federal welfare programs .

we also discuss possible impacts of the proposals on state general assistance programs and immigrants' actions in response to these proposals .

 ( see pp .

14-15. ) .

many categories of legal immigrants are currently eligible for ssi and afdc benefits .

ssi provides benefits to three groups of needy individuals: aged ( 65 years old and older ) , blind , and disabled .

afdc provides benefits to needy families with children .

immigrants eligible for assistance include those classified by the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) as lawful permanent residents .

also eligible for benefits are certain other legally admitted immigrants , classified by public assistance programs as permanently residing in the united states under color of law ( prucol ) .under the ssi and afdc programs , the prucol category includes immigrants , such as refugees , asylees and certain others whose deportation ins does not plan to enforce .

 ( see glossary. ) .

however , a few small categories of immigrants considered as prucol are not uniform between the two programs .

some legal immigrants are admitted into the country under the financial sponsorship of a u.s. resident .

the immigration and nationality act of 1952 , as amended , provides for the exclusion of any alien who is likely to become a public charge .

aliens can show prospective self - sufficiency through ( 1 ) proof of sufficient personal resources , ( 2 ) an offer of a job with adequate compensation , ( 3 ) posting of a public charge bond , or ( 4 ) an affidavit of support submitted on their behalf by a sponsor who preferably is a u.s. citizen or permanent resident .

by signing the affidavit of support , sponsors attest to their ability and willingness to provide financial assistance to the immigrant .

however , several courts have ruled that these affidavits of support are not legally binding .

concerned about the number of sponsored immigrants receiving public assistance , the congress amended program statutes to include a sponsor - to - alien deeming period ; that is , if a sponsored immigrant applies for public assistance before a certain time period , a portion of the sponsor's income and resources are deemed or assumed to be available for the immigrant's use ( whether or not they are available in fact ) .

this deeming provision is used to determine eligibility as well as benefit amount .

for the afdc program , this period is 3 years after admission to the united states as a permanent resident .

in 1993 , the deeming period for the ssi program was temporarily extended from 3 to 5 years , starting in january 1994 through september 1996 .

the deeming provisions do not apply if an immigrant becomes blind or disabled after admission to the united states as a permanent resident .

affidavits of support were amended so sponsors currently agree to provide financial support to the immigrant for 3 years .

the responsibility and empowerment support program providing employment , child care and training act of 1994 , reintroduced as h.r .

4 , the personal responsibility act of 1995 , introduced by a group of republicans during the 104th congress as part of their “contract with america,” would eliminate most legal immigrants' eligibility for ssi and afdc , as well as food stamps , medicaid , foster care and adoption assistance , education programs and numerous other public assistance programs .

two groups would remain eligible: ( 1 ) refugees in the country fewer than 6 years and ( 2 ) lawful permanent residents who are 75 years old and older and who have been in the country 5 years or more .

the provisions of this proposal would go into effect 1 year after enactment with no grandfathering provision .

in contrast , the administration's proposal would increase the time period that sponsors' incomes would be deemed available to immigrants receiving afdc , ssi , or food stamps to 5 years .

after the fifth year , sponsored immigrants would still receive benefits if their sponsor's income was below the u.s. median income .

the proposal would become effective as of october 1995 and contains a grandfather clause protecting current recipients .

table 1 provides more detailed information on these two proposals .

to determine the number and characteristics of immigrants receiving ssi and afdc benefits , we analyzed data from ssi and afdc administrative files , as well as published data from ins and the bureau of the census .

to identify trends in immigrant and citizen use of ssi and afdc , we reviewed published administrative data from 1983 through 1993 .

we used published data from ins's 1992 and 1993 statistical yearbooks and the march 1994 supplement of the census bureau's current population survey ( cps ) to provide background on overall immigration .

the march 1994 cps reports recipiency data for 1993 .

to identify the characteristics of immigrant recipients who could lose benefits under the proposals , we reviewed current ssi and afdc policies and four key welfare reform proposals .

we also analyzed 1993 afdc administrative data and ssi administrative data for december 1993 .

in addition , we reviewed a published study by the social security administration ( ssa ) that included information about immigrants' use of ssi's aged , blind , and disabled benefits .

ins defines immigrants as lawful permanent residents .

for the purposes of this report , we also included as immigrants other categories of noncitizens who are eligible for ssi or afdc: refugees , asylees , aliens granted stay of deportation by ins , and other prucol individuals .

we analyzed immigrant recipients' immigration status , length of time in the united states , and age — key characteristics in determining eligibility under the welfare reform proposals .

to determine the impact of restricting or eliminating benefits for immigrants , we reviewed four key welfare reform proposals .

we used h.r .

4 and the administration's proposal as examples of the range of options available .

to assess the impact of the proposals on immigrants and their families , we interviewed officials from the ssi and afdc programs and from ins , researchers from public policy groups , and state and local government officials with information about immigrants' utilization of assistance programs .

overall , immigrants as a group are more likely than citizens to be receiving ssi or afdc benefits .

based on cps data , immigrants receiving ssi or afdc represented about 6 percent of all immigrants in 1993 ; in contrast , about 3.4 percent of citizens received such assistance .

however , the total number of immigrants receiving ssi or afdc is much lower than the number of citizens because legal immigrants represent only about 6 percent of the u.s. population .

based on 1993 administrative data , an estimated 18.6 million citizens received ssi or afdc , compared with an estimated 1.4 million legal immigrants .

much of the difference in recipiency rates between immigrants and citizens can be explained by differences in their demographic characteristics and household composition .

immigrants are much more likely than citizens to be poor .

in 1993 , about 29 percent of immigrant households reported incomes below the poverty line , compared with 14 percent of citizen households .

researchers have noted that immigrant households have larger numbers of small children and elderly or disabled persons and contain more members with relatively little schooling and low skill levels .

these are all characteristics that increase the likelihood of welfare recipiency .

public policy has also played a role in immigrants' receipt of public assistance .

refugees and asylees are categories of immigrants who are much more likely to be on welfare than citizens or other immigrants .

by virtue of their refugee or asylee status alone , they qualify immediately for assistance programs that may be restricted to other immigrants .

almost 83 percent of all immigrants receiving ssi or afdc in 1993 resided in four states: california , new york , florida , and texas .

this is not surprising given that over 68 percent of all immigrants resided in these states .

over one - half of the immigrants receiving these benefits lived in california .

 ( see table 2. ) .

as a percentage of all ssi recipients , immigrants receiving ssi benefits have increased dramatically .

the percentage of ssi recipients who were immigrants nearly tripled between 1983 and 1993 , rising from 3.9 to 11.5 percent .

this rise occurred because the number of immigrants receiving ssi grew at a much faster rate than the number of citizen recipients .

the number of immigrants receiving ssi increased from 151,207 to 683,178 while the number of citizen recipients increased from approximately 3,750,300 to 5,301,200 .

in total , immigrants received an estimated $3.3 billion in ssi benefits in 1993 .

between 1983 and 1993 , the number of immigrants receiving aged benefits quadrupled ( 106,600 to 416,420 ) , while the number of citizens receiving aged benefits decreased by 25 percent ( 1,408,800 to 1,058,432 ) .

consequently , aged immigrant recipients grew from 7.0 to 28.2 percent of all aged recipients .

over the same time period , the number of immigrants receiving disabled benefits increased six - fold ( 44,600 to 266,730 ) , while the number of citizens receiving disabled benefits increased by 81 percent ( approximately 2,341,500 to 4,242,800 ) .

as a result , the percentage of disabled immigrants more than tripled , rising from 1.9 to 5.9 percent of all disabled recipients .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

immigrants as a percentage of all afdc recipients grew at a lower rate than immigrants receiving ssi benefits .

adult immigrants receiving afdc increased from 5.5 to 10.8 percent between 1983 and 1993 .

in 1993 , almost 722,000 immigrants , including adults and children , received an estimated $1.2 billion in afdc benefits .

the characteristics of immigrants receiving ssi and afdc differ , but data limitations prevent a complete analysis .

available data show that ssi immigrant recipients are more likely than citizens to be 75 years old or older — the age that h.r .

4 uses to determine eligibility .

most afdc families containing immigrant recipients also contain citizen recipients .

only the immigrants in these families would lose benefits under some of the proposals — the citizen members of these families would remain eligible .

compared with ssi recipients , afdc recipients are more likely to be refugees .

however , available data provide an incomplete picture of immigrant recipients , and even less is known about their sponsors .

as noted earlier , immigrants account for an increasingly greater percentage of the ssi aged program .

moreover , immigrant recipients are more likely than citizen recipients to be 75 years old or older .

in 1993 , 26 percent of immigrants on ssi aged benefits were 75 years old or older ; in contrast , 15.3 percent of citizen ssi recipients were 75 years old or older .

most immigrants receiving ssi are lawful permanent residents , and many have been in the country for over 5 years .

among immigrants receiving ssi benefits in 1993 , over 76 percent were lawful permanent residents , 18 percent were refugees or asylees , and 6 percent were other prucol immigrants .

 ( see fig .

2. ) .

of lawful permanent residents , over 56 percent had been in the country for 5 years or longer .

about 10 percent of lawful permanent residents were 75 years old or older and had been in the country for 5 years or longer .

over 14 percent of refugees had been in the country for 6 years or longer .

questions have been raised about the growing numbers of elderly immigrants receiving ssi and the extent to which these immigrants entered the united states with a financial sponsor .

while we cannot determine the extent to which immigrants receiving ssi are sponsored , ssa's data suggest that some immigrants apply for ssi benefits shortly after a deeming period would have expired .

analyses by ssa researchers indicate that about 25 percent of lawful permanent residents who applied for ssi benefits since 1980 applied soon after 3 years of u.s. residency ; that is , soon after the sponsor's promise of support would have expired .

discussing the immigration status of afdc recipients is complicated because afdc is a family - based benefit , and each family member could have a different immigration status .

most afdc households containing at least one immigrant also contain a citizen .

of afdc households with at least one immigrant recipient , only about 19 percent contained no citizen ( that is , all members of the household were immigrants ) .

for example , over 64 percent were headed by an immigrant adult with at least one citizen child .

in about 9 percent of the households containing immigrants , at least one adult is a citizen and at least one child is a citizen .

 ( see fig .

3. ) .

most immigrants receiving afdc were either lawful permanent residents or refugees or asylees .

data on all immigrant recipients showed that 65.3 percent — over 471,000 — were lawful permanent residents and almost 32.5 percent — over 234,000 — were refugees or asylees .

the remaining immigrant recipients fall into other prucol categories .

 ( see fig .

4. ) .

no one source provides all the data needed to fully describe the characteristics of immigrants receiving benefits or of their sponsors .

administrative data from the ssi and afdc programs may not have a recipient's current immigration status if an immigrant's status changed and the immigrant did not notify the agency .

for example , lawful permanent residents can become citizens after 5 years of residing in the united states and meeting other ins criteria , and refugees and asylees can become lawful permanent residents after a 1-year residency in the united states .

further , afdc administrative data do not contain information on how long an immigrant recipient has resided in the united states .

additionally , computerized data on sponsors , their incomes , the amount of financial support they provide , and the number of immigrants they are sponsoring are not available from administrative sources or the ins .

ssi's new automated application system collects information on sponsors but it cannot currently aggregate the data for national analyses .

the afdc program does not have any computerized data on sponsors of immigrant recipients .

ins collects this information when an immigrant first enters the country but the data are not computerized .

given these data limitations , we were unable to assess the extent to which immigrants are relying on sponsors for financial assistance or determine sponsors' ability to support sponsored immigrants .

the estimated number of immigrants affected by welfare reform proposals varies .

h.r .

4 , which eliminates eligibility for certain categories of immigrants , would eliminate benefits to the largest number of immigrant recipients .

the impact of the administration's proposal , which would increase the sponsor's responsibility for supporting immigrants , is difficult to determine .

last year , cbo estimated cost savings for these two proposals .

if these proposals were enacted , immigrants might change their behavior by , for example , applying for state - funded public assistance , naturalizing more quickly , or changing their immigration patterns .

under h.r .

4 , only two groups of immigrants would remain eligible for benefits — refugees residing in the country fewer than 6 years and lawful permanent residents 75 years old or older who have resided in the united states for at least 5 years .

an estimated 522,000 immigrants receiving ssi and an estimated 492,000 immigrants receiving afdc — mostly lawful permanent residents — are in categories that lose eligibility under this proposal .

in addition , some of the approximately 230,000 refugee recipients may no longer be eligible if they had resided in the united states for 6 years or longer .

cbo estimated that federal savings from this proposal for the ssi and afdc programs would be $9.2 billion and $1 billion , respectively , over the period 1996-99 .

adjusting administrative data to account for naturalizations , cbo estimated that 390,000 immigrants receiving ssi and 400,000 immigrants receiving afdc would lose eligibility under this proposal .

greater federal savings are expected from the ssi program because ssi ( 1 ) provides a higher average monthly benefit per person — $407 for ssi immigrants , compared with $133 for afdc ; and ( 2 ) ssi benefits are solely a federal expenditure , while afdc costs are shared between the federal government and the states .

cbo estimated federal savings of $21.7 billion from all the public assistance programs affected by this proposal including the ssi , afdc , food stamp , and medicaid programs .

determining the impact of extending the amount of time a sponsor's income is deemed available for the immigrant is difficult because of a lack of computerized data on sponsors , their income , and the number of immigrants they are sponsoring .

recognizing these limitations , cbo estimated that the administration's proposal would save nearly $2.9 billion in ssi , medicaid , and afdc benefits over the next 4 years .

cbo estimated that more than 80 percent of these savings would come from the ssi program .

an additional $400 million over 4 years would be saved by tightening ssi , medicaid , and afdc eligibility standards for immigrants to conform with stricter food stamp program criteria .

while determining exactly how immigrant recipients will be affected by the various welfare reform proposals is difficult , these changes may have some effect on immigrants' behavior .

no studies have quantified these effects ; however , experts have suggested a number of possible outcomes .

for example , some immigrants who lose eligibility may find themselves financially worse off .

other immigrants may find ways to increase their income by increasing their work effort or relying more heavily on their sponsors ( if they have one ) for financial support .

also , immigrants may supplement their incomes by applying for state - funded public assistance or seek changes in their naturalization status that would result in the reinstatement of their benefits .

immigrants who lose eligibility for federal welfare programs may turn to state - funded public assistance programs , thus shifting costs to the states .

state general assistance programs would be unable to restrict benefits to legal immigrants losing federal eligibility .

according to the 1971 supreme court ruling in graham v. richardson , states cannot categorically restrict legal immigrants from receiving state benefits .

as of 1992 , state - or county - funded public assistance programs were operating in 42 states .

california and new york , two states with high concentrations of immigrants on public assistance and which operate state general assistance programs , could be greatly affected .

as a result , the possible savings that states would accrue from their reduced share of afdc benefits to immigrants could be offset by increased costs for state - funded general assistance .

immigrants may also change their naturalization and immigration patterns .

eliminating or restricting benefit eligibility may prompt more immigrants to become citizens to retain their eligibility , according to an urban institute study .

cbo's $21.7 billion cost - savings estimate takes into account higher naturalization rates .

however , the impact of the proposal on naturalization rates is difficult to predict .

even higher naturalization rates could lower actual program savings .

restricting legal immigrants' eligibility for benefits may also have longer - term effects on the number and composition of immigrants entering this country .

eliminating benefits for most legal immigrants could prompt some prospective immigrants to reconsider their decision to seek residence in this country .

in addition , potential sponsors of immigrants may reconsider whether they would assist others in entering this country if doing so may result in additional financial responsibility on the part of the sponsor , according to an ins official .

as agreed with your office , we did not obtain written agency comments but we did discuss the report with program officials at hhs , ssa , and ins .

we also discussed the contents of the report with the congressional research service , cbo , and other relevant research organizations .

the officials generally agreed with the contents of this report but made some technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate .

we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of health and human services , the commissioner of the social security administration , the commissioner of ins , and other interested parties .

if your or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

other gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix i .

in addition to those named above , the following individuals made important contributions to this report: john vocino , senior evaluator ; alicia puente cackley , senior economist ; c. robert deroy , assistant director ( computer science ) ; paula a. bonin , senior computer specialist ; vanessa r. taylor , senior evaluator ( computer science ) ; steven r. machlin , senior statistician .

signed by a sponsor for an immigrant as an assurance that the immigrant will not become a public charge .

aliens found likely to become a public charge may not be admitted into the united states under the immigration and nationality act .

the afdc program provides cash welfare payments for ( 1 ) needy children who have been deprived of parental support or care because their father or mother is absent from the home continuously , incapacitated , deceased , or unemployed ; and ( 2 ) certain others in the household of a child recipient .

benefits may also be provided to needy women in the third trimester of their pregnancy .

states define need , set their own benefit levels , establish income and resource limits , and supervise or administer the program .

federal funds pay from 50 to about 80 percent of the afdc benefit costs in a state and 50 percent of administration costs .

ins defines an asylee as an alien in the united states or at a port of entry , who is unable or unwilling to return to his or her country of nationality because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution .

persecution or the fear thereof may be based on the alien's race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

asylees apply for status after entering the united states , and are eligible to adjust to lawful permanent resident status after 1 year of continuous presence in the united states .

if a sponsored immigrant applies for public assistance , the income and resources of the sponsor will be considered or deemed to also be available to the sponsored immigrant , regardless of whether they are in fact available to the immigrant .

state and locally funded programs designed to provide basic benefits to low - income people who are not eligible for federally funded cash assistance .

states , counties , or other local governmental units determine general assistance benefit levels , eligibility criteria , and length of eligibility .

ins defines lawful permanent residents as persons lawfully accorded the privilege of residing permanently in the united states .

they may be issued immigrant visas by the department of state overseas or adjusted to permanent resident status by the ins in the united states .

generally , a lawful permanent resident can apply for naturalization to become a u.s. citizen after living in the united states continuously for 5 years .

ins defines naturalization as the conferring , by any means , of citizenship upon a person after birth .

immigrants must meet certain requirements to be eligible to become naturalized citizens .

generally , they must be at least 18 years old , have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence , and have resided in the united states continuously for at least 5 years .

they must also be able to speak , read , and write the english language ; demonstrate a knowledge of u.s. government and history ; and have good moral character .

this term refers to immigrants who are considered “permanently residing under color of law.” prucol is not an immigration status provided by ins ; rather , it is a term used to indicate many alien statuses and is used for the purpose of determining eligibility for afdc , ssi , and medicaid .

ins defines a refugee as any person who is outside his or her country of nationality and unable or unwilling to return to that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution .

persecution or the fear thereof may be based on the alien's race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

refugees apply for status outside the united states ; they are eligible to adjust to lawful permanent resident status after 1 year of continuous presence in the united states .

the ssi program is a means - tested , federally administered income assistance program authorized by title xvi of the social security act .

begun in 1974 , ssi provides monthly cash payments in accordance with uniform , nationwide eligibility requirements to needy aged , blind , and disabled persons .

the aged are defined as persons 65 years old and older .

the blind are individuals with 20 / 200 vision or less with the use of a correcting lens in the person's better eye or those with tunnel vision of 20 degrees or less .

disabled individuals are those unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of a medically determined physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or that has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of at least 12 months .

some states supplement federal ssi payments with state funds .

a sponsor is a person who has signed an affidavit of support on behalf of an alien seeking permanent residence in the united states .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

