the fiscal year 1994 conference report on the department of defense's authorization act contains a provision calling for us to assess the c - 17's original justification and the effect of technical problems and cost increases on the aircraft's ability to achieve original program requirements .

this report responds to that provision and also discusses some of the assumptions underlying the conclusions in the recent c - 17 cost and operational effectiveness analysis .

this report was prepared under the direction of louis j. rodrigues , director of systems development and production issues , who may be reached on ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions .

major contributors are listed in appendix ii .

in the event of a conflict or crisis overseas , the united states must be able to deliver the troops , equipment , and supplies necessary to meet the threat .

the department of defense ( dod ) relies on airlift , sealift , and prepositioned assets to accomplish this mission .

airlift , the vital component that provides rapid mobility to combat forces , delivers army light forces , equipment , initial resupply and bulk ammunition , and nearly all precision munitions and time - critical items .

airlift can also rapidly transport troops and supplies to link up with prepositioned equipment , thus speeding the deployment of heavier units early in a conflict .

airlift is classified as either intertheater ( from one theater of operation to another ) or intratheater ( operations within a theater ) .

intertheater airlift services are provided by the air force's air mobility command ( amc ) , which has a fleet of c - 5 , c - 141 , and kc - 10 aircraft to carry out that mission .

amc also relies on the civil reserve air fleet to supplement its military airlift capacity during contingencies .

the air combat command is responsible for operating c - 130 aircraft , which provide intratheater airlift .

in july 1982 , the air force contracted with mcdonnell douglas corporation to develop and produce the c - 17 , which is an air refuelable , four - engine jet transport , designed to operate in both the intertheater and intratheater roles ( see fig .

1.1 ) .

the c - 17 is currently contracted to carry a maximum payload of 160,000 pounds 2,400 nautical miles unrefueled and perform the full range of airlift missions , including unique military missions such as direct delivery to forward airfields , potentially near the battle zone ; routine operations into small , austere airfields in an intratheater role ; airlift of outsize cargo such as tanks ; and airdrop .

the air force originally planned to acquire 210 c - 17 aircraft .

however , in april 1990 , as a result of dod's major aircraft review , the secretary of defense reduced the program to 120 aircraft .

the c - 17 is still undergoing test and evaluation , with the flight test program scheduled to be completed in june 1995 .

dod plans to have a fleet of 120 c - 17s delivered by 2004 .

in recent years , congress has expressed concern with the c - 17's growing cost and continuing technical problems .

the fiscal year 1993 defense authorization act required dod to conduct a special defense acquisition board review of the program .

in december 1993 , as a result of the review , the secretary of defense announced that the program would be stopped at 40 aircraft unless mcdonnell douglas could demonstrate that program cost , schedule , and performance warranted completing the 120 aircraft program .

as we recently testified , dod has proposed lowering the c - 17's payload / range specifications .

dod has also proposed relaxing the aircraft's contracted short field landing specifications to levels that the c - 17 can probably achieve .

dod plans to assess the contractor's improvements in november 1995 , at the scheduled full - rate production decision milestone .

through fiscal year 1995 , congress has appropriated almost $18 billion for the c - 17 program , including ( 1 ) $5.8 billion for research , development , test , and evaluation ; ( 2 ) $12 billion for procurement ; and ( 3 ) $163 million for military construction .

congress has also authorized the procurement of 32 c - 17 aircraft and advance procurement funds for another 8 aircraft .

as of december 1994 , 17 production c - 17s had been delivered to the air force .

the fiscal year 1994 defense authorization act conference report contains a provision calling for us to assess whether ( 1 ) the original c - 17 justification remains valid and ( 2 ) the c - 17 can still achieve its original program requirements , given cost increases and technical problems .

this report responds to that provision .

it also discusses the nature of the performance problems , the extent of the cost growth , and the results of dod's recent c - 17 cost and operational effectiveness analysis ( coea ) , which was conducted by the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) .

to determine if the c - 17's original justification has changed , we reviewed program documents , including past and current system specifications , operational requirements documents , concepts of operation , and army field manuals and doctrine .

we also used our past work on the major aircraft review , operation desert shield / storm , the mobility requirements study ( mrs ) , and the c - 17 program .

we interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint chiefs of staff , air force headquarters , amc , army headquarters , and the army's training and doctrine command .

we used information from our continuing work to monitor cost , schedule , and performance issues related to the program at the mcdonnell douglas plant , long beach , california , and c - 17 developmental and operational testing by the air force at edwards air force base , california .

we also reviewed a recent defense science board report on the c - 17 and spoke with members of the board's working groups regarding the c - 17's payload / range performance and other aspects of the program .

to determine whether cost - effective alternatives to the full c - 17 program exist , we reviewed the coea .

we also interviewed officials from ida , the office of the secretary of defense , amc , mcdonnell douglas corporation , boeing corporation , and lockheed corporation .

we conducted our review between april 1993 and december 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we obtained dod comments on a draft of this report , which are discussed at the end of each of the following chapters and are presented in their entirety in appendix i along with our detailed evaluation of them .

the air force justified the c - 17 in the early 1980s on the aircraft's planned capabilities to operate routinely in an intratheater shuttle role ; perform direct delivery missions to forward airfields , potentially in hostile areas ; and airlift substantial amounts of outsize cargo such as tanks and helicopters .

the c - 17 was also intended to provide the capability to conduct low - level parachute extractions of the army's heavy equipment and to airdrop troops and equipment .

however , the c - 17's envisioned role has changed , and these capabilities will not be used as originally intended .

dod's 1981 congressionally mandated mobility study addressed the u.s. policy objective of concurrently supporting a major north atlantic treaty organization - warsaw pact conflict and a lesser contingency involving a soviet - backed threat in the persian gulf region .

dod recommended increasing u.s. airlift capacity by about 20 million ton - miles per day ( mtm / d ) to 66 mtm / d — the capacity to lift the required amount of cargo and troops to europe and southwest asia to counter an imminent threat .

the 1981 mobility study highlighted the need for a new airlifter that could land on small , austere airfields ; perform both intertheater and intratheater airlift missions ; and carry outsize cargo — the largest items in the army's inventory .

outsize cargo includes , for example , m1 tanks , patriot battery radar , and apache helicopters .

the air force's 1983 airlift master plan concluded that , in addition to new c - 5b and kc - 10 aircraft , procuring 210 c - 17s was the most cost - effective way to reach the goal of 66 mtm / d while providing necessary military utility .

military utility included the ability to operate from austere airfields in an intratheater airlift role , perform direct delivery missions to forward operating locations , carry all types of combat equipment , and airdrop combat equipment and troops .

figure 2.1 depicts the c - 17's concept of operations .

the c - 17's role has been modified from that envisioned in the 1983 airlift master plan .

the c - 17 will not routinely conduct intratheater shuttle missions , will not routinely perform direct delivery missions , and will rarely land near the battle front .

furthermore , the dissolution of the soviet threat has resulted in a reduced requirement for outsize cargo .

in addition , the number of airfields open to the c - 17 but not the c - 5 is much less than the air force has previously stated .

finally , the c - 17's unique 60,000 pound low - altitude parachute extraction system ( lapes ) capability is not needed , and the aircraft cannot meet original airdrop requirements .

the c - 17's planned intratheater capability was key to its anticipated cost - effectiveness .

intratheater missions are needed when sealifted cargo arrives in the theater or when deployed forces need to be repositioned quickly .

these missions are typically carried out by c - 130s or ground transportation .

because the c - 17 would perform the workload of the c - 130s , the air force's 1983 airlift master plan stated that 198 c - 130s would be retired and not replaced , a key factor in establishing the c - 17's cost - effectiveness .

current air force policy , however , reflects a substantially diminished intratheater role for the c - 17 .

for example , amc's 1993 air mobility master plan does not discuss using the c - 17 in an intratheater role or retiring a significant number of c - 130s .

the air force initially anticipated that the c - 17 would routinely perform intratheater missions during contingencies .

however , as a result of the 1990 major aircraft review , the secretary of defense reduced the number of c - 17s from 210 to 120 , citing the changing strategic environment and diminished soviet threat .

under the current 120-aircraft program , the intertheater airlift flow would be adversely affected if c - 17s were diverted to perform intratheater missions on a routine basis .

amc officials acknowledge that while c - 17s will provide theater commanders additional flexibility when needed , the aircraft will not routinely perform intratheater missions as originally planned .

the c - 17 was also intended to offer an extended direct delivery capability by landing at forward airfields near the battle front .

however , the air force's current c - 17 operational concept states that the aircraft will rarely land near the battle front .

moreover , current army doctrine calls into question the extent to which the c - 17's direct delivery capability will be used .

the army — the primary user of airlift — prefers to deploy to main operating bases rather than directly to final destination airfields .

the air force has reported that the c - 17's capability to land on short airfields would enable it to land at about 6,400 more airfields in the free world ( less the united states ) than the c - 5 .

however , the 6,400 figure is overstated because it did not take into account runway strength and included all types of airfields , ranging from concrete and asphalt to gravel , dirt , and grass , many of which are not suitable for either aircraft .

when wartime landing requirements , including minimum runway strength , are considered , the c - 17's wartime airfield advantage decreases from 6,400 to about 1,400 airfields .

more importantly , dod's 1992 mrs identified only three such airfields that would likely be used by the c - 17 in the major regional contingency scenarios .

two are located in korea and one in saudi arabia .

the 1983 air force decision to buy the c - 17 was based largely on the aircraft's ability to carry outsize cargo .

in the north atlantic treaty organization - warsaw pact scenario examined in dod's 1981 congressionally mandated mobility study , 27 percent of the airlifted equipment was outsize .

the post - cold war scenarios examined in dod's recent mrs , however , require a smaller percentage of outsize cargo than the soviet - based scenarios .

in the most lift - intensive scenario in the 1992 mrs — simultaneous deployments to southwest asia and korea — about 15 percent of the cargo was outsize .

recent deployment experience also reflects a smaller outsize cargo requirement .

during desert shield / storm , only 12 percent of the airlifted cargo was outsize .

an air force and dod analysis shows that fewer than 120 c - 17s would be needed , in conjunction with the existing aircraft fleet , to meet the outsize airlift delivery requirement in the 1992 mrs .

the mrs moderate risk airlift requirement , judged acceptable by dod , was accomplished with a fleet that included 80 c - 17s .

dod did not determine the minimum number of c - 17s that would be needed to meet the moderate risk requirement .

dod is currently preparing a new mrs , scheduled to be completed by the end of january 1995 , that will reflect the recommendations in the department's 1993 bottom - up review .

preliminary amc data indicate that the percentage of outsize cargo will not change significantly from the 15 percent assumed in the 1992 mrs .

lapes is a means of extracting equipment while an airlifter flies at low levels .

at present , the c - 130 is the only aircraft capable of lapes operations , and it is limited to extracting 42,000 pounds of equipment .

in 1981 , the army identified an “urgent need” to develop a lapes capability up to 60,000 pounds .

according to army officials , this capability was needed to extract armored artillery pieces , ammunition , and towing vehicles from the same lapes platform , which would minimize dispersion over the drop zone .

the c - 17 was intended to provide this unique capability .

in march 1994 , the army acknowledged that “lapes has been an expensive , unused , untrained capability and is potentially of limited battlefield use.” the army stated that the current c - 130 42,000-pound lapes capability “appears to more than adequately address foreseeable army requirements.” the army intends neither to maintain the material systems and rigging required for the 60,000-pound lapes platform nor to conduct c - 17 lapes training .

thus , the c - 17 will not be used for this mission .

however , amc officials noted that testing of a 42,000-pound c - 17 lapes capability is currently underway .

the ability to airdrop troops and equipment is one of dod's most critical requirements .

currently , only the c - 141 and c - 130 aircraft are capable of routinely performing airdrop missions .

the joint chiefs of staff recently revalidated the requirement for a strategic airdrop of a brigade's worth of troops and equipment .

because the c - 130 cannot fly the long distances required for this mission and the c - 141 fleet is being retired , the c - 17 is expected to fulfill this requirement .

however , the c - 17 has not been able to meet initial requirements because of airflow problems caused by its design .

as a result , the army is lowering its airdrop requirements .

the contracted specifications call for the c - 17 to airdrop 102 combat - equipped paratroopers using static line deployed parachutes , preceded by at least 8 , 500-pound equipment bundles , within 55 seconds .

the bundles are to be dropped out of the cargo ramp door while the paratroopers jump from the two troop doors on the aircraft's sides .

the army considers combination drops critical to early entry lethality and survivability on the battlefield .

however , testing has shown that the c - 17 has severe airflow problems when the side troop doors and the rear cargo door and ramp are open .

in march 1994 , the army notified amc that , due to the c - 17's airflow problems , it had revised its airdrop requirement in terms of “desired” and “required” capabilities .

the army's new desired objective for the combination airdrop is to drop 102 paratroopers and 8 bundles in 70 seconds .

the required capability is to drop 102 paratroopers and 2 bundles in 55 seconds .

however , amc officials told us that this is an unrealistic requirement because 102 paratroopers cannot exit the c - 17 within this time frame .

accordingly , amc plans to reduce the c - 17 airdrop requirement .

another specification requires airdropping 40 containerized delivery system bundles , weighing 2,350 pounds each .

however , the c - 17 has been restricted to dropping only 30 bundles because of safety concerns .

the c - 17 program office is making design changes to eliminate this safety hazard and enable the c - 17 to drop 40 bundles .

the c - 17's anticipated role has changed and the aircraft will not be used as originally envisioned .

the c - 17 was justified on the basis of its unique capability to routinely deliver the full range of army combat equipment to locations inaccessible to other strategic airlifters .

the c - 17 is not likely to conduct routine intratheater and direct delivery missions as planned , and it is no longer expected to operate into forward airfields near the battle front .

furthermore , the number of airfields in the free world open to the c - 17 , but not the c - 5 , is significantly less than the air force claimed in justifying the c - 17 .

while the c - 17 is capable of carrying outsize cargo , a dod analysis indicates that a fleet of 120 c - 17s may not be necessary to fulfill outsize delivery requirements .

finally , one of the aircraft's unique capabilities — using lapes to deliver a 60,000-pound platform — will not be used , and its airdrop capability does not meet the army's original requirements .

the aircraft is likely to operate primarily in a routine intertheater airlift role .

dod's position in commenting on a draft of this report is that ( 1 ) the role of the c - 17 has not changed , ( 2 ) the c - 17 can and will perform routine direct delivery and intratheater shuttle missions , and ( 3 ) the airfield accessibility advantage of the c - 17 over the c - 5 is significant .

a comparison of the c - 17's envisioned role as discussed in the 1986 c - 17 system operational concept , the 1983 airlift master plan , the 1993 c - 17 employment concept of operations , and the 1993 air mobility master plan shows that the role of the c - 17 has clearly changed .

for example , the air force no longer plans to use the c - 17 to routinely conduct intratheater shuttle missions .

further , while direct delivery is still a part of the concept for the c - 17 , the c - 17's operational concept has changed from one that emphasized direct delivery to forward airfields near the battle front to one that emphasizes more standard airlift operations at or near a main operating base .

the army is changing its doctrine to incorporate the use of direct delivery , but these doctrinal changes do not call for routine direct delivery to forward airfields near the battle front .

although the c - 17 can land on more airfields than the c - 5 , the c - 17's airfield advantage is significantly less than the 6,400 airfields originally claimed , and the 1992 mrs identified only three small austere airfields that would likely be used by the c - 17 in major regional contingencies .

dod's coea showed that the c - 17 is the preferred military airlifter because , when considering delivery of outsize cargo , the c - 17 retains its throughput ability better than the c - 5 if ( 1 ) airfield constraints are encountered and ( 2 ) the c - 17's planned utilization rate ( higher than the c - 5's experienced rate ) is achieved .

however , the coea also showed that alternative airlift fleets , such as a combination of 40 c - 17s and 64 modified commercial freighters , can meet airlift requirements at a significantly lower cost if alternative — in our opinion , more reasonable — assumptions are made .

in addition , c - 17 program costs have continued to increase , and potential savings from adopting an alternative to the 120-aircraft fleet could approach $4 billion more than the $10.7 billion ( in constant fiscal year 1993 dollars ) we identified in our earlier report .

dod's coea examined alternatives to the full c - 17 program , including ( 1 ) restarting the c - 5 line , ( 2 ) extending the service life of the c - 141 , and ( 3 ) procuring new commercial freighter aircraft .

the capability of boeing 747 freighters was assessed to determine how commercial aircraft would contribute to airlift missions .

the coea's conclusion was that an airlift fleet with 120 c - 17s was the preferred choice to meet the requirements set forth in the 1992 mrs , despite the fact that it was more expensive than a fleet comprised of c - 17s and modified commercial freighters .

this conclusion was based on three major assumptions: airfield availability for airlift use would be extremely constrained .

the c - 17 would achieve a 15.2-hour per day utilization rate while commercial freighters would achieve only a 12.5-hour per day rate .

the c - 17 would be used routinely in place of the c - 130 to accomplish intratheater delivery , so c - 130 operating and support costs should be added to non - c - 17 alternatives .

our review indicated that alternative assumptions pertaining to airfield availability , utilization rates , and intratheater capability are more realistic .

adjusting for these assumptions would result in the c - 17 fleet being less capable and a mixed c - 17 / commercial fleet being more capable and more cost - effective than the coea's conclusions indicate .

the coea was based on the threat scenario portrayed in the 1992 mrs , which postulated that an aggressive enemy was moving directly into saudi arabia .

based on this threat , several airfield assumptions were examined .

the coea showed that the c - 17 had a better delivery capability for outsize cargo than the mixed c - 17 / commercial aircraft fleet when airfield availability was extremely limited .

under the assumption that airlift deliveries would be equivalent to the first 45 days of desert shield , when only one major airlift airfield would be available , the c - 17 fleet could meet the mrs delivery requirement , but the mixed fleet could not .

however , under the airfield assumptions used in the mrs southwest asia scenario , in which more airlift airfields were assumed to be available , the coea showed that the mixed fleet of 40 c - 17s and 64 747s could deliver the required amount of cargo .

this mixed fleet would cost about $6 billion less than the fleet of 120 c - 17s .

during the first 45 days of desert shield , airfield availability was limited to only one major airlift base , due primarily to the saudi arabian government's reluctance to allow u.s. access to multiple airfields and the u.s. army's preference for deploying to only major operating bases .

in desert shield / storm , iraqi troops became entrenched shortly after the invasion of kuwait and did not invade saudi arabia .

we believe that , given the threat scenario on which the coea was based , the mrs assumption that the saudi government would open additional airlift airfields is more realistic than the airfield assumption based on early desert shield experience .

under the mrs airfield assumption , the mixed c - 17 / commercial fleet meets the airlift requirement .

the coea indicated that the c - 17 would perform better than mixed fleets if a 15.2-hour per day utilization rate were assumed for the c - 17 .

an aircraft's utilization rate is the planned average daily flying hours per aircraft for the entire fleet and is based on numerous elements , such as mission capable rate , number of aircrews per aircraft , and availability of spares .

the coea showed that , based on a 15.2-hour utilization rate for the c - 17 and a 12.5 rate for the 747 , both alternatives would meet the stated airlift requirement .

the fleet of 120 c - 17s could deliver more outsize cargo than the mixed fleet but would cost $6 billion more .

if the 747's utilization rate is increased to 15.2 , a rate amc officials acknowledge is feasible , the results show a significant increase in the mixed fleet's ability to deliver outsize and oversize cargo .

the c - 17's 15.2-hour utilization rate is undemonstrated .

to sustain this rate , the c - 17 must demonstrate a mission capable rate of 90 percent , and the air force must sufficiently fund c - 17 spares and aircrews .

the level of war reserve spares for airlift aircraft has historically been less than required to sustain projected wartime utilization rates .

air force officials told us they believe that the spares level for the c - 17 will be fully funded , in part , because spares funding has recently been made a higher priority .

the air force also plans to maintain a higher aircrew to aircraft ratio for the c - 17 than for other strategic airlifters .

the relatively higher c - 17 aircrew ratio contributes to its ability to maintain a higher utilization rate .

because the c - 17 was designed to deliver cargo to small , forward airfields typically used by the c - 130 , the coea assumed that the alternative with only 40 c - 17s would need 80 additional c - 130s to provide about the same intratheater movement capability as the fleet of 120 c - 17s .

thus , the life - cycle cost of the mixed fleet alternative was increased by $4.7 billion over 25 years ( in constant fiscal year 1993 dollars ) .

however , as discussed in chapter 2 , the c - 17's planned intratheater role has been largely limited and the air force does not plan to replace c - 130s with c - 17s for intratheater missions .

therefore , it was inappropriate to assume the mixed fleet alternative should include this added $4.7 billion .

if this cost is subtracted from the mixed fleet , the cost of a fleet of 120 c - 17s increases from about $6 billion to about $10.7 billion more than the mixed fleet alternative .

in its may 1994 paper , “department of defense airlift acquisition strategy,” dod included average cost figures that indicate that c - 17 program cost estimates continue to increase .

in december 1992 , total program costs were estimated to be $39.5 billion ( in then - year dollars ) at a maximum rate of 16 aircraft per year .

in january 1994 , the c - 17 program director estimated that total program costs would increase to $43 billion because of a reduced procurement rate of 12 aircraft per year and increased estimates for production and support costs .

dod's paper indicated that , at a maximum production rate of 12 aircraft per year , total program costs would be $45.4 billion .

this increase is attributable to increased production and support costs and the cost of a recently approved business settlement between dod and mcdonnell douglas .

if the maximum procurement rate were reduced to eight aircraft per year , dod's paper estimated that total program costs would increase another $2.6 billion , to about $48 billion .

in recent years , due to ongoing development and production problems , congress has reduced funding to slow the c - 17's production rate to reduce the level of concurrency in the program .

while the air force's desired procurement rate may eventually be achieved , the program has been significantly more stretched out than originally planned .

the c - 17 procurement cost estimates reported in dod's paper are significantly higher than those in the c - 17 coea .

dod's paper indicates that estimated procurement costs have increased by $2.8 billion to $4 billion ( in constant fiscal year 1993 dollars ) since the c - 17 coea .

consequently , the potential savings from adopting an alternative to the 120-aircraft fleet would be significantly greater than the $10.7 billion we previously reported .

while estimating the exact amount of savings would be very difficult because of the many variables involved , we believe the increase in savings could approach $4 billion .

however , this estimate does not take into account changes that may have occurred in the estimated costs of modified commercial aircraft .

determining whether a mixed fleet is a viable alternative to a 120-aircraft c - 17 program depends on the fleet's capability to fulfill certain unique military requirements such as direct delivery to forward airfields , routine operations into small , austere airfields in an intratheater role , airlift of outsize cargo , and airdrop .

the coea was not intended to address this issue in detail .

dod has several studies underway , scheduled to be completed before the november 1995 defense acquisition board decision on c - 17 full - rate production , that will assess the capability of various fleet mixes and identify the minimum number of c - 17s needed to fulfill unique military airlift requirements .

as currently planned , nondevelopmental airlift aircraft source selection and quantity will depend on the c - 17 full - rate production decision .

the defense acquisition board will consider several factors in deciding whether to continue the c - 17 program , including c - 17 flight test and reliability results , contractor performance , and the findings of the air force's airlift fleet mix study .

serious concerns about the c - 17's cost - effectiveness have prompted congress to direct dod to explore alternatives to the full c - 17 program .

the coea identified less costly alternatives that could meet airlift requirements and save billions of dollars .

in addition , the c - 17's program cost continues to increase .

therefore , the savings associated with a mixed fleet of c - 17s and commercial freighters could be significantly greater than the coea reported .

in light of changes in the c - 17's intended role , its less than anticipated performance , the results of dod's coea , and continued program cost growth , we continue to believe that congress should not support the c - 17 program beyond the minimum number needed to fulfill unique military requirements .

that number has not yet been determined but is the subject of several ongoing studies .

in commenting on a draft of our report , dod stated that ( 1 ) a direct invasion of saudi arabia would still likely result in extremely constrained theater airfield availability in contrast to that reflected in the 1992 mrs , ( 2 ) two c - 17s flew missions to kuwait and demonstrated higher utilization rates than required , and ( 3 ) its coea estimate of potential savings associated with the mixed fleet alternatives was not understated .

while the precise extent of airfield availability in any future contingency is unknown , the mrs threat suggests that more airfields will be available than was the case during desert shield , when allied forces had the advantage of a 5-month deployment period .

we believe that using the desert shield - type airfield situation juxtaposed against an mrs threat gives the c - 17 an inappropriate advantage over alternative airlifters .

in our opinion , a more valid basis on which to compare the c - 17 to alternative airlift fleets is the coea's examination of the mrs airfield availability assumption .

the recent missions to kuwait are not an adequate basis for establishing the appropriate sustainable utilization rate because these missions were of extremely limited duration .

dod has not yet determined how to extrapolate an inherent utilization rate from the results of the planned july 1995 reliability , maintainability , and availability evaluation .

our position remains that the projected c - 17 utilization rate of 15.2 is , as yet , undemonstrated and that comparing this rate to a 12.5-hour utilization rate for commercial airlifters that have demonstrated higher utilization rates inappropriately favored the c - 17 in the coea .

dod's position that the c - 17's intratheater role is unchanged from that depicted in the 1983 airlift master plan , despite an almost 50-percent reduction in the number of aircraft , is untenable .

dod's position also contradicts the comments of office of the secretary of defense and amc officials on our july 1994 report on the coea , as well as the comments of amc officials on this report .

these officials acknowledged that the c - 17's intratheater shuttle role has been substantially diminished in the wake of the reduction from 210 to 120 aircraft .

moreover , they concurred with our finding that the coea should not have assumed a cost saving to the c - 17 to account for this intratheater role .

