as part of an earlier review of 37 bases closed by the first two base realignment and closure rounds , we reported in late 1994 on expected revenues from land sales , resources requested from the federal government , and issues delaying reuse planning .

as requested in your letter of march 21 , 1995 , we collected more recent information on reuse planning and implementation at the 37 bases .

specifically , we are providing updated summaries on the planned disposal and reuse of properties , successful conversions , problems that delay planning and implementation , and assistance provided to communities .

we are also including a profile of each of the 37 installations in appendix iii .

among the federal statutes that affect the reuse process , four are of particular importance: ( 1 ) the base realignment and closure acts of 1988 and 1990 , ( 2 ) the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , and ( 3 ) the 1987 stewart b. mckinney homeless assistance act ( mckinney act ) .

amendments to these acts enacted within the past year are leading to ongoing changes in reuse planning and implementation at closing bases .

the defense authorization amendments and base closure and realignment act and the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 — collectively referred to as the base realignment and closure ( brac ) acts — are the two statutes that authorize the secretary of defense to close military bases and dispose of property .

title xxix of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1994 amended the brac acts to enable local redevelopment authorities to receive government property at no initial cost if the property is used for economic development .

the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 requires disposal agencies to provide dod and other federal agencies an opportunity to request property to satisfy a programmed requirement .

property may be conveyed at no cost under various public benefit discount programs , sold for not less than the appraised fair market value through negotiated sale to state governments or their instrumentalities , or sold at a competitive public sale .

surplus property can be made available to providers of services to the homeless as provided for by the mckinney act .

at the time of our 1994 report , the mckinney act assigned such providers higher priority than local communities when conflicts over reuse planning for surplus property at military bases occurred .

however , the base closure community redevelopment and homeless assistance act of 1994 amended the brac acts and the mckinney act to incorporate homeless assistance requests into the community reuse planning process and to eliminate the higher priority given to requests for property at bases undergoing realignment and closure .

the information contained in this report reflects the june 1995 status of property disposal plans at 37 of the 120 installations closed by the 1988 and 1991 closure commissions ( see fig .

1 ) .

about three fifths of the property at the 37 closing military bases will be retained by the federal government because it is contaminated with unexploded ordnance , has been retained by decisions made by the brac commissions or by legislation , or is needed by federal agencies .

the remaining two fifths of the property is available for conversion to community reuse .

communities' plans for this property involve a variety of public benefit and economic development uses .

little property is planned for negotiated sale to state and local jurisdictions or for public sale , as shown in figure 2 .

 ( see app .

i for a summary of property disposal plans. ) .

public benefit conveyances ( 37,268 acres ) economic development conveyances ( 23,633 acres ) 6% undetermined ( 12,110 acres ) 4% public sale ( 6,849 acres ) mandatory retention by federal agencies ( 22,154 acres ) while the federal government plans to retain about 58 percent of the property at closing bases , only 17 percent has been requested to satisfy federal agency needs .

about 29 percent is contaminated with unexploded ordnance and will be retained by the federal government because the cost of cleanup and environmental damage that would be caused by cleanup are excessive .

another 12 percent of the property has been either retained per either brac decisions or legislation .

an example of property retained per a brac decision would be the 100-acre parcel at fort benjamin harrison , indiana , for the defense finance and accounting service facility .

an example of property retained by legislation would be the 1,480-acre presidio of san francisco , california , which was transferred to the national park service .

of the 58 percent , the department of interior's fish and wildlife service and bureau of land management are to receive about 42 percent of the property .

much of the property is contaminated with unexploded ordnance .

dod will retain about 13 percent to support reserve , national guard , defense finance and accounting service facilities , and other active duty missions .

other federal agencies will receive about 3 percent of the property for such uses as federal prisons and national parks .

 ( see app .

ii for a summary of federal uses. ) .

communities also are planning to use about 20 percent of the base property for various public benefits .

the largest public benefit use is for commercial airport conversions , which will total about 14 percent under current plans .

about 4 percent is to go to park and recreation use , the second largest public benefit use .

plans call for transferring another 2 percent of the property to such public benefit uses as education , homeless assistance , and state prisons .

communities are planning to acquire about 12 percent of the property under economic development conveyances , and dod plans to sell about 4 percent of the property either through negotiated sales to state and local jurisdictions or through direct sales to the public .

communities have not determined how the remaining 6 percent of the property should be incorporated into their reuse plans .

land sales for all brac closures totaled $138.8 million as of june 1995 .

the sale of 641 acres of developed land at norton air force base , california , to the local redevelopment authority for $52 million under an economic development conveyance is the largest sale to date .

the 1989 sale of the kapalama military reservation , hawaii , to the state of hawaii for $38.5 million is the next largest sale .

when we last reported , land sales totaled $69.4 million .

the largest increase in sales has been to local reuse authorities under the new economic development conveyance authority , which allows for no - cash downpayment terms and up to 15 years to pay .

overall , progress is being made in converting properties at the closing bases we reviewed to civilian use .

communities are creating new airport facilities , jobs , education and job training centers , and wildlife habitats .

 ( see app .

iii for a more detailed discussion of each installation's conversion progress. ) .

converting military airfields to civilian airports is a goal at most communities that have bases with closing airfields .

for example , the city of austin , texas , is converting bergstrom air force base's airfield and facilities into a new municipal airport .

the federal aviation administration has provided over $110 million toward the conversion .

buildings are being demolished to build an additional runway , while design work is underway on the conversion , which is scheduled for completion in 1998 .

dod officials believe that one meaningful measure of base conversion success is in the number of jobs created .

the 37 bases will have lost 54,217 civilian jobs when they are all closed .

to date , 25 of the bases have closed .

at these 25 bases , 29,229 jobs were lost .

so far , 8,340 jobs have been created .

 ( see app .

iv for a summary of each community's success at creating jobs. ) .

community efforts to create jobs have been a key component of economic recovery strategies in a number of locations .

successful efforts in a few communities have led to the creation of more jobs than were lost due to closures .

at england air force base , louisiana , the community has attracted 16 tenants that have created over 700 jobs replacing the nearly 700 civilian jobs lost as a result of the base's closure .

the largest tenant has hired 65 employees to refurbish jet aircraft .

another large tenant has hired 58 people to operate a truck driving school .

 ( see p.44. ) .

at chase naval air station , texas , newly constructed state prison facilities and several small manufacturers have created over 1,500 jobs , a net increase of 600 jobs over the level of civilian employment by the navy .

 ( see p .

38. ) .

at pease air force base , new hampshire , a commercial airport , an aircraft maintenance complex , a government agency , and a biotechnology firm are among the 41 tenants that have created over 1,000 jobs at the base , over twice the 400 civilian jobs lost .

 ( see p .

86. ) .

several communities have begun developing or planning centers for higher education and job training .

in some instances , these efforts have involved pooled efforts by local schools and state institutions and agencies .

at lowry air force base , colorado , a consortium of colorado colleges and the denver public school system are providing educational and job training opportunities .

currently , 80 classes with a total of 800 students are in session at the former base .

 ( see p .

73. ) .

at fort ord , california , classes at the new california state university , monterey bay , are scheduled to begin in the fall of 1995 .

about 700 graduate and undergraduate students are expected to enroll in the university's fall class .

 ( see p .

51. ) .

the u.s .

fish and wildlife service plans to set aside land at several bases for preservation as natural wildlife habitats .

in some locations , the preservation of wildlife habitats reduces the level of environmental cleanup , particularly where unexploded ordnance is involved .

at jefferson proving ground , indiana , the army plans to transfer about 47,500 acres to the fish and wildlife service for a wildlife refuge , which could potentially save the army billions of dollars in costs otherwise needed to remove unexploded ordnance .

 ( see p .

63. ) .

at woodbridge army research facility , virginia , all 580 acres are to be transferred to the service for inclusion in the mason neck wildlife refuge .

service plans for the property envision showcasing habitat and wildlife not routinely seen so close to a metropolitan area and providing environmental education opportunities .

 ( see p .

109. ) .

early experiences indicate that a new form of conveyance authority called an economic development conveyance can be mutually beneficial to both the federal government and local communities .

this new authority calls for ( 1 ) dod to convey property to a local redevelopment authority for the purpose of creating jobs when it is not practicable to obtain fair market value at the time of the transfer and ( 2 ) dod and the local authorities to negotiate the terms and conditions of the conveyances .

in qualifying rural areas , conveyances are at no cost to the communities .

this new authority benefits local redevelopment authorities by allowing them to take possession of properties with no initial payment so that they can implement their job creation and economic development plans .

the federal government benefits by eliminating the costs of maintaining and protecting idle properties and by generating revenues to help pay for base realignment and closure costs .

several communities are planning to use this new conveyance mechanism to obtain property for economic development .

two economic development conveyance agreements — one at norton air force base , california , and another at sacramento army depot , california — have been successfully negotiated .

the local redevelopment authority and the air force have agreed that for a 641-acre parcel at the norton air force base , the local reuse authority will pay the government 40 percent of gross lease revenues and 100 percent of gross land sales revenues up to a total of $52 million , the estimated fair market value of the property .

if the $52 million has not been paid in full at the end of 15 years , the local redevelopment authority is obligated to pay the air force the balance .

the local redevelopment authority is negotiating or has entered into 7 leases that it projects will result in about 2,250 new jobs by next year .

 ( see p .

83. ) .

at the sacramento army depot , the city of sacramento has acquired 371 acres of the 487-acre depot from the army .

under the terms of the economic development conveyance agreement , the army will be paid $7.2 million either at the end of 10 years or when the property is sold by the city , whichever is sooner .

the city has negotiated a lease with packard bell that creates a projected 2,500 to 3,000 jobs that nearly offset the 3,200 lost from the depot's closure .

 ( see p .

100. ) .

successful conversion of military bases to civilian uses involves various parties reaching a consensus on realistic reuse plans .

but , before the plans can be implemented , necessary environmental cleanup actions must have been taken by dod .

in numerous communities , the failure to reach a consensus on reuse issues has caused delays in the development of acceptable reuse plans .

at george air force base , california , reuse was delayed about 2 years while lawsuits were settled between the city of adelanto and the victor valley economic development authority over which jurisdiction should have the reuse authority .

 ( see p .

58. ) .

at tustin marine corps air station , california , homeless assistance groups are requesting about 400 family housing units and other buildings .

the local reuse authority believes that 100 family housing units and some single - residence , multiple - unit buildings would provide a balanced living environment and that the request for additional facilities conflicts with other aspects of its reuse plan .

at its request , the local reuse authority was granted a delay in dod's disposal process to give it more time to negotiate with the homeless assistance groups .

negotiations continue between the two groups to reach a consensus .

 ( see p .

102. ) .

at puget sound naval station ( sand point ) , washington , the city of seattle and the muckleshoot indian tribe are promoting competing reuse plans .

the city plans to use the property for housing , parks and recreation , and educational activities .

the tribe plans to use the property for economic development and educational activities .

as long as 2 years ago , the navy asked both parties to work on a joint reuse plan .

however , no consensus on reuse has been reached by the two parties .

dod's disposal decisions on the property are pending .

 ( see p .

93. ) .

early efforts likewise indicate that even after a consensus is achieved , conversions are unlikely to prove successful if the resulting plans incorporate unrealistic reuse expectations .

some base conversions involve reuse expectations that may be unrealistic given their rural or relatively unpopulated geographic locations .

early experiences suggest that bases with airfields in remote locations pursuing reuse plans involving expanded airport operations are most prone to these types of expectations .

reuse plans for the airfields at wurtsmith air force base , michigan , eaker air force base , arkansas , and loring air force base , maine , have been largely unsuccessful because the new tenants attracted are not capable of generating enough revenue to support the costs of airport operations .

environmental cleanup requirements delay the implementation of reuse plans .

in february 1995 , we reported that the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 prohibits transferring property to nonfederal ownership until all necessary environmental cleanup actions are taken .

however , much of the property is in the early stages of cleanup .

cleanup progress has been limited because the study and evaluation process is lengthy and complex and , with existing technology , take time .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1994 allowed long - term leases of property prior to cleanup but few had been signed as of january 1995 .

federal agencies have provided about $368 million to the 37 selected brac 1988 and 1991 communities to assist with the conversion of military bases to civilian reuse .

agencies have awarded grants for such purposes as reuse planning , airport planning , and job training , as well as for infrastructure improvements and community economic development .

 ( see app .

v for a summary of the federal assistance provided to each community. ) .

the federal aviation administration has awarded the most assistance , providing $151 million to assist with converting military airfields to civilian use .

dod's office of economic adjustment has awarded $85 million to help communities plan the reuse of closed brac 1988 and 1991 bases .

the department of commerce's economic development administration has awarded $85 million to assist communities with infrastructure improvements , building demolition , and revolving loan funds .

the department of labor has awarded $46 million to help communities retrain workers adversely affected by closures .

we updated information that we had obtained from 37 installations closed by the 1988 and 1991 base closure commissions .

these 37 bases contain 190,000 of the 250,000 acres designated for closure by the 1988 and 1991 rounds , or about 76 percent of the total .

to gather the most recent reuse information and to identify any changes since our earlier report , we interviewed base transition coordinators , community representatives , and dod officials .

we obtained up - to - date federal assistance information from the federal aviation administration , the economic development administration , the department of labor , and the office of economic adjustment to determine the amount and type of assistance the federal government provided to the brac 1988 and 1991 base closure communities .

for each base , the profiles provide ( 1 ) a description of size and location ; ( 2 ) important milestone dates ; ( 3 ) a reuse plan summary and a golf course reuse plan , which discusses the status of reuse implementation ; ( 4 ) jobs lost and created ; ( 5 ) federal assistance ; and ( 6 ) environmental cleanup status .

the information collected represents the status of reuse planning and actions as of june 1995 .

we did not obtain written agency comments .

however , we discussed the report's contents with dod officials , and their comments have been incorporated where appropriate .

our review was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between october 1994 and june 1995 .

unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the directors of the defense logistics agency and the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties .

we will also make copies available to others upon request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi .

davisville naval construction battalion center long beach naval station / naval hospital myrtle beach air force base philadelphia naval station / naval hospital / naval shipyard puget sound naval station ( sand point ) .

chanute air force base , ill. 8 acres fort benjamin harrison , ind .

100 acres ( brac recommendation ) fort ord , calif. lexington army depot , ky. loring air force base , maine lowry air force base , colo. 108 acres , also houses air reserve personnel center ( brac recommendation ) norton air force base , calif. 34 acres fort wingate , n. mex .

fort ord , calif. 740 acres of housing and support buildings to support other nearby military bases ( brac recommendation ) fort sheridan , ill. 15 acres containing army cemetery ( brac recommendation ) davisville naval construction battalion center , r.i. 380 acres ( camp fogarty ) fort benjamin harrison , ind .

144 acres fort devens , mass .

5,177 acres ( brac recommendation ) fort ord , calif. fort sheridan , ill. 104 acres ( brac recommendation ) richards - gebaur air reserve station , mo .

rickenbacker air guard base , ohio sacramento army depot , calif. 61 acres ( brac recommendation ) tustin marine corps air station , calif. 10 acres ( also for air national guard and coast guard ) williams air force base , ariz. fort sheridan , ill. long beach naval station , calif. 592 acres to shipyard ( brac recommendation ) philadelphia naval shipyard , pa. 550 acres to be preserved by navy for possible use in future ( brac recommendation ) richards - gebaur air reserve station , mo .

warminster naval air warfare center , pa. sacramento army depot , calif. 19 acres ( brac recommendation ) lowry air force base , colo. 7 acres ( brac recommendation ) moffett naval air station , calif. 130 acres of housing to support nearby military base ( brac recommendation ) norton air force base , calif. 78 acres of housing to support nearby military base ( brac recommendation ) bergstrom air force base , tex .

330 acres ( brac recommendation ) grissom air force base , ind .

1,398 acres ( brac recommendation ) pease air force base , n.h. 230 acres ( brac recommendation ) rickenbacker air guard base , ohio 203 acres ( brac recommendation ) bureau of land management fort ord , calif. 15,009 acres , ( including 8,009 acres of unexploded ordnance ) fort wingate , n.mex .

8,812 acres returned to public domain ( legislative requirement ) fort devens , mass .

jefferson proving ground , ind .

47,500 acres for wildlife refuge ( contains unexploded ordnance ) loring air force base , maine 6,000 acres for wildlife refuge pease air force base , n.h. 1,095 acres for wildlife puget sound naval station ( sand point ) , wash. woodbridge army research facility , va. 580 acres for wildlife refuge ( legislative requirement ) wurtsmith air force base , mich. presidio of san francisco , calif. 1,480 acres ( legislative requirement ) philadelphia naval station , pa. puget sound naval station , ( sand point ) , wash. williams air force base , ariz. department of agriculture ( forest service ) department of justice ( bureau of prisons ) castle air force base , calif. 659 acres for prison fort devens , mass .

george air force base , calif. department of health and human services ( public health service ) davisville naval construction battalion center , r.i. department of labor ( employment and training administration ) fort devens , mass .

long beach naval station , calif. department of transportation ( federal aviation administration ) moffett naval air station , calif. 1,440 acres ( brac recommendation ) .

base description: the laboratory is located on 37 acres in watertown on the charles river , west of boston .

its mission has been research and development of materials and manufacturing technology testing .

closure of this industrial facility , used by the army since 1816 , avoids major renovation costs .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the community reuse plan calls for 30 acres to be developed for industrial , commercial , and residential use .

the remaining 7 acres , comprising the commander's mansion and grounds , are to be a public benefit conveyance through the national park service for a park and historic monument .

the mixed - use plan emphasizes preserving the integrity of historic buildings and landscapes and providing greater public access to the riverfront .

a homeless provider expressed interest in some base property , but no application was filed .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the local reuse authority will likely request that the 30 acres planned for development be conveyed through an economic development transfer .

local officials believe an economic development transfer will give the local authority greater assurance that the property is developed in accordance with the reuse plan than if the army sells the property directly to a private developer .

there is some question whether the laboratory meets one of the criteria for such a conveyance — adverse economic impact of the closure on the region — since it is small and located in a large metropolitan area .

however , the plan does emphasize the job - creation criterion for economic development transfers by calling for the creation of 1,500 new jobs .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 540 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the economic development administration grant to the city of watertown was to provide technical assistance to determine the most practical reuse for the facilities and to do a market feasibility study .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: radionuclides , heavy metals , petroleum , oil , solvents , pesticides , and polychlorinated biphenyls .

estimated cleanup cost: $110 million .

cleanup at the facility is moving ahead gradually , with the radiological cleanup mostly complete .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 1997 .

base description: bergstrom is located on 3,216 acres on the southeast outskirts of austin .

the city bought the land for the government in 1941 , retaining an equitable interest .

following its activation in 1942 , bergstrom was the home of troop carrier units .

from 1966 to 1992 , it was under the tactical air command .

base closure legislation specified that the base would be turned over to the city .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: september 1992 .

date of base closure: september 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the city of austin passed a referendum in may 1993 to support establishment of a new municipal airport , and it has decided that bergstrom will be used for that purpose .

approximately 2,562 acres will revert back to the city .

this property , along with an additional 324 acres conveyed to the city upon closure , will be used for the new airport .

the air force will keep 330 acres as a cantonment area for the reserves .

the conveyance to the city will include the golf course and other property that can be leased to help support airport operations .

the city plans to move 60 to 70 of the base's 719 housing units downtown where they are to be sold to low - income home buyers .

the city plans to demolish most of the rest of the units to build a new runway .

golf course: the golf course is being conveyed to the city to help support airport operations .

implementation status: the transfer of property to the city is being delayed until the base cleanup is complete .

meanwhile , dod has entered into a long - term $1 lease with the city for the base .

while dod is not getting revenue from the lease , it is saving on operation and maintenance funds since the city has assumed responsibility for base maintenance , which , according to the site manager , averages about $9 million a year .

the target date for opening the airport is november 1998 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 942 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 0 .

the federal aviation administration grants are for demolition of existing structures , supplemental environmental studies , and construction of new airport facilities .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: domestic solid wastes , pesticides , paints , paint containers , incineration wastes , construction debris , petroleum / oil / lubricants , low - level radioactive waste , synthetic oils , oil / water separator wastes , silver , soaps , degreasers , air filters , battery acids , asphalt , and lead .

estimated cleanup cost: $53.2 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 1999 .

base description: cameron station consists of 165 acres of administrative and warehouse space as well as park land in alexandria .

the park land includes a 6-acre lake .

the government first purchased the land at the start of world war ii for use as a general depot .

it is a subinstallation of fort myer .

cameron station is one of the few bases on the closure list that dod considers to have high market value , but asbestos removal , demolition , and infrastructure costs affect the projected revenues .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for about 64 acres , including the lake and its perimeter , to be a public benefit transfer through the department of interior to the city for park and recreation and easements .

two homeless assistance providers are to receive about 8 acres of the property for an 80-bed shelter and a food redistribution center .

the remaining 93 acres are to be sold to a private developer who will likely demolish the buildings and construct residential , commercial , and retail facilities .

cameron station has no housing units .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the 93 acres for development were advertised for bids in january 1995 , and the winning bid of $33.2 million was awarded in may 1995 .

property transfer is scheduled for may 1996 if the environmental clearances have been completed by that time .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 4,355 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: volatile organic compounds , heavy metals , petroleum products , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , and herbicides .

estimated cleanup cost: $7 million .

cleaning up groundwater contamination could take 30 years , but base officials anticipate that the property can be sold once remediation measures are in place .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1995 .

base description: castle is located on 2,777 acres in the agricultural san joaquin valley , 6 miles from the city of merced and 100 miles southeast of sacramento .

first activated in december 1941 to provide flight training , its primary mission since the 1950s has been b - 52 and kc135 crew training .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: october 1994 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the federal bureau of prisons will receive 659 acres for prison construction .

the bureau will preserve a portion of this acreage , containing seasonal wetlands and endangered species , as a prison buffer .

the plan calls for 1,581 acres to be an airport public benefit transfer .

the local reuse authority hopes that attracting aviation - related businesses will be a stimulus to economic development for the area .

the federal aviation administration will get about 1 acre of property in conjunction with the airport .

additionally , the plan calls for a public benefit transfer of 132 acres for public school and community college programs , 18 acres for parks and recreation , and 13 for health facilities .

in october 1994 , the department of health and human services approved homeless assistance providers' applications for about 8 acres of property , including 8 family housing units .

the plan calls for the remaining 365 acres to be sold based on the fair market value .

this acreage includes 188 acres of residential areas , which may be used for a senior citizens cooperative and starter homes for first - time home buyers .

golf course: none .

implementation status: implementation of reuse plans , including the design and construction of the federal prison , has been delayed due to difficulties related to air quality conformity , environmental cleanup , infrastructure upgrading , and leasing .

the property disposition plans were approved in january 1995 .

approval of the environmental impact statement was delayed about 4 months because of air quality issues .

the navy's plans to expand operations at nearby lemoore naval air station raised concerns about air emissions from future development and aircraft traffic at castle .

the local utility company determined that the base gas distribution system should be abandoned .

the local reuse authority is negotiating with this company and the bureau of prisons to install a new gas line to the prison site to provide gas service to tenants that may be attracted to the base in the interim .

questions concerning upgrading or replacing other aging base utility systems are also being addressed .

the local authority at castle has been having difficulty attracting businesses that will support airport operations .

castle is competing with other closing airfields for a limited number of potential aviation - related businesses .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,149 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the economic development administration grants included $3.5 million to the city of atwater to connect the base sewer system to the city's system and $1 million to merced county to establish a revolving loan fund to be used to induce businesses to locate at castle by providing a source of financing .

the federal aviation administration grants included $115,000 for an airport feasibility study and master plan and $2,028,000 for airport facilities and equipment .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: spent solvents , fuels , waste oils , pesticides , cyanide , and cadmium .

cleanup efforts have been hampered by delays in release of funds .

castle has ground water contamination from an underground plume of trichloroethylene and other volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $146 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: october 1996 .

base description: chanute is located on 2,132 acres adjacent to the city of rantoul , which has annexed the base property .

the base was constructed in 1917 and used initially for pilot training and as a storage depot for aircraft engines and paint .

since world war ii , it has served as a training installation for aerospace and weapon system support personnel .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: july 1993 .

date of base closure: september 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan primarily involves developing a civilian airport and attracting aviation - related businesses , as well as other types of economic development .

a no - cost airport public benefit transfer of 1,181 acres is planned once cleanup is completed .

dod will retain 8 acres for a defense finance and accounting center .

additionally , 147 acres will be transferred to the local community for park and recreation use and 62 acres to the university of illinois for a research facility .

the remaining 734 acres , including the golf course and housing areas , will be sold once cleanup is completed .

golf course: the golf course was sold in march 1993 to the highest bidder for $711,502 , but the deed transfer has been delayed due to questions involving environmental cleanup .

meanwhile , the purchaser is operating the course on a no - cost prevention and maintenance lease .

implementation status: while environmental cleanup is underway most of the base property is being leased .

property sales have been negotiated for some parcels , but deeds cannot be transferred until the parcels are cleaned up or remediation is satisfactorily in place .

development has also been hampered by utility system issues , such as the high cost to tenants for unmetered service from the base's steam heat system .

despite such difficulties , the community has successfully attracted businesses that have created jobs .

a base official reported that about 78 businesses have located at chanute thus far .

since development cannot be financed on short - term leases , the city is negotiating 55- and 99-year leases , which can be converted into deed transfers when cleanup is completed .

the city has also used an economic development administration grant to finance building renovation and asbestos removal , and one business is paying back the renovation cost through increased rent .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,035 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 1,002 .

economic development administration grants to rantoul provided $1 million to establish a revolving loan fund to assist businesses locating at chanute , $400,000 for planning , and $1.1 million for a road improvement project to improve traffic access to base facilities .

federal aviation administration grants included $194,930 for planning , an environmental audit , and a utility survey and $742,900 for resurfacing a runway .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: household and industrial waste , spent solvents , fuels , and waste oils .

estimated cleanup cost: $43.5 million .

despite repeated environmental studies and surveys , the environmental protection agency has determined that more testing will be needed to determine the extent of groundwater contamination and identify remediation measures .

test wells will be drilled off the base to determine whether the contamination is occurring naturally or the result of base operations .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1997 .

base description: this 3,757-acre base is located 5 miles east of beeville in southern texas , about 60 miles northwest of corpus christi .

the base included the main air station , a 96-acre housing tract adjacent to the town , and an auxiliary airfield in goliad county 30 miles away .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: october 1992 .

date of base closure: february 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: under the plan , 96 acres of housing were sold to the local reuse authority , and the state received a 285-acre public benefit transfer for a state prison .

local authorities requested the remaining 3,376 acres , including the auxiliary field , as economic development conveyances .

while the plan calls for using the airfield as an airport , local officials are requesting an economic development conveyance rather than an airport public benefit conveyance because they believe that an economic development conveyance will allow them more latitude in their future actions than the more restrictive airport conveyance would .

golf course: the property containing the golf course is being used to construct a state prison .

implementation status: all the property has been leased , sold , or transferred , except for three sites that have been retained by the navy until cleanup is complete .

the state prison facilities are in operation , resulting in an increase in jobs for the area .

in addition , according to a base closure official , the local authority has eight or nine subleases with small businesses .

in a letter to the navy , we raised questions concerning the propriety of the negotiated sale of 396 family housing units for $168,000 , which is $424 a unit , to the local authority .

the units are being rented for $400 to $650 per month each .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 914 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 1,520 .

the economic development administration grant to the beeville / bee county economic development authority provided funds to improve the wastewater treatment facility , roads , and housing areas .

the federal aviation administration grant was for developing an airport master plan .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: acids , heavy metals , paints , polychlorinated biphenyls , petroleum fuels and hydrocarbons , photographic chemicals , and solvents .

estimated cleanup cost: $5.4 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: june 1995 .

base description: the center is located on 1,280 acres on the shoreline of narragansett bay in north kingstown .

between 1939 and 1942 , the navy constructed a naval air station and pier in the area .

in 1974 , the navy declared the air station surplus , and operations at the center were greatly reduced .

in response , the state established the port authority and economic development corporation to develop the area as a business and industrial park , which did not meet initial expectations .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: march 1994 .

date of base closure: april 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for 380 acres to be retained by dod for the army reserves and 10 acres to be retained by the public health service .

the port authority has requested an economic development transfer of 512 acres .

however , the department of interior , in june 1994 , requested 35 of the 512 acres on behalf of the narragansett indian tribe .

the outcome of this request is unclear even though the federal screening process for the base was completed in may 1993 .

the calf pasture point and allen's harbor shoreline will be part of a 289-acre park and recreation public benefit transfer , which will go to north kingstown , the tribe , or a partnership of both .

included in this transfer will be the gym and the yacht club , which the town will receive .

use of the remaining 89 acres , which include open space and wetlands , is undetermined .

golf course: none .

implementation status: although the narragansett indian tribe has a representative on the local reuse committee , the committee opposes the tribe's request to obtain sovereignty over the property it is requesting .

the community wants to maintain zoning and land use jurisdiction and fears that the tribe will establish a casino there as the tribe is attempting to do on its reservation 25 miles away .

base closure officials are seeking a clarification of the rights and priorities of native americans in the base closure property screening process .

property disposition is also awaiting the completion of the environmental impact statement and the base cleanup plan .

the community is urging the navy to provide additional assistance to demolish 160 to 170 unwanted buildings .

thus far , the navy has agreed to demolish 17 buildings it has determined to be structurally unsafe .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 125 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 29 .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: heavy metals , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , petroleum - based hydrocarbons , and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $37.9 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: may 1998 .

base description: eaker is located on 3,286 acres , with portions of the base lying within the towns of blytheville and gosnell , about 68 miles northwest of memphis , tennessee .

the base is in an agricultural area in the mississippi river floodplain , 11 miles west of the river .

it was activated as an army airfield in 1942 , serving as an advanced flying school .

it was deactivated in 1945 , and control of the land was transferred to the city of blytheville .

it was reactivated in 1955 as an air force base and was used for strategic air command refueling tankers and jet fighter trainers .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: april 1992 .

date of base closure: december 1992 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan centers around developing a civilian airport and attracting aviation - related businesses to support its operations .

the air force is conveying about 1,690 acres of base property for airport - related activities , including 192 acres that reverted to the city of blytheville at closure .

the plan also includes a public benefit transfer of 484 acres for park and recreation use , which include some archaeological sites .

the presbytery of memphis is interested in acquiring through an educational public benefit conveyance about 65 acres for an educational program to aid underachieving students .

the redevelopment authority will likely receive 1,044 acres through an economic development conveyance at no cost since the base is in a rural area .

the presbytery is interested in using about 235 of the 1,044 acres that include base housing , retail exchange and commissary buildings , and the hospital for a retirement community and convention center .

a chapel on 3 acres is to be sold .

golf course: the golf course is currently being leased for an annual fee of $19,000 plus maintenance .

if the local authority and the air force agree on an economic development conveyance for the remaining base property , the course is to be included .

otherwise , the air force would like to sell the course .

implementation status: questions remain about the viability of establishing a civilian airport and attracting sufficient aviation - related businesses to support it in a rural area .

nevertheless , the local airport authority is negotiating a long - term lease for about 1,690 acres of airport facilities .

the local authority hopes the long - term lease will make locating at eaker more attractive to potential business tenants .

the air force continues to cover caretaker and maintenance costs for those portions of the base not under lease , but it would like to terminate its caretaker operations by 1997 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 792 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 106 ( jobs related to caretaker operations ) .

the economic development administration grant to the blytheville - gosnell regional airport authority provided funds to repair the runway , taxiway , and ramps ; to install instrument landing equipment ; and to upgrade the airfield lighting system .

the federal aviation administration grant was for developing an airport master plan .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: household and industrial waste , spent solvents , fuels , waste oil , paints , pesticides , chromic acid , paint stripper , medical wastes , lead acid , and nickel / cadmium batteries .

estimated cleanup cost: $47 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 2000 .

base description: england is located on 2,282 acres about 5 miles west of alexandria in central louisiana .

constructed as a municipal airport , the base was first leased to the army air force at the onset of world war ii .

in 1949 , the property was returned to the city , but with the outbreak of hostilities in korea in 1950 , it was acquired by the air force .

in 1955 , the air force began constructing permanent facilities at the base .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: june 1992 .

date of base closure: december 1992 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for the entire 2,282-acre base to be an airport public benefit transfer to the local england authority .

all profits from revenue - generating properties , including the golf course and family housing , are planned to support airport operations .

golf course: the golf course is included in the long - term lease and provides revenue generation to the airport .

implementation status: local officials are optimistic that england's aviation - centered reuse plan will be successful , predicting that the authority's operations at england will be self - sustaining within 10 years .

the reuse plan calls for moving air carrier service from a small regional airport nearby to england .

the federal aviation administration insisted that it would only support one airport in the area .

in july 1994 , local officials voted unanimously for moving air carrier service to england .

the federal aviation administration has since approved the england plan , and it now supports a public benefit transfer of all the property to support airport operations .

a long - term lease to the england authority for the base property was signed in march 1995 , ending the air force's responsibility for funding about $2 million in operations and maintenance costs .

the england authority has attracted 16 tenants to help support aviation operations at england .

two weeks a month , for 10 months a year , the joint readiness training center flies wide - bodied planes in and out with military personnel for exercises at nearby fort polk .

however , this lease only produces five full - time jobs at england .

other tenants at england include ( 1 ) a company that refurbishes jet aircraft , which employs 65 ; ( 2 ) a trucking company , which operates a driver training school on base with 58 jobs ; ( 3 ) an operator for the golf course ; ( 4 ) the local school district , which leases an elementary school ; and ( 5 ) a university conducting classes on base .

a state hospital will use the base medical facility to expand charity care services .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 697 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 718 .

the economic development administration grants to the england economic and industrial development district were to construct a concrete cargo pad , security fencing , and access control ; rehabilitate runways , taxiways , approach lighting , and signage ; renovate an air terminal building and a railway spur ; and make access road improvements .

the federal aviation administration grant was for developing an airport master plan .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: household and industrial waste , spent solvents , fuels , waste oil , paints , lead , pesticides , alkali , low - level radioactive waste , chlorine gas , polychlorinated biphenyls , and medical waste .

estimated cleanup cost: $42.1 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 1999 .

base description: the base is located on 2,501 acres about 12 miles northeast of downtown indianapolis , near the city of lawrence .

it has been used periodically as a training ground and an infantry garrison .

it was abandoned from 1913 to 1917 .

in 1947 , it was declared surplus , but later that same year it was returned to active status as a permanent military post .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

estimated date of military mission termination: october 1996 .

estimated date of base closure: october 1996 .

summary of reuse plan: dod will retain 144 acres for use by the reserves .

in addition , 100 acres containing the defense finance and accounting service facility will be transferred to the general services administration .

the state will receive 1,550 acres as a public benefit transfer for a state park .

homeless assistance providers will receive 4 acres , including a building with six family housing units and a barracks .

the army plans to sell the 150-acre golf course .

the plan calls for the remaining 553 acres , including the harrison village housing complex , to be an economic development transfer .

the community hopes to attract light industry .

portions of this property have historic preservation and wetlands considerations .

golf course: the state originally requested that the golf course be included as part of the public benefit transfer for the state park , but the army has decided to sell it .

the state has made an offer for the golf course and the army is evaluating it .

implementation status: the community submitted its reuse plan to the army in december 1994 .

although the base will not close until october 1996 , most of the property will be available for reuse by october 1995 .

base closure officials are hoping to conclude a master lease by that time , which will facilitate the subleasing of properties as they are cleaned up and made available .

the army and the general services administration are coordinating to obtain office of management and budget approval for a no - cost transfer of the defense finance and accounting service facility ( building #1 ) from the army to the general services administration .

the transfer is expected to take place october 1 , 1995 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 4,240 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the economic development administration grant was to the state of indiana to plan for economic adjustment associated with the closure of the base .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: petroleum products , heavy metals , volatile organic compounds , and pesticides .

estimated cleanup cost: $17.6 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: june 1998 .

base description: fort devens is located on 9,311 acres near the town of ayer , about 35 miles northwest of boston .

it was created as a temporary cantonment in 1917 for training soldiers from the new england area .

in 1921 , it was placed in caretaker status and used for summer national guard and reserves training .

in 1931 , it was declared a permanent installation , and it was used during world war ii as a reception center for draftees .

in 1946 , it reverted to caretaker status , but again it became a reception center during the korean conflict .

it has remained an active army facility since that time .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: march 1996 .

summary of reuse plan: about 68 percent of the base will be retained by federal agencies .

under provisions designated by the 1991 brac commission , 5,177 acres will be retained by the army for facilities and a training area for reserve components .

the fish and wildlife service will receive 890 acres for a wildlife refuge .

the bureau of prisons will receive 245 acres for a federal prison medical facility .

the department of labor will receive 20 acres for a job corps center .

two homeless assistance applications totaling 29 acres have been approved .

however , the local community may find alternative means to meet these homeless requests .

the remaining 2,950 acres will be an economic development conveyance .

a consortium of indian groups has expressed interest in one parcel for a cultural center and museum , but it has not submitted a formal request .

golf course: a portion of the golf course and the adjacent hospital property will be used for construction of the federal prison medical facility .

plans call for a reconfiguration of the golf course to reestablish the full 18 holes .

implementation status: the community approved a final reuse plan in december 1994 .

a final decision on property disposition by the army is expected in july 1995 .

an interim lease with one private company is in place .

the army and the reuse authority are negotiating a master lease / purchase agreement that mirrors the profit - sharing provisions of an economic development conveyance .

it calls for property that can be sold to be sold and the remainder to be leased .

the local authority would receive 60 percent and the federal government 40 percent of net revenues from subleases and sales .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 2,178 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the economic development administration grants to the state provided a $750,000-revolving loan fund and $875,000 in technical assistance for businesses locating at the base .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: volatile organic compounds , heavy metals , petroleum products , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , herbicides , and explosive compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $49.4 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: march 1998 .

base description: fort ord consists of 27,725 acres on the monterey peninsula by the towns of seaside and marina , about 80 miles south of san francisco .

about 20,000 acres of the base are undeveloped property , which were used for training exercises .

since its opening in 1917 , fort ord has served as a training and staging facility for infantry troops .

from 1947 to 1975 , it was a basic training center .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: september 1993 .

date of base closure: september 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for dod to retain 760 acres: 740 acres of housing for military personnel remaining in the area , 12 acres for the reserves , and 8 acres for the defense finance and accounting system center .

the bureau of land management will receive 15,009 acres , which will be preserved from development , including 8,000 acres contaminated with unexploded ordnance .

state , county , and city agencies will receive public benefit transfers of 2,605 acres for parks and recreation , including beaches and sand dunes .

california state university and the university of california will receive 2,681 acres as economic development conveyance to establish university and research facilities .

included in the california state university conveyance are 1,253 family housing units .

other educational institutions will receive public benefit transfers totaling 338 acres for schools .

the city of marina will be given the airport — a public benefit transfer of 750 acres .

homeless assistance providers are to receive 84 acres , including 196 family housing units , 35 single housing units , and other buildings .

the army plans to negotiate a sale of the 404-acre parcel containing two golf courses .

the disposition of the remaining 5,094 acres has not been determined , but it will likely include market sales , as well as additional public benefit transfers .

golf course: the army's main interest is that the revenues from the two golf courses continue to support the morale , welfare , and recreation programs for military personnel remaining in the area .

the army is negotiating an agreement with the city of seaside under which the two 18-hole golf courses will be operated by the city .

the agreement will stipulate shared use by military personnel and the public .

army officials reported that the army intends to sell the golf courses to the city .

proceeds from the sale would go to support the morale , welfare , and recreation programs .

enabling legislation has been introduced .

implementation status: the transfer of property has been initiated .

in july 1994 , the first phase of transfers to two universities took place .

the new california state university , monterey bay , received an initial 630 acres .

the university plans to open classes for an estimated 700 students in the fall of 1995 .

the university of california , santa cruz , also received 949 acres in july 1994 to establish a research center .

in november 1994 , 5 schools and 93 acres were transferred to the federal sponsor , department of education , for deeding to the monterey peninsula unified school district .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 2,835 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 92 .

the office of economic adjustment provided nearly $2 million in planning grants to help develop and implement the reuse plan .

the office also provided $5 million to the city of monterey to help establish a center for international trade at fort ord in conjunction with the monterey institute for international studies .

the center plans to develop the capacity and resources for international marketing of technologies and applications from university research programs being established at fort ord .

the economic development administration provided $15 million to the new california state university , monterey bay , to renovate buildings for educational use and meet seismic and americans with disabilities act requirements .

a university official estimated that an additional $140 million would be requested from dod over the next 10 years to complete renovations .

monterey county received $1 million to establish a revolving loan fund , and the city of marina received $900,000 for road , water system , and sewer improvements for an interim commercial development project outside the base gate .

in addition , the county and the university of california , santa cruz , each received $750,000 for an infrastructure , economic , and job development analysis .

the university also received $1.2 million to help establish its science , technology , and policy center at the base .

the federal aviation administration provided $88,200 to the local reuse authority to complete an airport master plan for the reuse of the base airfield and $67,500 for an environmental assessment of airport plans .

the department of labor provided $800,000 to fund an array of retraining and reemployment services for workers affected by fort ord's closure .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: petroleum wastes and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $156.6 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1998 .

base description: fort sheridan is located on 712 acres of high - value suburban land on the shores of lake michigan between lake forest and highland park , 25 miles north of chicago .

acquired in 1887 , its major mission initially was cavalry training .

more recently , the fort served as headquarters of the nike missile antiaircraft defense systems in the midwest .

its latest mission was administration and logistical support for army recruiting and reserve centers in the midwest .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: may 1993 .

date of base closure: may 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the army originally proposed exchanging 156 acres at the fort with the equitable life assurance society for about 7.1 acres of land in arlington , virginia , where the army wanted to build a national army museum .

the local community supported this plan , but the secretary of defense rejected it as inappropriate to the base closure process .

the local reuse committee has submitted a new reuse plan to the army .

the army plans to keep 104 acres for use by the reserves and the existing 15-acre military cemetery .

the navy acquired approximately 182 acres , consisting of 392 housing units , in january 1994 for $20 million .

three homeless assistance providers were awarded approximately 46 acres , including 106 family housing units and 36 single housing units .

the lake county forest preserve district has requested the open space on the shoreline , bluffs , and ravines ( about 103 acres ) as a public benefit transfer for park and recreation use .

the department of education has approved two public benefit transfers , totaling 4 acres and including the library and gymnasium , for educational use .

the 174-acre golf course will be sold .

disposition of the remaining 84 acres , including the historic district , is undetermined .

the reuse plan foresees residential and public use for this property .

golf course: originally , the forest preserve district offered to purchase the golf course along with the shoreline , bluffs , and ravines for $10 million .

at that time , the army had a request from the department of veteran affairs for some of that property for a national cemetery .

therefore , the army turned down the offer from the district .

when the veteran affairs' offer fell through , district officials said they could not buy the property because it failed to pass a local bond measure .

consequently , the district requested the property through a public benefit transfer .

however , the army notified the district that the golf course will be sold and opened negotiations with the district regarding sale terms .

implementation status: the army now must decide on the public benefit transfer requests .

in turn , the reuse committee must decide whether to form a local redevelopment authority and request the developable property through an economic development conveyance or negotiated sale or whether to have the army sell the property directly to developers .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,681 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 18 .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: volatile and semivolatile organic compounds , polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons , thallium , and unexploded ordnance .

estimated cleanup cost: $26.9 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: 1997 for surplus property and 1999 for retained navy / army property .

base description: fort wingate is located on 21,812 acres in northwest new mexico .

the base is bordered by the cibola national forest on the south and is within 10 miles of the city of gallup to the west , the navajo indian reservation to the north , and the zuni indian reservation to the southwest .

additional navajo reservation land lies south of the national forest .

both tribes consider fort wingate to be part of their ancestral lands .

the base includes sites considered sacred by the zunis , including fenced up horse canyon , site of ancestral anasazi ruins .

the southern portion of the base is also part of the watershed for the zuni reservation .

the depot is a subinstallation of tooele army depot , and it has been used for ammunition storage .

there are more than 700 concrete ammunition storage bunkers .

between 1963 and 1967 , the base was used by white sands missile range to fire several pershing missiles to test the missile's mobility and accuracy .

most of the property is undeveloped .

before the army acquired the property , it was public domain land .

as such , it reverts to the department of interior , bureau of land management , when it is not needed by dod .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: january 1993 .

date of base closure: january 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: dod wants to retain approximately 13,000 acres for 7 years for use by the ballistic missile defense office for missile launching activity in conjunction with the white sands missile range .

to retain this land , either the army would not include that portion of the base in its relinquishment notice or the missile defense office would have to lease the land from the bureau of land management .

both the navajo and zuni tribes oppose use of fort wingate for missile testing , and several federal agencies have expressed environmental and land use concerns .

any property not retained by dod will revert to the bureau .

once the army cleans up the contamination at fort wingate , the bureau will consult with other department of interior agencies concerning possible uses for the property .

the department's bureau of indian affairs has requested the entire base to hold in trust on behalf of the two tribes .

the tribes want the land for preservation of sacred sites , watershed protection , economic development , and use for other tribal programs .

the city of gallup opposes the conveyance of fort wingate property to the indians , and it has indicated interest in a portion of the base for economic development .

the city has retained an attorney to challenge the requirement that the property be relinquished to interior when the army's need for it ceases .

golf course: none .

implementation status: dod tried to get officials from gallup , mckinley county , and the two indian tribes to agree on forming a reuse committee under its base closure rules and guidelines .

however , interior department and bureau of land management officials maintain that this effort was inappropriate because the property will revert to the bureau and will be handled under the bureau's authorities and rules .

the missile defense office competed an environmental impact study with a decision in march 1995 to proceed with the proposed missile program .

meanwhile , interior is cooperating with dod in facilitating a private company's use of some of the facilities to carry out a contract with the army to deactivate army pyrotechnics , which will provide 25 to 30 jobs for this economically depressed area .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 90 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: not available , property to be retained by federal agencies .

federal assistance: none .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: explosive compounds , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , heavy metals , asbestos , and lead - based paint .

estimated cleanup cost: $22.5 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: unknown .

base description: george is located on 5,068 acres between the towns of adelanto and victorville in the mojave desert northeast of los angeles .

the base was first activated in 1941 as a pilot training location .

it was placed on standby status in 1945 and used for aircraft storage .

in 1950 , it was reopened after hostilities began in korea .

during the vietnam conflict , the air force designated george as one of its major training bases for fighter crews , and it continued as a fighter operations and training base thereafter .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: december 1992 .

date of base closure: december 1992 .

summary of reuse plan: approximately 900 acres are to be transferred to the bureau of prisons for a federal prison .

about 2,300 acres will be an airport public benefit transfer , and 63 acres will be conveyed under public benefit transfers for schools .

homeless assistance providers will receive 34 acres , including 64 family housing units .

initially , the air force designated the remaining acres , including the golf course and over 1,500 family housing units , for negotiated or public sale .

however , local authorities are planning to request 1,471 acres of this property as an economic development conveyance .

the air force will dispose of the 300-acre golf course at a public sale .

golf course: the air force plans to dispose of the golf course by negotiated or public sale .

implementation status: reuse of george was delayed for 2 years due to a jurisdictional dispute over reuse authority between the city of adelanto and the victor valley economic development authority , which was supported by victorville , apple valley , hesperia , and the county .

another reason was differences in their reuse plans over the proposed size of the airport .

the air force recognized the victor valley authority as the airport authority and leased the 2,300-acre airport to the authority .

adelanto is receiving some public benefit transfers for schools .

lawsuits between adelanto and the authority were settled in february 1995 , and the authority is proceeding with plans to attract tenants and create jobs .

under the new provisions of the base closure community redevelopment and homeless assistance act of 1994 , the community has until september 1995 to incorporate plans for accommodating homeless needs in its reuse plan , which must be completed before the air force can consider an economic development conveyance request .

a chapel on 2 acres was sold to a local church for $510,000 .

in addition , the air force is transferring the land for the federal prison and negotiating the sale of the 295-acre golf course and a 3-acre parcel containing the credit union .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 506 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 209 .

the economic development administration grants were provided to the victor valley authority to improve roads , the water system , the sewer system , and the airport .

the federal aviation administration grant was awarded for developing an airport master plan .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: petroleum / oils / lubricants , volatile organic compounds , and heavy metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $75.8 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 1997 .

base description: grissom is located on 2,722 acres in an agricultural area of central indiana , about 6 miles southwest of peru and 65 miles north of indianapolis .

the base was established in 1942 as a naval air station and was used as a training site throughout world war ii .

it was deactivated in 1946 and was reactivated as bunker hill air force base in 1955 .

it is currently home to an air reserve wing whose mission is air refueling operations .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: july 1993 ( active duty mission ) .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: according to the plan , the air force will retain about 1,398 acres , including the airfield , for the reserves and will transfer 901 acres as an economic development conveyance .

the remaining 423 acres , including the 1,128 family housing units , will be sold via a public sale .

a primary goal of the plan is to attract businesses and replace the jobs lost due to the closure .

golf course: the 9-hole golf course is currently under interim lease to a private operator through the local redevelopment authority .

the reuse plan calls for the land to be part of an economic development conveyance and used for the development of light industry .

implementation status: according to local officials , reuse efforts have been hampered by a lack of specificity in the local reuse plan , delays in property disposition decisions , and delays in negotiating a caretaker agreement and leases .

the final property decision has been delayed pending the air force's approval of the proposed size of the reserve cantonment area .

despite these delays , some actions have been completed .

the caretaker agreement has been finalized , and a caretaker account has been established and funded .

the lease on the golf course has also been signed and two more leases have been requested .

the air force informed local officials that lease processing procedures have been improved and leases can now be processed within 120 days .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 807 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 28 .

the economic development administration grant was awarded to the state of indiana to plan for mitigating the adverse effects associated with the base's closure .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: household and industrial waste , spent solvents , fuels , waste oil , pesticides , lead , silver , munitions , and asbestos .

estimated cost of cleanup: $25.6 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: march 1998 .

base description: the base is located on 55,264 acres , mostly forest land , near madison in southeastern indiana about 45 miles northeast of louisville , kentucky .

over 50,000 acres are contaminated with unexploded ordnance .

the facility was constructed in 1941 and has been used over the years to test ammunition and weapon systems .

most of the facility was placed on standby status in 1946 , reactivated in 1950 , again placed on standby in 1958 , and reactivated in 1961 .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: september 1994 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the army plans to transfer about 47,500 acres to the u.s .

fish and wildlife service for preservation as a wildlife refuge for migratory birds .

such an action would eliminate the need to cleanup the unexploded ordnance , which could cost between $215 million and $2 billion , depending on the level of cleanup .

the three adjoining counties want the remaining land conveyed to them for economic development .

however , the international union of operating engineers has proposed purchasing about 5,000 acres of the property for a training center .

the union is offering to buy the property and do the environmental remediation , since that would fit into the kind of training it plans for the site .

a plastics manufacturer has indicated interest in the same property .

consequently , the army is considering a market sale to the highest bidder of the 5,000 acres , conveying the remaining 2,764 acres to the counties for economic development .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the army issued an invitation to bid for 4,320 acres of property not contaminated with unexploded ordnance .

meanwhile , the local authority is submitting an economic development conveyance request for the same property .

the army plans to have all the property disposed of by september 30 , 1995 , when base closure funds for operations and maintenance costs run out .

initially , disposal to non - federal agencies would be through leases .

later , when cleanup requirements were met , the property would be sold .

army officials think that jefferson proving ground will be a significant base closure success story , due to the savings in cleanup costs made possible by the property transfer to the fish and wildlife service and due to the envisioned economic development of the remaining property .

however , transfer of the property to the wildlife service faces several obstacles .

according to a base official , the wildlife service is concerned about possible liability should someone enter the property and be injured by the unexploded ordnance , and the wildlife service lacks money in its budget to staff and maintain the preserve .

meanwhile , the air national guard has asked the air force to request the property for an expanded bombing and strafing area .

furthermore , the environmental protection agency has not agreed that no environmental remediation is needed in the proposed wildlife refuge .

the wildlife service opposes remediation because the agency does not want the habitat disturbed .

the environmental protection agency , however , is considering whether to place the base on the national priorities list , which would require environmental remediation at the base .

the army maintains that the unexploded ordnance is a safety problem , not a hazardous waste problem .

a joint committee is studying the issue .

the environmental protection agency will likely require the army to drill some wells to monitor subsurface , as well as surface water , for years to come .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 387 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the state of indiana received a $50,000 economic development administration grant to plan for economic adjustment associated with closure of the base .

the madison chamber of commerce received an economic development administration grant of $850,000 to construct a new building in madison for business incubator and technical training programs .

former base employees will have priority in terms of starting new businesses at the site .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: solvents , petroleum products , heavy metals , depleted uranium , and unexploded ordnance .

estimated cleanup cost: $10.9 million ( assuming unexploded ordnance will not have to be cleaned up ) .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: may 1997 .

base description: the depot is located on 780 acres , 10 miles east of lexington .

it has 1.8 million square feet of covered storage space .

it was established in 1941 , and it has been used to store radar and communications equipment .

depot properties , including buildings and the golf course , have deteriorated since the closure decision was announced and the army curtailed its maintenance .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the army is retaining one building located on 4 acres of land for a defense finance and accounting center .

the state of kentucky has signed a 7-year lease for the rest of the property , and it is covering the cost of renovation and repair instead of lease payments to the army .

the state plans to request 210 acres as a public benefit transfer for park and recreational use , and it is requesting that the remaining 566 acres of the property be conveyed to it through an economic development conveyance .

golf course: the deterioration of the 9-hole golf course has made it unusable as a golf course .

in determining the course's fair market value , the appraisal was modified to categorize it as unimproved ground .

the state plans to request the golf course as part of the public benefit transfer for park and recreation purposes .

implementation status: the state appropriated $1.8 million to rehabilitate deteriorating buildings and cover operating costs .

current operations by a military contractor at the base are providing about 500 jobs .

the state also has a sublease with the kentucky national guard for training - related use of several buildings and some base land .

under a dod contract , the state is using some buildings for processing military equipment being brought back from europe , and it is negotiating to sublease additional space to several other organizations .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,131 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: volatile and semivolatile organic compounds , heavy metals , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , and herbicides .

estimated cleanup cost: $25 million .

base officials are awaiting environmental protection agency and state approval of remediation plans .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: to be determined .

base description: the naval station and hospital , as well as several housing areas and a golf course , are located on 932 acres at various sites in the long beach area .

portions of the property lie within the long beach city limits , while other portions are in nearby los angeles county towns .

the navy began acquiring property for the station in 1935 .

in 1946 , the station was chartered to provide welfare , recreation , and social facilities , in addition to maintaining facilities for the operation and berthing of tugboats , barges , and similar vessels .

in 1964 , the u.s. government purchased the land for the hospital from the city of long beach , and the hospital was commissioned in 1967 .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: hospital — march 1994 and naval station — september 1994 .

date of base closure: hospital — march 1994 and naval station — september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the navy plans to transfer 592 acres , including the main station , the golf course , and over 1,000 family housing units , to the naval shipyard .

it also plans to transfer 17 acres to the department of labor for a job corps training center .

the long beach school district received 62 acres as an educational public benefit transfer in september 1994 .

california state university , long beach , requested an economic development conveyance of 30 acres , which include 294 family housing units .

the navy expects that 148 acres will be conveyed for future expansion of long beach and los angeles port facilities and transportation corridors to the ports .

plans call for at least 26 acres to be used for homeless assistance , including 204 family housing units .

disposition of the remaining 57 acres , including the naval hospital , is undetermined .

additional acres are being considered for homeless assistance groups under the base closure community redevelopment and homeless assistance act of 1994 .

dod has recommended to the 1995 base realignment and closure commission that the naval shipyard be closed .

if this recommendation is sustained , the property being transferred to the shipyard will be disposed of as part of the shipyard closure process .

golf course: the golf course property is owned by the army and leased to the navy through an indefinite lease .

the navy plans to retain the golf course , which is located about 10 miles from the naval station and 3 miles from the naval hospital , transferring the course to the naval shipyard .

implementation status: a reuse plan for the los angeles portion of the property has not yet been completed .

reuse disputes between long beach and nearby communities have led to delays in property disposition decisions .

the long beach plan calls for the hospital to be converted into a retail center , while an opposing plan supported by nearby communities calls for it to become a los angeles county office of education administrative building .

dod's office of economic adjustment hired a consultant to do an independent study that the navy will use , along with the environmental impact study , to determine the preferred use for the property .

the long beach plan calls for the navy to sell the property for about $20 million , while the other plan involves an educational public benefit transfer .

a draft environmental impact statement for the hospital was published in february 1995 .

the navy expects to make its property disposition decisions in july 1995 .

homeless assistance plans have not been settled .

in response to a community challenge , the department of housing and urban development reversed its position and declared that 66 of the 140 housing units at the taper avenue housing site designated for a homeless assistance provider are unsuitable for that purpose because they are located too close to some aviation fuel tanks .

a community group also asked the department of health and human services to reexamine the provider's suitability to undertake such a project .

another homeless assistance provider that was approved to receive a portion of the savannah / cabrillo housing lost financial backing and was therefore disqualified to receive it .

both los angeles and long beach are developing new plans to address homeless needs .

the city of long beach is still committed to using 26 acres of the property for homeless assistance , possibly through temporary leasing of some facilities .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 417 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: not available ; most of the property is being retained for naval shipyard .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: petroleum hydrocarbons , paints , solvents , asbestos , trichloroethylene , and battery acid .

estimated cleanup cost: $125.3 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: to be determined .

base description: loring is located on 9,482 acres and is 5 miles from the canadian border in limestone , maine , near the town of caribou .

along with the approximately 8,700-acre main base , loring has several off - site parcels in nearby towns , which include housing tracts .

prior to closure , loring was home to b - 52 bombers and kc - 135 tankers .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: march 1994 .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: dod will retain 400 acres for use by the national guard and 14 acres for a defense finance and accounting service center .

the fish and wildlife service will receive 6,000 acres for a wildlife preserve .

the bureau of indian affairs will receive about 600 acres of property at the main base and about 60 housing units on 20 acres in the nearby town of presque isle .

this property will be held in trust by the bureau for reuse by the aroostook band of the micmac indian tribe .

the air force also plans to transfer 50 acres to the department of labor for a job corps training center and 18 acres through public benefit transfers for several educational programs .

the remaining 2,380 acres will likely be disposed of through an economic development conveyance .

the initial reuse plan called for the base to be used for an airport and aviation - related enterprises .

the reuse plan asks the federal government to pay $35 million of the projected $40 million in base conversion costs over 20 years , including the cost of demolition of buildings .

in addition , local officials want dod to cover base caretaker costs for 15 years .

golf course: the 9-hole golf course has been leased to the local authority .

the authority plans to request the golf course as part of an economic development conveyance .

implementation status: a joint study by the federal aviation administration and the maine department of transportation concluded that another airport was not needed in the region .

the federal aviation administration indicated , however , that it would consider approving plans for an airport at loring if a market developed for an air cargo operation that needed a heavy , long runway .

loring , however , is experiencing the same difficulties as other rural bases in attracting aviation - related businesses .

since its closure , the base has been maintained under a 3-year caretaker agreement .

under the agreement , the air force covers nearly 100 percent of the caretaker costs for the first year , but the percentage is expected to decline in subsequent years if businesses can be attracted to the base .

according to a base official , the defense finance and accounting system center should be in operation by the summer of 1995 , which will provide about 500 jobs within 2 years .

the local authority is hopeful the center will act as a catalyst to attract other businesses to the base .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,326 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 144 ( these jobs are related to caretaker operations ) .

the economic development administration awarded $1,590,000 to the city of fort fairfield to increase the capacity of the sewage treatment facility and $677,000 to the northern maine development commission for technical assistance .

the federal aviation administration grant was awarded to the local authority for airport facilities and equipment .

environmental cleanup: national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: volatile organic compounds , waste fuels , oils , spent solvents , polychlorinated biphenyls , pesticides , and heavy metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $141.9 million .

the cleanup of contaminants at loring is progressing .

the air force is signing agreements with environmental regulators , and the base cleanup team is facilitating the work .

through interagency cooperation , $10 million was saved by combining the cleanup of two sites .

the environmental protection agency granted a waiver to allow marginally contaminated soil that had to be cleaned from a quarry to be used to cap a land fill .

however , the base's inclement weather restricts cleanup work to the summer months , slowing cleanup completion .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1999 .

base description: lowry is located on 1,866 acres in a suburban area between denver and aurora .

the base was established in 1937 as an army air corps technical school , and it has been used as a technical training center since that time .

in addition , a defense finance and accounting center and the air reserve personnel center are located on the base .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: april 1994 .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for mixed - use urban development combining business , training , education , recreation , and residential uses to make maximum use of existing facilities and land .

dod will retain 115 acres for the defense finance and accounting center , an air reserve personnel center , and the 21st space command squadron .

the air force is conveying 220 acres in educational public benefit transfers to a consortium of colorado colleges and the denver public school system for educational and job training centers .

initially , homeless assistance providers were approved to receive 47 acres , including 200 family housing units and dormitories .

however , under a plan worked out with the city of denver and the department of housing and urban development , the providers will withdraw their requests for some of this property in return for funding to establish homeless facilities at dispersed locations in the denver metropolitan area .

the officials involved believe this plan will better meet the needs of the homeless than would concentrating the facilities at lowry .

in addition , parks and recreation public benefit transfers will total 175 acres .

health - related public benefit transfers totaling 22 acres will be used for such purposes as a blood bank and a research center .

an economic development transfer of 711 acres will go to the lowry economic redevelopment authority .

this acreage will increase if homeless providers withdraw some of their requests for base property as expected .

market sales are planned for the remaining 576 acres , including the golf course and residential areas .

golf course: the golf course is under interim lease to the city of denver .

its sale awaits environmental clearances .

a residential landfill adjacent to the golf course may not require appreciable cleanup if its future use is open space or recreational , such as extension of the golf course .

implementation status: following final decisions on the disposition of base property in august 1994 , base closure officials have been proceeding with disposition agreements .

the community college educational consortium has signed an interim lease and is conducting 80 courses for 800 students .

several other leases have been signed or are being negotiated .

four of the homeless providers have withdrawn their requests for base housing in return for a contract with the city to provide space elsewhere in the community .

pending final environmental clearances , long - term leases will be used to promote immediate reuse on most parcels .

in addition , negotiations have begun between the air force and the local authority regarding property sales and the economic development conveyance .

the economic development conveyance negotiations involve an up - front fair market settlement price in accordance with recent regulations .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 2,290 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 104 .

the economic development administration grant to the cities of aurora and denver has provided funds to prepare a work plan for identifying market opportunities for businesses affected by the base closure .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: waste oil , general refuse , fly ash , coal , metals , and fuels .

estimated cleanup cost: $18.8 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1999 .

base description: mather is located on 5,716 acres in the suburbs of sacramento .

the base was first activated in 1918 as a combat pilot training school , then placed on inactive status from 1922 until 1930 and again from 1932 until 1941 .

more recently , mather hosted a strategic air command bombardment wing and an air refueling group .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: may 1993 .

date of base closure: september 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: under the plan , the air force will retain the 26-acre hospital and the army will retain 31 acres for the national guard .

in addition , the veterans administration is requesting a 20-acre site to construct a new clinic and nursing home .

public benefit transfers will include 2,883 acres for the airport , 1,462 acres for county parks and recreation , and 95 acres for educational purposes such as a law enforcement training center .

in addition , 28 acres are to be transferred to the sacramento housing and redevelopment agency to provide facilities for the homeless , including 60 family housing units and 200 single housing units .

the plan calls for the remaining 1,171 acres to be sold , including the 174-acre golf course and 997 acres for commercial , industrial , and residential development .

golf course: the air force disposed of the golf course through a negotiated sale to the county for $6 million .

implementation status: the airport transfer was delayed over air quality issues .

however , a long - term lease conveyance was signed in march 1995 to begin civilian airport use .

some of mather's missions moved to nearby mcclellan air force base , and some air emission mitigation measures may be needed to permit civilian aviation activities at mather .

utility system and infrastructure costs have also posed some difficulties .

local utility companies have been asked to purchase these systems , but they are concerned about the cost of upgrading the systems .

the municipal utilities district estimated it would cost between $2.5 million and $3 million to upgrade the electrical distribution system .

the negotiated sale of the housing has been abandoned due to contentions over fair market value .

instead , the air force will sell the housing publicly .

furthermore , according to a base official , sale of developable parcels of land at mather will likely be piecemeal , requiring more time and effort .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,012 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 241 .

sacramento received the economic development administration grant to assist with the preparation of an economic development plan and the federal aviation administration grant for an airport reuse feasibility study .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: solvents , cleaners , volatile organic compounds , plating waste , and heavy metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $94 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1997 .

base description: the station was located on 1,577 acres on san francisco bay in mountain view , near sunnyvale , 7 miles north of san jose .

it was originally commissioned in 1933 as the home base for a navy dirigible .

its recent mission was to support anti - submarine warfare training and patrol squadrons .

the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) ames research center lies adjacent to the naval air station at moffett .

lockheed missile and space company and other government contractors in the adjacent community also use the airfield .

the onizuka air force station , a satellite tracking and control operation , is also located adjacent to moffett , but it has no airfield or planes , and it does not use the moffett runway .

the 1991 brac commission recommended that the federal government transfer the entire naval air station directly to nasa .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: july 1994 .

date of base closure: july 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the navy's plan called for the no - cost transfer of 1,440 acres to nasa and 130 acres of base housing to the air force .

a 7-acre off - base site of former housing is to be sold for a negotiated price to the city of sunnyvale , which plans to use the site for developing affordable housing .

nasa plans for airfield facilities to be used by various nasa tenants , including lockheed , an army medical evacuation unit , and bay area reserve and national guard units , some of which are relocating from other closing bay area bases .

nasa itself will only use 10 percent to 20 percent of the property , and its operations are expected to make up only about 30 percent of the airfield's use .

golf course: the golf course is part of the property being transferred to nasa , which is having the air force operate it through its morale , welfare , and recreation program .

as with other federal agency uses of moffett facilities , the air force contributes proportionally to nasa for overall operations and maintenance costs .

implementation status: the active duty navy mission ceased , and the base was transferred to nasa on july 1 , 1994 .

as of november 1994 , a nasa official reported that nasa had received commitments for about 80 percent of the available buildings and 50 percent of the airfield use .

nasa is marketing moffett property only to federal agencies and contractors because of the brac decision that it be kept as a federal facility .

as more bases close , nasa hopes to attract more military and military - related units .

however , dod has recommended to the 1995 brac commission that the air national guard unit at moffett be moved to mcclellan air force base and that the onizuka air force station be downsized .

furthermore , nasa faces major budget cuts in coming years and is questioning whether it can handle the operational costs of moffett field under the current arrangements .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 633 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 194 .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: volatile and semivolatile organic compounds , petroleum products , heavy metals , polychlorinated biphenyls , battery acid , polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene .

estimated cleanup cost: $52.9 million .

according to the agreement between the navy and nasa , the navy did not have to certify that the property was clean before the transfer took place .

however , the agreement calls for the navy to remain responsible for the cleanup , which may extend to the year 2010 .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: 2010 .

base description: this base is located on 3,744 acres by the atlantic coast , 100 miles north of charleston , in an area with many resort beaches and golf courses .

beginning in 1939 , the site was used as a municipal airport .

in 1941 , the war department acquired the airfield from the city of myrtle beach .

it was used for training throughout world war ii and was then deactivated , and the runways and tower were given to the city .

the air force reacquired the airfield from the city in 1955 .

most recently , it was home to a tactical fighter mission .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: september 1992 .

date of base closure: march 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for a 1,247-acre airport public benefit transfer .

it further designates 1,555 acres to be included in a land exchange with the state of south carolina , as authorized by public law 102-484 , section 2832 .

in return , the air force will receive 12,521 acres of forested land near shaw air force base for a bombing range , a portion of which the air force had been leasing .

also under the plan , the 224-acre golf course will be a public benefit transfer to the city for a municipal golf course , and a 12-acre site is designated as an educational public benefit transfer for a fire training center .

the air force plans to sell the chapel and credit union properties , totaling about 4 acres .

the disposition of the remaining 702 acres , including 800 housing units , is undetermined , but could include mixed - use redevelopment and airport expansion .

accordingly , the redevelopment authority and the air force are discussing possible negotiated sale or economic development conveyance .

a developer has offered $11.1 million for the housing .

several housing units have been requested for homeless assistance , which dod indicated is consistent with the planned residential use of the facilities .

golf course: the air force planned to dispose of the golf course through a negotiated sale to the state .

however , the city requested the course as a public benefit transfer for use as a municipal course .

this request was subsequently endorsed by the department of the interior and approved by the air force .

a private developer had offered $3.5 million for the course .

implementation status: a conflict between the city and the county over the need for and expansion of the airport caused delays in property disposition decisions .

state legislation created a central authority to handle the dispute and make reuse decisions .

of the property exchanged with the state , the state has sold 69 acres to an electronics firm and is in the process of selling much of the rest for private development of a tourist resort complex .

however , environmental cleanup clearances are needed before the deal is finalized .

the air force will sell the 1.78-acre credit union site to the credit union for about $76,500 , and a tentative agreement has been reached to sell a 2-acre chapel site for $280,000 .

one homeless assistance request remains under consideration by the air force .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 799 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 588 .

the economic development administration grants consisted of $1 million to the grand strand water and sewage authority and $2.5 million to the city of myrtle beach to construct water and sewage facilities .

the federal aviation administration grants were awarded for planning , a noise abatement study , airport construction projects , and equipment , such as rescue and fire - fighting equipment .

in addition , before the 1991 base closure decision , the federal aviation administration provided $13.1 million in grants to help develop civilian airport facilities .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: spent solvents , fuel , waste oil , volatile organic compounds , heavy metals , asbestos , and paints and thinners .

estimated cleanup cost: $27 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: march 1997 .

base description: norton is located on 2,115 acres adjacent to the city of san bernardino , 60 miles east of los angeles .

the base was activated in 1942 , and its primary mission included maintenance of aircraft and aircraft engines .

in 1966 , its mission changed to maintaining airlift capability .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: june 1993 .

date of base closure: march 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for 78 acres of housing to be retained by the air force for personnel at nearby march air force base .

when the march base , which was recommended for realignment in 1993 , declares this property excess , it will be disposed of .

under the plan , dod will retain 34 acres for a defense finance and accounting service center and transfer 33 acres , including a headquarters building and aircraft space , to the forest service for its fire - fighting operations .

furthermore , public benefit transfers will include 1,267 acres for an airport , 24 acres for parks and recreation , and 10 acres for educational purposes to local colleges .

other public benefit transfers will include the 4-acre chapel and youth center sites , which will go to a homeless assistance provider , 24 acres for roads and road widening , and the base's water and sewer system .

the remaining 641 acres will be an economic development conveyance , under the terms of an agreement that guarantees $52 million in revenue to dod after 15 years .

under this agreement , dod will receive 40 percent of the gross revenues from leases and 100 percent of the proceeds from any property sales .

after 15 years , the authority is to pay dod any remaining balance .

the san manuel indians have expressed interest in purchasing a parcel of land for light manufacturing use , and they are also pursuing a request through the bureau of indian affairs for a building to be used as a clinic .

golf course: the local redevelopment authority submitted a $6-million bid for the golf course as part of the $52-million economic development package , which was accepted by the air force .

the authority leased the course for $190,000 annually prior to the sale .

implementation status: reuse was delayed by a homeless request for a major portion of the base that subsequently fell through .

initially , the disposition of the utility systems was also disputed , but the dispute was resolved .

a final agreement on the economic development conveyance was signed in march 1995 ; the agreement obligates the authority to pay the air force $52 million within 15 years for the 641 acres , including the golf course and the utility systems other than sewer and water , which will be conveyed for public health purposes .

the authority is already negotiating seven subleases , under which the tenants will receive free rent for 6 to 12 months in return for renovating the old buildings .

until the environmental cleanup is complete , most property is being disposed of under leases instead of deed transfers .

according to base closing officials , processing leases and deed transfers has been time - consuming .

public benefit transfers have been delayed because the sponsoring federal agencies are reluctant to transfer property where cleanup has not been completed .

the air force is preparing long - term leases in lieu of assignment to sponsoring agencies .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 2,133 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 25 .

the economic development administration funds were awarded to the city of san bernardino to improve the roads and water system at norton .

the federal aviation administration grants were awarded to the local authority for $118,638 to develop an airport master plan and for $2.1 million for airport construction and improvements .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: waste oils and fuel , spent solvents , paints , refrigerants , heavy metals , and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $117.4 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 2000 .

base description: pease is located on 4,257 acres at portsmouth in southeastern new hampshire .

it started operations in 1956 as a strategic air command base ; its mission was to maintain a force capable of long - range bombardment and air - to - air refueling operations .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: september 1990 .

date of base closure: march 1991 .

summary of reuse plan: the air force retained 230 acres for the air national guard and transferred 1,095 acres to the fish and wildlife service for a wildlife refuge .

local authorities requested a 2,305-acre airport public benefit transfer and a 600-acre economic development conveyance , which would include revenue - generating property to support airport operations .

the new hampshire state transportation agency will receive a 27-acre conveyance for highway widening .

golf course: the local authority requested that the golf course be included as part of the economic development conveyance , but they are reevaluating their request .

meanwhile , the golf course is being leased to the local authority for $100,000 annually .

implementation status: a portion of the base , including the airfield , is under lease to the local authority , and 41 tenants have created more than 1,000 jobs thus far .

a commercial airport and an aircraft maintenance complex are in operation .

other tenants include the u.s. department of state's passport and visa processing center and a biotechnology firm .

the state has made a large financial commitment to the fledgling airport , including $16 million a year in operating loans and over $100 million in bonding guarantees for business development .

the air force remains the caretaker of about 1,050 acres that have not been leased .

although it has been 3 years since property disposition decisions were made , no deeds have been transferred .

according to base officials , considerable time and effort have been spent on preparing environmental studies and reports and seeking cleanup approvals , but no end is in sight .

on august 29 , 1994 , in a suit brought by the conservation law foundation and the town of newington , the u.s. district court ruled that the air force violated section 120 ( h ) of the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act by transferring property under a long - term lease without an approved remedial design .

however , the lease was not invalidated .

this ruling has affected dod's leasing practices at other closing bases .

the court also ordered the air force to prepare a supplemental environmental impact statement , which will be complete in july 1995 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 400 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 1,038 .

to assist with industrial development , the economic development administration awarded grants amounting to $8,475,000 to the pease development authority to renovate or demolish buildings and to widen the main roadway entrance to the base to facilitate public access .

in addition , the pease community and the portsmouth naval shipyard community are expected to share the benefits of a $3,450,000 economic development administration grant to the new hampshire state port authority for the construction of a barge facility in the area .

federal aviation administration grants were awarded for planning , preparing a noise compatibility study , installing equipment , and improving the airport .

the largest of the grants was $3.8 million to rehabilitate a runway .

in addition to the grants shown above , the department of transportation provided $400,000 for a surface transportation study and the environmental protection agency provided $120,000 for a watershed restoration study .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: volatile organic compounds , organic solvents , spent fuels , waste oils , petroleum / oils / lubricants , pesticides , paints , and elevated metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $140 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: november 1997 .

base description: these naval facilities are located on 1,502 waterfront acres , 4 miles south of philadelphia's central business district .

the 348-acre shipyard includes piers and water acres that contain a mothballed fleet .

the brac commission determined that the shipyard should be closed and preserved so that it would be available if needed in the future .

the 1,105-acre naval station is adjacent to the shipyard .

the property was deeded to the navy by the city in 1868 .

the 49-acre hospital property is located about 1 mile from the base .

the main hospital building was completed in 1935 .

date of closure recommendation: hospital — 1988 , naval station and shipyard — 1991 .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: naval station — january 1996 and shipyard — september , 1996 .

summary of reuse plan: under the current plan , the navy will retain 550 acres , including the shipyard .

the plan calls for the national park service to receive 1 acre and for most of the hospital property to be public benefit transfers — 30 acres for park land and 6 acres for a nursing home .

the remaining 13 acres of hospital property to be sold for residential development .

reuse plans for 902 acres containing most of the naval station property have not been determined .

the emphasis of the reuse plan is on economic development and job creation .

the reuse authority hopes to encourage businesses , both large and small , to use existing buildings , and there is one large open site , the former airfield , that is suitable for large site development .

golf course: none .

implementation status: local authorities' initial challenge of the closure decision delayed the start of reuse planning for the closing facilities .

in early 1994 , the u.s. supreme court ruled against the challenge .

the local reuse committee has completed a conceptual reuse plan , which seeks to attract private business and redevelop the area through economic development transfers and long - term leases .

according to the base closure officer , although base cleanup will take 5 more years , most base property could be leased and no environmental issues should prevent reuse from occurring .

in november 1994 , the navy and the city executed a master lease that permits the city to sublease the preserved shipyard facilities , thus allowing for job creation at the facility .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 8,119 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the office of economic adjustment has provided about $2 million in planning grants .

in april 1995 , the office also awarded a $50-million grant to establish a revolving loan fund to invest in projects that would accelerate the conversion of the naval station and shipyard to civilian use .

economic development administration grants awarded to the city of philadelphia included $1.6 million to establish a revolving loan fund to assist in the conversion of defense dependent industries and $1.1 million for a feasibility study on the potential commercial reuse of shipyard and hospital buildings and specialized equipment to determine the best use and whether there are market matches .

the study also was to determine the feasibility of extensive asbestos removal from the hospital building .

in addition , the navy is expending $16 million in military construction funds to improve utility systems on the retained portion of the base .

furthermore , the 1995 defense appropriations act directed the navy to spend $14.2 million for similar utility improvements on the portion of the base that is being disposed of .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: heavy metals , polychlorinated biphenyls , petroleum / oil / lubricants , solvents , and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $120 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: 1999 .

base description: the presidio is located on 1,480 acres in san francisco fronting the ocean and san francisco bay .

it has been a military garrison for 220 years , occupied by spain , mexico , and the united states , and was designated a national historic landmark in 1962 .

the property includes the letterman army medical center and the army institute of research , as well as a former public health service hospital .

legislation enacted in 1972 to create the golden gate national recreation area included a provision mandating the transfer of the presidio to the national park service if dod determined the base was in excess of its needs .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 .

date of military mission termination: september 1994 ( sixth army headquarters — september 1995 ) .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the army is transferring the entire 1,480-acre base to the national park service to become part of the golden gate national recreation area .

the plan calls for the creation of a nonprofit corporation called the presidio trust to manage the conversion of the base into a park and to be responsible for the renovation and leasing of facilities .

golf course: the golf course will be transferred to the park service by october 1995 .

the park service is seeking a concessionaire to operate the course , and it plans to use revenues from the course , which could exceed $1 million annually , to help support park operations .

implementation status: after months of discussions and considerable controversy , the army and the park service agreed on the transfer terms , and the property was transferred to the park service on october 1 , 1994 .

the army retained an irrevocable special use permit for a portion of the base to be used by sixth army headquarters .

however , in december 1994 , the army announced that it would cease operations at the presidio by october 1995 , at which time the park service will have sole responsibility for the costly maintenance of the presidio .

since the 1994 congress did not authorize the presidio trust , the park service is handling conversion efforts .

the park service had hoped to lease the letterman complex to the university of california medical complex , but the university announced in december 1994 that it would not lease the facility .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 3,150 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 725 .

in addition , before turning the property over to the park service , the army spent $69 million to upgrade various features of the base's infrastructure , including its sewer systems , water treatment facilities , electrical systems , and roofs .

however , these repairs do not address bringing the base's buildings up to local codes .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: petroleum hydrocarbons , heavy metals , solvents , and pesticides .

estimated cleanup cost: $104.6 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: july 1996 .

base description: the 151-acre base is located on lake washington in seattle .

in 1922 , the navy established a 366-acre air station at the site .

the navy surplused 215 acres , including the airfield in 1973 , which became home to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and the city's magnuson park .

the remaining property has served as a navy administrative facility and includes a small research facility for the fish and wildlife service .

date of closure recommendation: 1988 — partial closure ; 1991 — full closure .

estimated date of military mission termination: september 1995 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: the navy plans to transfer 10 acres to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , which it will use to expand operations at its adjacent facility .

the fish and wildlife service is to receive 4 acres , which is the site of an on - base laboratory it currently operates .

seattle's reuse plan calls for the remainder of the base to be public benefit transfers of 18 acres for homeless assistance , 82 acres for parks and recreation , 21 acres for educational activities , and 16 acres for roadways .

under this plan , homeless providers would receive 18 acres , including 3 family housing units and 197 single housing units .

under the provisions of the base closure community redevelopment and homeless assistance act of 1994 , the city is interested in incorporating the homeless housing with the development of mixed housing on that property .

the bureau of indian affairs requested the majority of the base ( 85 acres ) on behalf of the muckleshoot indian tribe , which seeks to use the property for educational and economic development activities .

the muckleshoots have indicated a willingness to reduce the size of their request if the city is willing to negotiate .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the city of seattle opposes the muckleshoot plan , saying it is incompatible with the community's reuse plan .

the city also opposes the tribe's gaining sovereignty over base property , which would remove it from local zoning and land use regulations .

the department of interior has asked dod to give the bureau of indian affairs' request priority under federal rules for disposing of excess property .

as long as 2 years ago , dod asked the parties to work on a joint reuse plan .

dod's property disposition decision is pending because of the issue , which is delaying reuse progress at the base .

base closure and community officials doubt that the stalemate at the local level will be broken without a dod policy decision more clearly defining native american status in the base closure screening process and the concept of sovereignty as it applies to base closure sites not located on a reservation .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 754 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: petroleum products and metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $5.2 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: january 1995 .

base description: the station is located on 428 acres on the southern edge of kansas city .

the city conveyed the property to the air force to establish the base in 1953 .

until 1970 , the air defense command had the primary mission on the base .

in 1979 , the air force phased down the base , and in 1980 , the air force reserve assumed operational control .

in 1985 , the air force transferred ownership of much of the airfield to the city , but the city was unable to develop a successful commercial airport , and the air force reserve has remained the biggest user .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: july 1994 .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: dod plans to retain 238 acres — 184 acres for the army reserves and 54 acres for the marine corps .

most of the remaining property , about 178 acres , will be a public benefit transfer to the city to expand the airport .

the city of belton plans to purchase the remaining 12 acres at fair market value .

golf course: none .

the golf course was disposed of when the air force property was transferred in 1985 .

implementation status: the air force has turned responsibility for control tower operations and navigational maintenance over to the city .

in addition , annual air force payments of $265,000 to partly cover airfield operations ceased as of october 1994 .

a final decision on property disposition was signed in april 1995 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 569 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 0 .

the federal aviation administration grants awarded to the kansas city aviation department included $228,000 for an airport master plan , $744,000 for facilities and equipment , and $600,000 for grading and drainage .

in addition , prior to the 1991 closure decision , the department received $955,800 in federal aviation administration funds in 1990 for new runway approach lights .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: petroleum / oil / lubricants , aqueous film - forming foam , polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons , and solvents .

estimated cleanup cost: $5 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1998 .

base description: the base is located on 2,015 acres about 12 miles southeast of downtown columbus .

construction of the base began in january 1942 , and it was activated as a training center for army air corps glider pilots .

the base was deactivated in 1949 and reactivated in 1951 as a strategic air command base supporting the korean war build - up .

the air force base closed in 1978 , and the airfield was leased long - term to the community in 1984 .

however , most of the support for airport operations has continued to come from the air national guard .

air guard base property to be disposed of under the current closure will include conveyance of property included in the long - term lease , as well as other runways and taxiways .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: no active duty missions .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the air force will retain 203 acres for use by the air national guard , and it will transfer 164 acres to the army for use by the army national guard and reserves .

the remaining 1,648 acres will be an airport public benefit transfer to the port authority .

golf course: none .

the golf course was disposed of when the air force base was closed in 1979 .

implementation status: final property screening of acreage and buildings under the mckinney homeless assistance act was completed , and no formal homeless requests have been received .

the public comment period on the environmental impact statement has concluded , and the statement was issued in february 1995 .

a final decision on property disposition was signed in may 1995 .

the port authority has been having difficulty attracting sufficient tenants to support airport operations .

it currently receives an annual $3 million subsidy from the county .

however , a local official reported that the port authority recently has had much greater success in attracting businesses .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,129 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 8 ( these jobs are related to caretaker operations ) .

the federal aviation administration grants were awarded for planning and airport improvements .

in addition , prior to the 1991 closure decision , the federal aviation administration had provided grants totaling $13.5 million to help develop civilian airport facilities .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: pesticides , paint , spent fuel , waste oil , solvents , and heavy metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $41.7 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: june 1997 .

base description: the depot is located on 487 acres in an industrial area , 7 miles southeast of downtown sacramento .

the depot first occupied its present site in 1945 .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: march 1994 .

date of base closure: march 1995 .

summary of reuse plan: dod plans to retain 80 acres for use by the army reserve and the navy .

the department of health and human services has approved requests by homeless assistance providers for 28 acres of property , including warehouse and cold storage space for food distribution to homeless groups .

the city opted for an alternative to another approved request from a homeless provider for two buildings on either side of the main administration building .

adopting the view that the operation of a homeless facility in the location would likely disrupt the economic development plan , the city instead agreed to fund the acquisition of facilities elsewhere for the homeless provider .

according to a city official , the increased property tax revenue from economic development at the depot is expected to more than offset the cost of the relocation .

california state university sacramento is receiving about 8 acres for a manufacturing technology center .

the remaining 371 acres have been transferred to the city of sacramento through an economic development conveyance .

under the terms of the conveyance , the city will pay the army $7.2 million for the property after 10 years .

golf course: none .

implementation status: army officials consider the depot to be a model of successful fast - track efforts to clean up contaminants , convert facilities to civilian use , and create jobs at a closing base .

central to this success was the city's ability to convince packard bell to locate its computer manufacturing operations at the depot .

key factors contributing to the company's decision were the state's approval of an enterprise zone , which enabled the company to qualify for tax breaks , and the city's offer to finance renovation costs at the base .

the city is financing $17 million in renovation costs to be covered by lease payments from packard bell .

the city is allowing packard bell to sublease some of the property it has received and use the proceeds to help with renovation costs .

packard bell has an option to buy the 269 acres it is leasing from the city for $8.9 million .

local officials expect the packard bell move to sacramento will create 2,500 to 3,000 direct manufacturing jobs and up to 2,500 additional jobs for suppliers in the area .

the total more than offsets the jobs lost due to depot closure .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 3,164 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 630 .

national priorities list site: yes , the base is expected to be removed from the list in june 1996 .

contaminants: waste oil and grease , solvents , metal plating wastes , and wastewaters containing caustics , cyanide , and metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $62.4 million .

considerable progress has been made in base cleanup so that the property being transferred to packard bell was suitable for transfer .

some additional base cleanup activities have been slowed by a contract award bid protest .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: june 1996 .

base description: the station is located on 1,620 acres in the orange county town of tustin south of los angeles .

it was first commissioned in 1942 and was used to support observation blimps and personnel conducting antisubmarine patrols off the coast during world war ii .

it was decommissioned in 1949 but reactivated in 1951 and used solely for helicopter operations .

dod's estimate of revenues from the disposal of property at the station is higher than for any other 1988 or 1991 base closure .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

estimated date of military mission termination: june 1997 .

the 1993 brac commission redirected the planned relocation of tustin military missions , which resulted in a delay in terminating these missions at tustin .

estimated date of base closure: july 1997 .

summary of reuse plan: dod plans to retain 10 acres for the army reserves .

the city has agreed to include in its reuse plan about 38 acres for homeless assistance programs , including family and single housing units and a facility to be used for a children's shelter .

the plan calls for 219 acres to be educational public benefit transfers for public schools and an educational coalition involving the community college .

in addition , public benefit transfer for parks and recreation will total 103 acres .

the current reuse plans call for 1,142 acres of the base property to be an economic development conveyance with terms to be negotiated .

the remaining 108 acres are undetermined .

disputes have arisen about additional federal requests: 12 acres by the army reserves , 25 acres by the air national guard , and 55 acres of housing , consisting of 274 family housing units , by the coast guard .

these requests for property with high - market value are opposed by the community or marine corps headquarters or both .

other acreage requested by two indian groups and a local homeless services' coalition also conflict with local reuse plans .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the local authority has completed its reuse plan , and preparation of the environmental impact statement based on the plan is underway .

dod granted a request from the authority to delay the federal screening decision .

the authority is concerned that if too much of the property is given to federal and homeless assistance agencies , the local tax base will be diminished and will be insufficient to support the many infrastructure improvements that are needed to develop the base , such as construction of new roads .

one local official estimated that these infrastructure improvements will cost about $200 million , which will reduce the estimated revenue from developing base property .

the authority has agreed that homeless assistance requests will be incorporated into the community plan in accordance with the base closure community redevelopment and homeless assistance act of 1994 .

homeless requesters want more property than has been agreed to by the authority .

determination of how much property will go to homeless requesters awaits a final decision on how much property will be transferred to federal entities .

resolution of the indian requests for property at tustin is on hold pending clarification at the federal level of where such requests should fit in the property screening process .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 348 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: dichloroethane , naphthalene , pentachlorophenol , petroleum hydrocarbons , trichloroethylene , benzene , toluene , ethylbenzene , and xylene .

estimated cleanup cost: $86.2 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: november 1999 .

base description: the center is located on 840 acres in warminster , a populated suburban area about 20 miles north of the philadelphia city center .

the facility includes an airport , as well as office and research space .

the navy acquired the facilities in 1944 from brewster aeronautical corporation , which manufactured aircraft during world war ii .

the facility has served as the principal naval research , development , and evaluation center for aircraft , airborne antisubmarine warfare , and aircraft systems other than aircraft - launched weapon systems .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

estimated date of military mission termination: july 1996 .

estimated date of base closure: september 1996 .

summary of reuse plan: the navy planned to retain 100 acres , including its dynamic flight simulator ( centrifuge ) and its inertial navigation laboratory , leaving 740 acres for reuse .

the community has decided that it does not want to reuse the center as an airport .

instead , the community hopes to attract research facilities to the site .

discussions are also underway with a consortium of eight universities for a satellite campus , and the school district is interested in obtaining property for a new junior high school .

county homeless assistance providers may also be interested in obtaining some center property .

the community finalized its reuse plan in february 1995 , which emphasizes public benefit and economic development transfers .

parks and recreation will account for approximately 296 acres , economic development conveyance 296 acres , education 67 acres , and the homeless 7 acres .

the reuse authority has not developed a plan for how the remaining 74 acres will be disposed of , but has earmarked 44 acres for residential and 30 acres for municipal use .

dod has recommended to the 1995 brac commission that the 100 acres the navy was retaining also be closed .

according to a base official , if the commission approves this recommendation , this property will likely be added to the economic development conveyance .

golf course: none .

implementation status: the closure process is on schedule , and environmental remediation measures are expected to be in place by the time the base closes in 1996 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 1,979 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: base not yet closed .

the federal lands reuse authority of bucks county , pennsylvania , plans to establish a 35,000-square foot business incubator program in hangar and office space .

according to a base official , the economic development administration has promised a future grant of over $2 million to assist this program .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: firing range wastes , fuels , heavy metals , industrial wastewater sludges , nonindustrial solid wastes , paints , polychlorinated biphenyls , sewage treatment sludge , solvents , unspecified chemicals , and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $11.1 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: september 1996 .

base description: williams is located on 4,043 acres in mesa , which is in the phoenix metropolitan area .

it was activated in 1941 as a flight training school , and pilot training was the base's primary mission throughout its history .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: january 1993 .

date of base closure: september 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the reuse plan calls for the base to be converted into a civilian airport and for a consortium of educational and job training programs involving arizona state university and maricopa community college .

the local authority is to receive a 2,547-acre airport public benefit transfer .

the colleges are to receive 657 acres through an educational public benefit transfer .

this transfer would include the housing for the campus and the hospital , which would be operated jointly by arizona state university and the veterans administration .

the housing units will be leased until the university students occupy them .

two homeless providers will receive 42 acres , including 88 housing units and a chapel .

the army reserve will receive 11 acres and the national weather service 1 acre .

the air force will convey 16 acres as a public benefit transfer for public health purposes .

the air force currently plans to sell the remaining 769 acres .

the gila river indian community is to receive the 158-acre golf course and an additional 144 acres through a negotiated sale .

the remaining 467 acres , including property the local authority wanted to support the airport , is slated for negotiated sale .

however , public law 102-484 authorized the air force to do a land exchange with the state of arizona , whereby some of this property at williams would be given to the state in exchange for about 85,000 acres of rangeland that the air force leases from the state .

the air force has not acted on this prerogative , and the local authority does not favor property at williams being conveyed to the state .

golf course: the golf course will be a negotiated sale to the gila river indian community .

implementation plan: negotiations are ongoing between the local airport authority , the education consortium , the homeless coalition , the gila indians , the federal aviation administration , and the air force over property disposition issues and details .

the airport authority and the gila indians are negotiating over possible gila partnership in the airport authority .

the education and job training programs are underway , with enrollment of over 600 students expected for the fall of 1995 .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 781 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 368 .

the economic development administration grant was awarded to the city of mesa to fund the educational consortium plan , a land use and economic development plan , and a transportation plan .

the federal aviation administration grants included $125,000 for developing an airport master plan and $2,893,000 for facilities and equipment .

national priorities list site: yes .

contaminants: volatile organic compounds , waste solvents , fuels , petroleum / oil / lubricants , and heavy metals .

estimated cleanup cost: $42.7 million .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: december 1997 .

base description: the facility is located on 580 acres , 25 miles south of washington , d.c .

it is bounded on the west by the marumsco national wildlife refuge and consists of some laboratory buildings and a wetlands area .

the army acquired the property in 1951 for use as a military radio station .

the facility became inactive in 1969 .

in 1971 , it became a satellite installation of the harry diamond army research laboratory at adelphi , maryland .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: september 1994 .

date of base closure: september 1994 .

summary of reuse plan: the army plans to transfer the entire 580 acres at no cost to the department of the interior to be incorporated into the fish and wildlife service's mason neck wildlife refuge .

an earlier community plan had called for the developed portion of the facility to be conveyed to the community for a regional employment center and environmental education , but august 1994 legislation gave the entire property to interior .

golf course: none .

implementation status: no date has been established for transferring the facility to the department of the interior .

at present , the facility remains under army stewardship and continues to be maintained in a caretaker status .

the army is continuing the environmental restoration program at the base , and it will remain responsible for remediation activities until completion .

according to a base official , interior is reluctant to sign for ownership of the property because it lacks operations and maintenance funds to care for the property and upgrade or demolish buildings , particularly until the lease expires on space occupied by local fish and wildlife service staff in the nearby community .

furthermore , interior is reluctant to assume ownership until the cleanup is complete due to concern that dod's environmental restoration budget will be cut , leaving insufficient dod funds to complete the cleanup .

the operator of a homeless assistance seed distribution program has a no - cost temporary lease from the army for a small warehouse operation at the base .

it must make arrangements with interior , if it wants to continue this activity after the transfer occurs .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 90 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: not available ; the property is being retained by a federal agency .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: polychlorinated biphenyls , petroleum products .

estimated cleanup costs: $4.1 million .

other potential contaminants include ethylene glycol from a previous research and development activity and possible heavy metals in soils from past sewage sludge injection activities .

site investigation and sampling activities are continuing to confirm or deny potential remediation sites .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: april 1997 .

base description: wurtsmith is located in northeast michigan on the coast of lake huron in the township of oscoda .

it is located on 2,205 acres of air force property and 2,995 acres of land leased from the state , the forest service , and the local power company .

the base was initially established in 1924 and used as an army air service gunnery range .

it was closed in 1945 , then reactivated in 1947 .

in 1958 , the base was expanded to host a strategic air command unit .

date of closure recommendation: 1991 .

date of military mission termination: december 1992 .

date of base closure: june 1993 .

summary of reuse plan: the plan calls for 2 acres to be transferred to the fish and wildlife service .

public benefit transfers will include 1,700 acres for a civilian airport , 15 acres for parks , 10 acres for an educational consortium , and 5 acres for a health facility .

two homeless assistance providers are requesting about 7 acres of property , including 9 family housing units and a 72-bed dormitory .

the local authorities are planning to request the remaining 466 acres , including housing units , utilities , and property available for commercial development .

since wurtsmith is a qualifying rural area , it may be a no - cost economic development conveyance .

the chippewa indian tribe has expressed interest in buildings for a casino , as well as some base housing , but it had not made a formal request at the time of our review .

golf course: none .

implementation status: as of december 1994 , the airfield facilities were being operated on a 30-year , long - term lease .

under the lease agreement , local authorities gave up the right to restoration , which otherwise would have required the air force to remove unwanted buildings and a runway from land originally leased from the state .

the air force will continue to handle caretaker costs for the rest of the base .

the local authority is subleasing some of the facilities to an aircraft remanufacturer , which has created over 200 jobs .

a final decision on disposition of the remaining property cannot be reached until decisions are made on requests from the homeless assistance providers and the indian tribe .

civilian jobs lost due to closure: 705 .

civilian jobs created as of 3 / 31 / 95: 553 .

the economic development administration granted iosco county $7,717,500 for infrastructure improvements and other assistance , including funds to connect the base to municipal water and wastewater systems and to improve and expand the capacity of those systems to handle the increased load .

the grant also included $375,000 for marketing and promotion and $750,000 for technical assistance to survey and subdivide the property and map public streets and the utility lines .

the economic development administration granted the county an additional $2 million to establish a revolving loan fund for financing the expansion of existing businesses and for attracting new businesses to the area .

the federal aviation administration grants were for airport facilities , equipment , and planning .

national priorities list site: no .

contaminants: waste fuel and oil , spent solvents , and volatile organic compounds .

estimated cleanup cost: $70 million .

cleanup of groundwater contamination under the housing area will take some time , but base officials hope to have remediation measures in place by 1999 .

estimated date cleanup complete or remedy in place: 1999 .

recovery ( percent ) davisville naval construction battalion center long beach naval station / naval hospital myrtle beach air force base philadelphia naval station / naval hospital / naval shipyard puget sound naval station ( sand point ) tustin marine corps air station ( continued ) recovery ( percent ) .

gao has issued the following reports related to military base closures and realignments: military base closures: analysis of dod's process and recommendations for 1995 ( gao / t - nsiad - 95-132 , apr .

17 , 1995 ) .

military bases: analysis of dod's 1995 process and recommendations for closure and realignment ( gao / nsiad - 95-133 , apr .

14 , 1995 ) .

military bases: challenges in identifying and implementing closure recommendations ( gao / t - nsiad - 95-107 , feb. 23 , 1995 ) .

military bases: environmental impact at closing installations ( gao / nsiad - 95-70 , feb. 23 , 1995 ) .

military bases: reuse plans for selected bases closed in 1988 and 1991 ( gao / nsiad - 95-3 , nov. 1 , 1994 ) .

military bases: letters and requests received on proposed closures and realignments ( gao / nsiad - 93-173s , may 25 , 1993 ) .

military bases: army's planned consolidation of research , development , test and evaluation ( gao / nsiad - 93-150 , apr .

29 , 1993 ) .

military bases: analysis of dod's recommendations and selection process for closure and realignments ( gao / t - nsiad - 93-11 , apr .

19 , 1993 ) .

military bases: analysis of dod's recommendations and selection process for closures and realignments ( gao / nsiad - 93-173 , apr .

15 , 1993 ) .

military bases: revised cost and savings estimates for 1988 and 1991 closures and realignments ( gao / nsiad - 93-161 , mar .

31 , 1993 ) .

military bases: transfer of pease air force base slowed by environmental concerns ( gao / nsiad - 93-111fs , feb. 3 , 1993 ) .

military bases: navy's planned consolidation of rdt&e activities ( gao / nsiad - 92-316 , aug. 20 , 1992 ) .

military bases: observations on the analyses supporting proposed closures and realignments ( gao / nsiad - 91-224 , may 15 , 1991 ) .

military bases: an analysis of the commission's realignment and closure recommendations ( gao / nsiad - 90-42 , nov. 29 , 1989 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

