the ballistic missile defense organization and the army plan to acquire a theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) user operational evaluation system ( uoes ) — an early prototype version of the final thaad system .

uoes is intended to ( 1 ) allow military users to influence the thaad system design , ( 2 ) permit an early operational assessment of the system's capabilities , and ( 3 ) provide a system that could be deployed in a national emergency .

uoes will consist primarily of refurbished components acquired for the system's demonstration and validation phase , although the army plans to purchase 40 uoes interceptors to provide the deployable system capability .

pursuant to our basic legislative responsibilities , we reviewed the thaad uoes program to determine whether planned testing would reasonably demonstrate the capabilities of uoes as an interim system before funds are committed to interceptor production .

we are addressing this report to the committees of jurisdiction because it identifies problems and calls for corrective action that the department of defense ( dod ) has indicated an unwillingness to take .

we are suggesting that the congress may wish to take the necessary action to ensure that dod addresses the problems we have identified .

this report does not address the overall value of the thaad system .

thaad is a ground - based weapon system being developed by the ballistic missile defense organization and the army to defeat theater ballistic missiles by colliding with them while in flight .

the system supports the national objective of protecting u.s. and allied deployed forces , population centers , and industrial facilities from theater missile attacks .

the total estimated cost for thaad is $16.7 billion , and the system is currently in an early phase of development called demonstration and validation .

a decision on whether to proceed into the engineering and manufacturing development phase is scheduled for march 1997 .

a production decision is planned for early 2003 , and initial fielding is currently scheduled for 2006 .

dod's budget submission for fiscal year 1997 requests $481.8 million for the program .

the fiscal year 1996 national defense authorization act requires a contingency capability — thaad uoes — by fiscal year 1998 .

uoes will consist of 40 interceptors ; 4 launchers ; 2 radars ; 2 battle management / command , control , and intelligence units ; and associated support equipment .

except for the 40 interceptors , these components have already been acquired under the existing thaad demonstration and validation contract .

the components are to be refurbished for use in the uoes system .

the 40 interceptors are yet to be acquired under an option to the demonstration and validation contract .

figure 1 shows the principal uoes components .

initially , the army had no specific plans to test the 40 uoes interceptors .

however , in 1995 , the ballistic missile defense organization's general counsel ruled that use of research , development , test , and evaluation funding to acquire the interceptors would be justified only if ( 1 ) there were a planned intent to use them in early testing , ( 2 ) they were not principally intended for operational purposes , and ( 3 ) they were necessary to provide an adequate number for testing .

in response to this ruling , the thaad project office developed a test plan for the interceptors , but recommended that it not be implemented .

the ballistic missile defense organization instructed the project office to implement the test plan .

since that time , circumstances have changed .

part of the test plan has become obsolete , and other parts can be accomplished with equipment other than the 40 uoes interceptors .

five of the uoes interceptors were to serve as backups in tests that have now been canceled ; another four interceptors were planned as backups for engineering and manufacturing development tests ; and one was planned as a backup to a limited user test .

as a result of changes in planned demonstration and validation phase testing , it now appears that an adequate number of backup interceptors will be available for engineering and manufacturing development and limited user tests without the uoes interceptors .

the remaining 30 uoes interceptors were to be used in operational suitability tests that did not involve firing interceptors .

however , the purposes of those tests can be accomplished with training rounds or with the backup demonstration and validation phase interceptors .

the army anticipates exercising the contract option for the uoes interceptors in the 3rd quarter of 1996 based on the results of only the first 7 of 14 scheduled demonstration and validation flight tests .

the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) established one successful intercept of a target while using the thaad radar to guide the interceptor as minimum criteria for exercising the contract option for uoes interceptors .

test flight 7 , currently scheduled for about july 1996 , will be the first intercept attempt using the thaad radar .

through may 1996 , the army had conducted five flight tests .

only two of the five tests were designed to intercept a target and both intercept attempts failed .

according to the ballistic missile defense organization and the army , seven tests will not be sufficient to characterize operational effectiveness in such areas as mission performance and supportability .

the army also plans to conduct a 7-week limited user test after completing the 14 demonstration and validation flight tests .

the limited user test will build on the results of the demonstration and validation flight tests and focus on operational effectiveness and suitability issues , including mission performance and system supportability .

the primary events to be conducted during the limited user test will be field training exercises , command post exercises , modeling and simulations , and a flight test using an interceptor already under contract .

results from the limited user test are not scheduled to be available until early 1998 .

according to dod's joint staff , information currently available is not sufficient to characterize uoes operational effectiveness .

representatives of the joint staff told us that if a national emergency occurred , the national command authority would decide whether to deploy thaad uoes based on the threat at that time and whatever data was known about uoes effectiveness .

they agreed , however , that better data for making a deployment decision would be available at the completion of the limited user tests .

the joint staff representatives also told us that some theater commanders place a high priority on thaad's intended capabilities .

the joint staff expect that at the completion of the demonstration and validation flight tests and the limited user tests , sufficient information will be available to characterize uoes operational effectiveness .

however , under the current plan , results from the limited user tests are not scheduled to be available until about 1-1 / 2 years after the army exercises the contract option for the 40 uoes interceptors .

the airlift requirement for uoes will be significant .

the army estimates that to transport the full system with 40 interceptors from the united states to a theater of operation will require up to 18 c - 5 , 26 c - 17 , or 40 c - 141 flights .

the army estimates that a uoes initial force , or “minimum launch capability,” including 1 radar , 2 launchers , and 20 interceptors , could be deployed with 7 c - 5 , 9 c - 17 , or 13 c - 141 flights .

however , whether for a complete uoes deployment , or a minimum launch capability , the necessary flights may not be available unless uoes is afforded a high priority .

in september 1995 , the ballistic missile defense organization's annual report to the congress stated that deciding what assets should be transported in the crucial first days of an overseas campaign will present a critical challenge and that the need to transport large inventories of equipment to regional theaters of operations will stress airlift capabilities .

representatives from the joint staff told us that thaad uoes would likely have a high priority for airlift resources .

however , other systems may also have a high priority .

for example , the army plans to begin fielding 1,200 patriot advanced capability - 3 interceptors in 1999 , which could compete with the 40-interceptor thaad uoes for airlift resources .

since september 1992 , when the thaad demonstration and validation contract was awarded , the contractor's cost estimate for the 40 uoes interceptors has increased by over 100 percent — from $80 million to $165 million .

according to thaad project officials , the contractor's estimate is likely to increase further because funding for the interceptors has been stretched out over a 4-year period and the delivery period has been extended from 29 months to 34 months .

the estimated cost for spares , support equipment , and contractor support increases the estimated total cost of a uoes deployment option by another $55 million — to a total of $220 million .

at our request , thaad project officials categorized the interceptor cost increase .

they stated that the increase in interceptor cost is due to technical , estimating , and schedule changes .

technical cost increases result from design changes to the interceptor's seeker , booster , and divert and attitude control system .

estimating cost increases result from correcting errors in the initial cost estimate and shifting other costs from the contractor to the government .

schedule cost increases occurred because the time from exercising the contract option to final delivery grew from 18 to 29 months .

final delivery of the 40 uoes interceptors has been delayed about 2 years — from the 2nd quarter of 1997 until the 2nd quarter of 1999 .

under the current schedule , uoes interceptor deliveries would begin in 1998 .

at the end of fiscal year 1998 when the 1996 defense authorization act requires the uoes capability , only 14 interceptors will be available .

exercising the option for the uoes interceptors has been delayed about 10 months , from october 1995 until about august 1996 , and the time from exercising the option to final delivery has increased 16 months .

the 10-month delay results from slips in the demonstration and validation flight test schedule .

these slips occurred largely because of scheduling difficulties at the test range and the failure to intercept the target during test flights 4 and 5 — the first two tests designed for target intercept .

the army maintains that a successful intercept using a test range radar to guide the interceptor should occur before attempting an intercept with the thaad radar .

the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) is requiring the army to conduct a successful intercept using the thaad radar before it can exercise the option for uoes interceptors .

the first intercept attempt relying on the thaad radar is now planned during test flight 7 in the july 1996 time frame .

the 16-month delay in delivery results from ( 1 ) extended lead times — from 18 to 29 months — in delivery of some interceptor components and ( 2 ) reduced fiscal year 1997 funding that further extended final deliveries from 29 to 34 months .

the current plan for acquiring thaad uoes interceptors commits funds for interceptor production in about august 1996 , well before testing in early 1998 provides some assurance of the system's effectiveness .

in view of the risks associated with producing uoes interceptors before testing , we believe the army should delay contracting for them until the testing is completed .

using 34 months as the time required from contract award to final interceptor delivery , uoes would still be available as an interim system in late 2000 .

this is about 1-1 / 2 years later than currently planned but well before fielding of the final thaad begins in the 2006 time frame .

accordingly , to avoid committing over $200 million for a system that may not have adequate operational effectiveness , we recommend that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) restrict obligational authority for uoes interceptors until the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff certifies that uoes has adequate effectiveness to merit deployment as an interim system and ( 2 ) seek legislative relief from the requirements of the 1996 national defense authorization act in regards to acquiring thaad uoes by fiscal year 1998 .

in commenting on a draft of this report , dod disagreed with our recommendations , stating that thaad uoes will serve three functions in priority order: ( 1 ) providing soldiers an opportunity to influence the system's design ; ( 2 ) conducting early operational assessments of the system ; and ( 3 ) if directed by the national command authority , providing a theater commander in chief with a limited missile defense capability .

we do not disagree with these purposes and would point out that the two primary purposes of uoes set forth by dod — early user influence on the design and system operation assessment — can be accomplished without contracting for the 40 interceptors .

moreover , the thrust of our report deals with the risks inherent in the army's accelerated approach of contracting for interceptors to be deployed before testing provides assurance of the interceptor's effectiveness .

dod stated that the requirement for successful hardware - in - the - loop testing of kill vehicle subsystems and one successful intercept using the thaad radar will reduce the risk associated with contracting for the 40 interceptors .

however , we note that these minimal criteria are even less than the three successful intercepts required for entering the engineering and manufacturing development phase .

our work has repeatedly shown that when production of weapon systems began on the basis of schedule or other considerations rather than on the basis of technical maturity , major design changes were often needed to correct problems .

the design changes frequently led to additional testing and costly retrofit of units already produced .

dod stated that implementing our recommendation would cause a gap in production of interceptors between demonstration and validation and engineering and manufacturing development .

however , dod failed to point out that the current schedule already includes a production gap between demonstration and validation and engineering development and an even larger gap between completing production of interceptors for engineering development tests and the beginning of low - rate initial production .

implementing our recommendation would widen the gap between demonstration and validation and engineering development but decrease the gap between engineering development and low - rate initial production .

dod also stated that implementing our recommendation would permit a uoes capability no sooner than fiscal year 2000 , 2 years later than required by law .

we recognize that implementing our recommendation would not allow dod to provide a thaad uoes capability by fiscal year 1998 as required by the 1996 national defense authorization act .

for that reason , we recommended that the secretary of defense seek relief from the act's requirement .

however , under the current thaad schedule , only 14 interceptors will be available at the end of fiscal year 1998 .

the army's definition of “minimum launch capability” includes 20 interceptors or 6 more than will be available in fiscal year 1998 .

the full 40-interceptor capability will not be available until the 3rd quarter of fiscal year 1999 , even if no additional schedule slips occur .

because dod has clearly indicated its intention to commit over $200 million for uoes interceptors that may have inadequate operational effectiveness and because the current schedule will provide only 14 of the 40 interceptors by fiscal year 1998 , the congress may wish to consider delaying the timetable for acquiring thaad uoes set forth in the 1996 defense authorization act .

the congress may also wish to restrict obligational authority for acquiring uoes until the secretary of defense certifies that the system has adequate operational effectiveness to merit its deployment in a national emergency .

we performed our work at the office of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , office of the secretary of defense , headquarters of the ballistic missile defense organization ; the department of the army in washington , d.c. ; and the thaad project office in huntsville , alabama .

at these locations , we interviewed responsible agency officials and analyzed pertinent documents .

we obtained comments on a draft of this report from dod .

those comments are discussed above and reprinted in appendix i .

we conducted our work from june 1995 to may 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense and the army ; the director of the ballistic missile defense organization ; and the director , office of management and budget .

we will make copies available to others upon request .

this report was prepared under the direction of thomas j. schulz , associate director , defense acquisitions issues .

if you or your staff have any questions concerning the observations expressed in this report , please contact him on ( 202 ) 512-4841 .

major contributors to this report were lee edwards , leon gill , stan lipscomb , and j. klein spencer .

the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated may 13 , 1996 .

1 .

we recognize that the theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) user operational evaluation system ( uoes ) has three purposes — ( 1 ) providing soldiers an opportunity to influence the system's design ; ( 2 ) conducting early operational assessments of the system ; and ( 3 ) if directed by the national command authority , providing a theater commander in chief with a more robust theater missile defense architecture than exists today .

the two primary purposes of uoes set forth by dod — early user influence on the design and system operation assessment — can be accomplished without contracting for the 40 interceptors .

the thrust of our report deals with the risks inherent in the army's accelerated approach of contracting for interceptors to be deployed before testing provides assurance of the system's effectiveness .

2 .

the current thaad uoes schedule provides only 14 of the 40 interceptors by fiscal year 1998 — the date the 1996 defense authorization act calls for a uoes capability .

delivery of the 40 interceptors will not be completed until the 3rd quarter of fiscal year 1999 .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

