in march 1996 , you raised concerns in an oversight hearing and a letter to us about the extent of carryover balances for the mission to planet earth ( mtpe ) and other national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) programs .

this report discusses mtpe's carryover , as well as that of other nasa programs , and describes nasa's plans to reduce those balances .

we plan to continue reviewing nasa's carryover , as part of our basic legislative responsibilities , to fully understand the nature of these balances and how they should be considered in the budget process .

carryover balances consist of unobligated funds and uncosted obligations .

each fiscal year , nasa requests obligational authority from the congress to meet the costs of running its programs .

once nasa receives this authority , it can obligate funds by placing orders or awarding contracts for goods and services that will require payment during the same fiscal year or in the future .

unobligated balances represent the portion of its authority that nasa has not obligated .

uncosted obligations represent the portion of its authority that nasa has obligated for goods and services but for which it has not yet incurred costs .

through the annual authorization and appropriations process , the congress determines the purposes for which public funds may be used and sets the amounts and time period for which funds will be available .

funding provided for nasa's human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology programs is available for obligation over a 2-year period .

authority to obligate any remaining unobligated balances expires at the end of the 2-year period .

five years later , outstanding obligations are canceled and the expired account is closed .

some level of carryover balance is appropriate for government programs .

in particular , nasa's human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology appropriations are available for obligation over a 2-year period .

in such circumstances , some funds are expected to be obligated during the second year of availability .

funds must travel through a series of approvals at headquarters and the field centers before the money is actually put on contracts so that work can be performed .

according to nasa officials , it can be difficult to obligate funds that are released late in the year .

in addition , the award of contracts and grants may sometimes be delayed .

once contracts and grants are awarded , costs may not be incurred or reported for some time thereafter .

expenditures , especially final payments on contract or grant closeouts , will lag still further behind .

finally , costs and expenditures for a multiyear contract or grant will be paced throughout the life of the contract .

for these reasons , all nasa programs have carryover balances .

the unobligated balances expire at the end of their period of availability , and according to nasa officials , uncosted obligations carried over will eventually be expended to cover contract costs .

carryover balances at the end of fiscal year 1995 for human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology programs totaled $3.6 billion .

of this amount , $2.7 billion was obligated but not costed and $0.9 billion was unobligated .

table 1 shows the carryover balances by program .

the balance carried over from fiscal year 1995 plus the new budget authority in fiscal year 1996 provides a program's total budget authority .

the total budget authority less the planned costs results in the estimated balance at the end of fiscal year 1996 .

table 2 starts with the carryover from fiscal year 1996 and ends with the balance that nasa estimates will carry over from fiscal year 1997 into 1998 .

the cost plans shown in the tables reflect the amount of costs estimated to be accrued during the fiscal year .

the carryover balances will change if actual cost and budget amounts differ from projections .

nasa program officials are in the process of updating their 1996 cost plan estimates .

officials in some programs now expect the actual costs to be less than planned , resulting in higher carryover balances at the end of 1996 than those shown in the tables .

nasa often discusses and analyzes carryover balances in terms of equivalent months of a fiscal year's budget authority that will be carried into the next fiscal year .

for example , the aeronautical research and technology carryover balance of $217.9 million at the end of fiscal year 1996 is equivalent to 3 months of the $877.3 million new budget authority , based on an average monthly rate of $73.1 million .

table 3 shows each program's carryover in equivalent months of budget authority .

the carryover balances at the end of fiscal year 1995 ranged from the equivalent of 1 month for the space shuttle to 16 months for academic programs .

nasa officials gave several overall reasons for the large relative differences in carryover amounts .

one major reason was that programs such as the space station and the space shuttle , which have fewer months of carryover , prepare budgets based on the amount of work estimated to be costed in a fiscal year .

other programs , such as mtpe and space science , have based their budgets on the phasing of obligations over a number of fiscal years .

another major reason given was that some programs fund a substantial number of grants , which are typically funded for a 12-month period regardless of what point in the fiscal year they are awarded .

this practice , coupled with slow reporting and processing of grant costs , contributes to higher carryover balances .

science programs such as mtpe , space science , and life and microgravity sciences and applications , fund grants to a much greater extent than the space station and the space shuttle .

nasa officials also said the size of contractors affects carryover balances , with larger contractors requiring less funding into next year than smaller contractors .

nasa officials gave two major reasons for mtpe's carryover balance at the end of fiscal year 1995 .

first , the mtpe program has undergone several major restructurings since its inception in 1991 .

during the periods when the content of the program was being changed , selected program activities were restrained until the new baseline program was established .

since several contract start dates were delayed , the carryover balance grew .

mtpe officials emphasized that all work for which funding was provided would be performed in accordance with the approved baseline and that , in most cases , the new baseline included the same end dates for major missions and ground systems .

officials expect the balances to decrease as delayed work is accomplished .

the second reason given for the large carryover balance at the end of fiscal year 1995 is the large number of grants funded in the mtpe program .

as discussed earlier , the process for awarding grants and delays in reporting costs on grants contributes to carryover balances .

officials from the aeronautical research and technology program attributed their relatively low level of carryover to aggressively managing carryover balances .

officials have studied their carryover balances in detail and have greatly reduced their levels .

in 1989 , the program had a carryover balance of 43 percent , equivalent to 5 months of funding .

program financial managers analyzed their carryover and determined that it could be reduced substantially .

by 1992 , the carryover balance was about 25 percent , or 3 months , of new budget authority , and it is estimated to remain at that level through fiscal year 1996 .

in fiscal year 1997 , program managers hope to achieve a 15-percent , or 2-month , carryover level .

officials attributed their improved performance to thoroughly understanding their carryover balances , emphasizing work to be accomplished and costed in preparing budgets , and carefully tracking projects' performance .

they believe that some of their methods and systems for managing carryover balances could be applied to other nasa programs .

although carryover naturally occurs in the federal budget process , nasa officials became concerned that the balances were too high .

nasa is taking actions to analyze and reduce these balances .

nasa's chief financial officer directed a study that recommended changes to reduce carryover balances .

nasa's comptroller will review justifications for carryover balances as part of the fiscal year 1998 budget development process .

a nasa steering group was tasked by nasa's chief financial officer to review carryover balances as part of a study to address nasa's increasing level of unliquidated budget authority .

the study identified a number of reasons for the current balances , including nasa's current method of obligations - based budgeting , reserves held for major programs , delays in awarding contractual instruments , late receipt of funding issued to the centers , and grant reporting delays .

the study recommended a number of actions to reduce carryover balances through improved budgeting , procurement , and financial management practices , including implementing cost - based budgeting throughout the agency and establishing thresholds for carryover balances .

according to the study , cost - based budgeting takes into account the estimated level of cost to be incurred in a given fiscal year as well as unused obligation authority from prior years when developing a budget .

the organization then goes forward with its budget based on new obligation authority and a level of proposed funding that is integrally tied to the amount of work that can be done realistically over the course of the fiscal year .

however , the study cautioned that a cost - based budgeting strategy should recognize that cost plans are rarely implemented without changes .

therefore , program managers should have the ability to deal with contingencies by having some financial reserves .

the study recommended that nasa implement thresholds for the amount of funds to be carried over from one fiscal year to the next .

nasa had about 4 months of carryover at the end of fiscal year 1995 , according to the study .

it recommended that nasa implement a threshold of 3 months for total carryover: 2 months of uncosted obligations for forward funding on contracts and 1 month of unobligated balance for reserves .

the study noted that carryover balances should be reviewed over the next several years to determine if this threshold is realistic .

nasa's chief financial officer said the next logical step is to analyze balances in individual programs in more depth .

we agree that the appropriateness of the threshold should be examined over time and that further study is needed to more fully understand carryover balances in individual programs .

we also believe that individual programs must be measured against an appropriate standard .

one problem with looking at carryover balances in the aggregate is that programs substantially under the threshold in effect mask large carryover balances in other programs .

for example , at the end of fiscal year 1996 , the total amount of carryover in excess of 3 months for seven programs is estimated to be $1.05 billion .

however , the carryover balance for the space shuttle and the space station programs in the same year is estimated to be $1.03 billion under the threshold , which almost completely offsets the excess amount .

we compared the balances of individual human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology programs to this 3-month threshold and found that at the end of fiscal year 1995 , nine programs exceeded the threshold by a total of $1.3 billion .

by the end of fiscal year 1997 , only four programs are expected to significantly exceed the threshold by a total of $0.6 billion .

table 4 compares individual program carryover amounts with the 3-month threshold at the end of fiscal years 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 .

as mentioned earlier , the estimates are based on projected costs for fiscal year 1996 and projected budgets and costs for fiscal year 1997 .

if actual costs and budgets are different , the amount of carryover exceeding the threshold will change .

the nasa comptroller is planning to review carryover balances in each program .

according to the comptroller and program financial managers , carryover balances have always been considered a part of the budget formulation process , but factoring them into the process is difficult since budget submissions must be prepared well before the actual carryover balances are known .

for example , nasa's fiscal year 1997 budget request was prepared in the summer of 1995 and submitted to the office of management and budget in the fall .

at that point , nasa's appropriations for fiscal year 1996 were not final and costs for 1996 could only be estimated .

estimates of budget authority , obligations , and accrued costs of program activities will be specifically scrutinized to ensure that the timing of the budget authority to accrued costs is consistent with minimal , carefully justified balances of uncosted budget authorities at fiscal year end .

carryover of uncosted balances in excess of eight weeks of cost into the next fiscal year will have to be specifically justified .

the carryover referred to by the comptroller is the equivalent of 8 weeks , or 15 percent , of the next fiscal year's cost .

for example , the fiscal year 1996 budget , factoring in carryover from the prior years , should include enough budget authority to cover all costs in 1996 plus 8 weeks of costs in fiscal year 1997 .

the comptroller stressed that he was not attempting to set a threshold for the appropriate level of carryover , but instead was setting a criteria beyond which there should be a strong justification for carryover .

the comptroller also told us that although the guidance specifically addressed preparation of the fiscal year 1998 budget , he has asked programs to justify carryover balances in excess of 8 weeks starting with the end of fiscal year 1996 .

table 5 compares program carryover balances at the end of fiscal years 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 to the 8-week criteria .

nasa was not able to provide cost plan data for fiscal year 1998 .

to approximate the 1997 carryover balances in excess of 8 weeks , we used the fiscal year 1997 cost plan .

if a program cost plan for 1998 is higher than 1997 , the 8-week criteria would also be higher and the carryover in excess of 8 weeks would be lower .

on the other hand , a lower cost plan in 1998 would result in a higher balance in excess of 8 weeks .

as shown in table 5 , significant amounts of carryover funding would have to be justified .

in fiscal year 1995 , $1.9 billion would have had to be justified .

in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , the amounts requiring justification are estimated at $1.5 billion and $1 billion , respectively .

we discussed a draft of this report with nasa officials and have incorporated their comments where appropriate .

we reviewed carryover balances for programs in the human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology appropriations as of september 30 , 1995 , and estimated balances as of september 30 , 1996 , and 1997 .

we relied on data from nasa's financial management systems for our analyses and calculations and did not independently verify the accuracy of nasa's data .

we reviewed budget and cost plans and discussed carryover balances with nasa's chief financial officer ; nasa's comptroller and his staff ; and with financial management staff for the mtpe , space science , space station , space shuttle , and aeronautics programs .

we also reviewed nasa's internal study of carryover balances and discussed the study with the nasa staff responsible for preparing it .

we performed our work at nasa headquarters , the goddard space flight center , the jet propulsion laboratory , the johnson space center , and the marshall space flight center .

we conducted our work between april 1996 and july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce this report's contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of the report until 10 days after its issue date .

we will then send copies to the administrator of nasa ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other congressional committees responsible for nasa authorizations , appropriations , and general oversight .

we will also provide copies to others on request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix i .

frank degnan vijay barnabas james beard richard eiserman monica kelly thomas mills the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

