as requested by the former chairman of the legislation and national security subcommittee , this report presents information on the ballistic missile defense organization's ( bmdo ) strategic target system ( stars ) .

specifically , we present information on the ( 1 ) status of the stars program , ( 2 ) planned launches through fiscal year 2000 , ( 3 ) program costs , and ( 4 ) status of major hardware acquisition and refurbishment .

stars is a bmdo program managed by the u. s. army space and strategic defense command ( ssdc ) .

it began in 1985 in response to concerns that the supply of surplus minuteman i boosters used to launch targets and other experiments on intercontinental ballistic missile flight trajectories in support of the strategic defense initiative would be depleted by 1988 .

ssdc tasked sandia national laboratories , a department of energy laboratory , to develop an alternative launch vehicle using surplus polaris boosters .

two stars booster configurations were developed , stars i and stars ii .

stars i consists of refurbished polaris first and second stages and a commercially procured orbus i third stage ( see fig .

1 ) .

it can deploy single or multiple payloads , but the multiple payloads cannot be deployed in a manner that simulates the operation of a post - boost vehicle ( pbv ) .

to meet this specific need , sandia developed an operations and deployment experiments simulator ( odes ) , which functions as a pbv .

 ( see app .

i , fig .

i.1. ) .

when odes is added to stars i , the configuration is designated stars ii .

the development phase of the stars program was completed in fiscal year 1994 , and bmdo provided about $192.1 million for this effort .

the operational phase began in fiscal year 1995 .

the first stars i flight , a hardware check - out flight , was launched in february 1993 , and the second flight , a stars i reentry vehicle experiment , was launched in august 1993 .

the third flight , a stars ii development mission , was launched in july 1994 .

all three were considered successful by bmdo .

in march 1993 , the secretary of defense initiated a comprehensive “bottom - up review” of the nation's defense strategy .

he believed that a departmentwide review needed to be conducted “from the bottom up” because of the dramatic changes that had occurred in the world as a result of the end of the cold war and the dissolution of the soviet union .

this review provided the direction for shifting america's focus away from a strategy designed to defend against a global soviet threat to a strategy oriented toward the dangers of aggression by regional powers , a theater missile threat .

based on the nature of the present and projected threat from ballistic and cruise missiles armed with weapons of mass destruction , the secretary of defense decided to proceed with a more robust tmd program to emphasize protection of forward - deployed u.s. forces in the near term .

additionally , he decided to limit the nmd effort to a technology program , which drastically reduced the number of stars launches to support nmd .

in may 1994 , based on declining launches for stars and budget reductions resulting from the “bottom - up review,” bmdo requested ssdc to develop a long - range plan for the stars program .

the ssdc stars project office developed a draft long - range plan that included management options for ( 1 ) continuing the stars program ; ( 2 ) placing it in a dormant status , retaining the capability to reactivate it ; and ( 3 ) terminating it .

bmdo is currently evaluating stars as a potential long - range system for launching targets for development tests of future tmd systems .

the final decision , which may not be made for 6 to 9 months , will be based on factors such as the cost to maintain stars and abm treaty issues associated with testing tmd systems .

stars project office officials cite several reasons related to treaty implications for not terminating the program .

the strategic arms reduction treaty i ( start ) limits other strategic ballistic missiles' use of telemetry encryption , but stars is exempt from this restriction .

in addition , the start ii treaty after its ratification and formal entry into force would require the total elimination of land - based multiple warhead intercontinental ballistic missiles by january 2003 .

this means that the launching of land - based multiple warhead intercontinental ballistic missiles , even as research and development target boosters , would cease .

because stars is exempt from the start ii treaty , it would be the only land - based multiple warhead booster that the united states can use as a target or for research and development .

the stars ii pbv carries multiple warheads and has the maneuvering capability to independently target each warhead on a final trajectory toward a target .

stars project office officials also cite other reasons for not terminating the program .

stars can deliver payloads at various reentry speeds and trajectories to the vicinity of kwajalein missile range located about 4,000 kilometers from the kauai test facility .

stars is also the only u.s. target missile system that operates in the 1,500 to 3,500 kilometer range .

additionally , the relatively large diameter of the stars launch vehicle , the shape of the nose shroud , and the flat payload plate make stars suitable as a carrier vehicle for a variety of experiments and scientific payloads .

also , stars has demonstrated a real - time reporting capability to accurately predict target positions for experiments throughout its trajectory .

these are important features for evaluating the capabilities of both theater and strategic missile defense sensors and weapons .

in july 1993 , bmdo had plans to launch 12 more stars boosters from kauai that would deliver experiments into near space and targets to kwajalein through fiscal year 2003 .

all of these launches were to support nmd objectives .

two were conducted , but as a result of the “bottom - up review,” all but one of the remaining 10 nmd launches were canceled .

bmdo now has only one firm launch scheduled .

additionally , bmdo has 11 potential launches identified through fiscal year 2000 .

ten would support tmd and 1 would support nmd .

table 1 provides the schedule by fiscal year for the stars launches .

the firm launch scheduled for 1995 involves launching a stars ii that will deploy numerous objects for the midcourse space experiment ( msx ) satellite to observe .

the msx satellite is scheduled to be launched into orbit from vandenberg air force base on a delta ii booster during the second quarter of fiscal year 1995 to conduct a variety of experiments , one of which will involve observing different types of target objects deployed from the stars pbv .

although this experiment will support work being conducted in a number of areas , the data will primarily support the space and missile tracking system ( formerly called brilliant eyes ) demonstration and validation program .

the targets for the msx satellite to observe are scheduled to be launched on a stars ii in the third quarter of fiscal year 1995 .

the msx's sensors are to view the numerous objects deployed from the pbv during sunrise conditions , and the objects are to be representative of various targets and deployment techniques .

other mobile and ground - based sensors will provide trajectory identification , definition , stereo viewing , and dynamic motion verification of the test objects .

until the abm treaty is clarified , the use of stars to support tmd testing , including the 10 potential tmd missions shown in table 1 , is in question .

the 1972 abm treaty prohibits mobile , land - based systems that can counter strategic missiles .

however , it does not define the characteristics of either a strategic or theater missile .

some theater missiles now approach the capabilities of the older , shorter range strategic missiles in terms of maximum range .

congress has continuously urged the administration to pursue discussions on amending the abm treaty to clarify the distinctions between theater and strategic missiles .

the united states and russia and some of the states of the former soviet union are currently involved in discussions seeking a demarcation that would clarify the treaty in such a way that would allow tmd systems such as the theater high altitude area defense and other advanced concepts to be developed in compliance with the abm treaty .

as shown in table 2 , the stars operational budget will be about $22.7 million for fiscal year 1995 .

of this amount , $15.1 million is the cost to maintain the capability to conduct launches , and the remaining cost of about $7.6 million primarily represents costs to be incurred for the scheduled launch in fiscal year 1995 .

for future years , it is estimated that the annual stars operating budget would also be about $15 million ( excluding inflation ) to maintain the capability to launch .

the $15 million does not include the additional costs that would be charged to stars customers for launches .

the $8.36 million for program infrastructure includes a full - time stars staff of about 40 to 45 sandia engineers and technicians , sandia part - time staff for the stars program , sandia overhead costs , and a department of energy surcharge of 4.3 percent .

according to a sandia official , in years when there are no launches , the engineers and technicians would be used to provide technical support for the stars booster system , plan for future stars launches , upgrade system documentation , correct anomalies noted on past launches , and perform other tasks assigned by the stars office .

the sandia official also told us that under sandia's personnel practices if the 40 to 45 full - time sandia personnel were to be assigned to other programs because of a termination or extended suspension of the stars operation , it is highly unlikely that they would later be returned to the stars program .

according to a stars project office official , plans are to spend about $3.47 million in fiscal year 1995 to maintain the industrial base for refurbishing first - and second - stage polaris motors .

a sandia official provided the following general comments about maintaining the industrial base .

initially , plans are to ( 1 ) modify the existing contract with aerojet general corporation to start assembling refurbished first - stage motors , ( 2 ) consolidate facilities to save money , and ( 3 ) send first - stage motors to the navy's china lake facility for screening .

also , sandia plans to provide hercules , inc. , aerospace division , with funds to recertify the second - stage flight motor for the fiscal year 1995 flight and assemble a second - stage component refurbished motor as a flight spare .

plans are to award new 2-year contracts in april 1995 to aerojet and hercules for work in fiscal years 1995 and 1996 .

aerojet is to refurbish up to three first - stage motors .

hercules is to continue assembling second - stage component refurbished motors .

these contracts will contain provisions for paying fixed termination costs to these contractors if the decision is made to cancel the contracts in fiscal year 1996 .

plans are to also award new contracts in april 1995 to lockheed missile and space company , inc. , and the navy .

lockheed is to provide technical assistance , and the navy's facilities at china lake and corona , california , are to screen and static fire stars motors and calibrate and recertify motor nozzles and assembly gauges .

the kauai test facility range support cost of $2.5 million is primarily for a facility maintenance contractor ; sandia personnel supporting stars ; and maintaining range technical capabilities such as electronic communications equipment , computers , and recording equipment used to gather flight data .

the additional cost associated with the launch to support the msx mission , $7.38 million , is for work to be performed by sandia , support of the pacific missile range facility , and logistics' maintenance and transportation support .

sandia is to perform work ( 1 ) related to the third stage of the stars launch vehicle that houses the orbus motor and ( 2 ) support of launch - field operations .

this effort involves ( 1 ) mission specific software modifications and validation ; ( 2 ) assembly and construction of specialized parts and equipment , to include components for the pbv ; and ( 3 ) final system checkout and testing .

the pacific missile range facility is to provide uprange support of the stars booster launch activities .

it is also to provide miscellaneous range tracking , telemetry , range safety , and other support requirements .

the logistics' transportation support is primarily for transportation supporting the msx mission .

in addition , funds are to be used for a nonrecurring effort to move and consolidate first - and second - stage motors , thus reducing storage costs .

the logistics' maintenance support primarily involves hill air force base's effort .

this work involves attaching components and performing system checks and validation for first - and second - stage motors .

the booster destruction cost of $260,000 is for the destruction of older first - and second - stage motors no longer required for the stars program .

the sierra army depot in california is to destroy the motors .

in september 1993 , we reported that stars users would pay an estimated $5.9 million for each stars i launch and an estimated $10.9 million for each stars ii launch .

these cost estimates have decreased because the stars program has already paid for equipment such as electronic components , mechanical equipment , stage 1 and 2 refurbished motors , and orbus motors .

another reason future stars users will pay less is because the msx and other programs have paid for long lead hardware to be used on stars launches that were canceled .

even though these launches were canceled , the stars office had already acquired the assets .

beginning in fiscal year 1996 , the costs to future stars i and ii customers will vary .

specifically , for the next three stars launches , the cost to stars i customers is estimated to be about $2.8 million , and the cost to stars ii customers is estimated to range from $6.7 million to $9.1 million .

beyond the next three launches , the cost to stars i customers is estimated to be about $4.1 million , and the cost to stars ii customers is estimated to range from $8.1 million to $9.1 million .

these estimates include costs for hardware refurbishment , sandia launch support , booster transportation , and costs associated with odes hardware and related integration of odes with the stars i booster .

these estimates do not include transportation and payload and range support costs associated with specific launches .

the stars program acquired surplus navy polaris first - and second - stage boosters starting in the mid - 1980s through 1991 .

the stars program's only cost for those boosters was for transportation to storage facilities .

the stars program purchased third - stage orbus i motors from united technologies .

sandia builds odes pbvs only as needed for stars ii launches .

first - and second - stage polaris motors have to be refurbished before being used on missions .

orbus i motors and odes do not need to be refurbished .

one odes has been built and flown .

currently , a second odes is being built for the launch scheduled in fiscal year 1995 .

table 3 shows the status of stars hardware acquisition and refurbishment as of december 1994 .

when the stars program was begun , four launches a year were anticipated .

now , no more than two launches a year are anticipated or even considered possible without increasing the number of sandia personnel supporting the stars program .

according to a stars official , there were two reasons the stars office acquired such a large number of surplus polaris first - and second - stage boosters .

first , a large number of launches was expected when the stars program was started .

second , the defect rate for these 1960s vintage motors was not known .

to determine the cost of the stars program through fiscal year 1994 , we obtained funding data from bmdo , stars program office , and sandia national laboratories .

stars officials also provided funding estimates for fiscal year 1995 and beyond .

to determine planned launches , bmdo and stars officials discussed and provided documents showing firm and potential launches .

air force and tmd officials also provided information about their launch needs .

bmdo and stars officials and the ssdc treaty advisor provided information about how u.s. treaties may affect the future of the stars program .

to determine the status of stars hardware , we reviewed relevant documents such as inventory records and refurbishment contracts .

additionally , sandia and stars officials provided detailed information about the status of the hardware program .

we performed our work at bmdo in washington , d.c. ; ssdc in huntsville , alabama ; and sandia in albuquerque , new mexico .

our work was conducted from august through december 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as requested , we did not obtain fully coordinated agency comments on a draft of this report .

however , we did discuss the results of our work with ssdc and bmdo officials and have incorporated their suggestions .

in general , they agreed with the information in this report .

we are sending copies to the chairmen of the senate and house committees on appropriations ; the senate committee on armed services ; the house committee on national security ; the secretaries of defense , the air force , the army , and the navy ; and the directors of bmdo and the office of management and budget .

copies will also be made available to others upon request .

if you or your staff have questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 .

the major contributors to this report are j. klein spencer , assistant director ; bobby d. hall , evaluator - in - charge ; and thomas l. gordon , evaluator .

appendix i contains pictures and maps of stars and launch sites .

a picture of odes with its multiple reentry vehicles is shown in figure i.1 .

the stars launch facility is located on kauai , hawaii ( see figs .

i.2 and i.3 ) .

the booster's range , about 4,000 kilometers , is about the same as the distance from kauai to the kwajalein atoll in the marshall islands , the intended destination .

kwajalein , where sensing and other tracking devices are located ( see fig .

i.4 ) , is one of the two designated test ranges under the abm treaty .

the other , white sands missile range , is not suitable for the types of tests planned for stars .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

