as you requested , we reviewed the actions taken by the department of defense ( dod ) to correct weaknesses cited in our september 1994 report on the military services' most sensitive category i missiles and to determine if problems still remain .

we also reviewed dod's oversight of category i rockets and the vulnerability of category i missiles and rockets and category ii grenades , mines , and explosives to theft from u.s. military arsenals by terrorists or extremists .

dod defines category i items as those that are highly explosive , extremely lethal , portable , and a potential threat if they were to be used by unauthorized individuals or groups .

category i missiles and rockets are nonnuclear and handheld .

the missiles are the stinger , dragon , and javelin ; the rockets are the light antitank weapon ( law ) and the at4 .

the stinger can destroy aircraft in flight , and the dragon and javelin missiles and the law and at4 rockets can pierce armor .

category ii munitions and explosives are hand or rifle grenades , antitank or antipersonnel mines , c - 4 explosives , tnt , and dynamite .

see appendix i for pictures of the category i missiles and rockets .

in september 1994 , we reported that many serious discrepancies in the quantities , locations , and serial numbers of handheld category i missiles indicated inadequate management oversight for these lethal weapons .

further , we reported that the services did not know how many handheld missiles they had in their possession because they did not have systems to track by serial numbers the missiles produced , fired , destroyed , sold , and transferred .

at that time , we could not determine the extent to which any missiles were missing from inventory .

we also stated that security measures were not uniformly applied at all locations where missiles were stored .

our report contained several recommendations to the secretary of defense to correct these problems .

in addition , the army inspector general conducted two follow - up studies and found similar problems .

dod has taken actions to correct the deficiencies cited in our september 1994 report .

in that report , we recommended that dod conduct independent worldwide inventories of category i missiles to establish a new baseline number .

dod established the new baseline number as of december 31 , 1994 , as shown in table 1 .

the army , the navy , and the marine corps are the primary purchasers of category i missiles ; consequently , our review and the prior report focused on their inventories .

our prior report also recommended that dod establish procedures to track , document , and report additions to and deletions from the new inventory baseline .

since that time , the army has begun modifying its automated system — the standard army ammunition system — to report changes to the inventories of stinger , dragon , and javelin missiles by serial number .

the modification to the system is designed to provide item managers at all army commands with 24- to 72-hour notification of changes to the inventory .

in the interim , the army has implemented manual reporting procedures to track handheld missiles on a monthly basis .

this temporary system has a 30- to 45-day time lag in reporting changes to the missile inventory .

the navy and the marine corps have also implemented automated systems to track category i missiles .

the navy's automated system is intended to provide information within 24 to 48 hours on where a given missile is located , and the marine corps' system is intended to provide such information within 24 hours .

in addition , our prior report recommended that dod establish procedures to include a random sampling of missile containers during inventories to ensure that they contain missiles .

the services have since established procedures to verify the presence of missiles inside their containers during maintenance checks .

finally , our report recommended that dod reemphasize security procedures and reexamine the current security policy .

in response , the services reemphasized physical security regulations for all category i munitions .

although the services established a baseline inventory count of category i missiles as of december 31 , 1994 , updates to the baseline continue to be made as additional missiles are located or errors are discovered .

discrepancies existed at some sites between records of the number of category i missiles in their inventories and our physical count , but we were able to reconcile the discrepancies manually .

even though missile containers are being opened and serial numbers are being verified , random checks are not being performed because the services stated that they would be too costly .

also , dod has not fully complied with physical security regulations at all of its sites .

army officials stated that , because of prior reporting , weaknesses involving the handheld missile inventory , they cannot fully assure that the category i missile baseline is completely accurate .

the baseline had to be updated several times since its establishment because additional missiles were located .

in february 1996 , the army discovered it had not counted 3,949 missiles during the initial inventory , which increased its baseline by almost 7 percent .

some of the missiles had been in transit and were not counted by either the shipping or receiving parties .

other missiles were being used by the signal communications electronics command in fort monmouth , new jersey , for test purposes but were not included in the initial baseline inventory .

a stinger missile had been at a storage facility in kuwait since september 1992 .

pakistanis discovered the missile during post - desert storm cleanup operations , and kuwait did not return it to the united states until april 1996 .

however , the army had previously reported that 6,373 stinger missiles were shipped to and subsequently sent back from the persian gulf .

thus , the army did not realize that this missile had been missing from inventory until after it was discovered .

also , errors in the initial inventory count have affected the baseline .

for example , two missiles on the army item manager's contractor database actually belonged to another country through the foreign military sales program .

these missiles , which were included in the baseline number , were at the contractor's facility for repair .

at the time of our visit , one of the missiles was still at the facility , and the other had been fixed and returned .

the item manager stated that the contractor was not reporting to her the number of missiles received , completed , and returned .

however , as a result of our finding , the contract has been modified to provide the item manager a monthly report of the missiles received at the contractor's facility and the missiles transferred from the contractor's facility to a dod facility .

in our september 1994 report , we noted that records of the number of category i missiles in some sites' inventories did not match our physical count .

this problem still exists at the army and marine corps sites we visited , but we were able to reconcile the discrepancies manually .

at a navy storage site , we found no discrepancies between the item manager's records and our physical count .

at the army military storage location we visited , we found discrepancies between the item manager's records and the missiles we counted at the storage facility .

all of the missiles that were on the item manager's records , but not at the storage location , had been issued to units for training .

we used the army's monthly interim reports to reconcile the discrepancies .

we verified that these missiles had in fact been expended during training exercises .

the item manager still had the missiles on the records because of the lag time in receiving the interim reports .

we also found five discrepancies with our missile count at a marine corps site that we visited .

all of the discrepancies involved the serial numbers .

one missile was not on the item manager's records because the wrong serial number was keyed into the system .

two missiles were upgraded and their serial numbers changed ; the new serial numbers , however , were not yet changed on the database that we used to conduct our reconciliation .

two of the six digits in one missile's serial number were apparently transposed on the container .

finally , one missile's correct serial number was in both the depot's and item manager's systems , but the wrong number was apparently stenciled on the container .

we also found discrepancies at two contractor facilities where both the stinger and dragon were being upgraded or modified .

most of the discrepancies were due to the lag between the time we received the database and the time we performed our physical count .

many missiles on the item manager's records had already been sent to the dod storage sites by the time we conducted our inventory count .

we verified that the dod storage sites had received the missiles .

however , we found four additional missiles at one of the contractor facilities that were not on the item manager's records .

the item manager had recorded that one of the missiles , still at the contractor's facility , was made non - lethal ( demilitarized ) .

eight additional missiles were also listed as being at that contractor's facility , but six were actually at another location , and two belonged to other countries , as stated previously , under the foreign military sales program .

finally , we noted a practice during this review , in addition to those that have been previously mentioned , that complicates serial number tracking: giving new serial numbers to missiles that have been upgraded .

stinger missiles that are undergoing a technical upgrade will be given new serial numbers once the upgrade has been completed .

according to a production assurance and test division official , u.s. army missile command , the justification for changing the serial numbers was that the missiles would , in effect , become new missiles , since they would be broken down into major component parts and reassembled with different components .

both the old and new serial numbers would then be cross - referenced .

however , a quality assurance official , u.s. army missile command , stated that he had opposed changing the serial numbers because it would be harder to track the life cycle of the missiles and that cross - referencing old and new serial numbers would create additional bookkeeping and the potential for transposition and other errors .

instead of changing the serial numbers , the upgraded missiles could be distinguished by adding a suffix to the serial number .

even though the services have established procedures to verify the presence of missiles inside their containers , a representative sample is not always being selected , according to the services , because it would be too costly .

for example , an army official said that during maintenance checks only the missiles that are easy to access in a storage facility are selected to be opened .

this methodology does not provide complete assurance that missiles are not being stolen because it may not deter insider theft .

moreover , opening a representative sample of missile containers helps to obtain assurance that all reported missiles do exist , are held by the services , and are owned by dod .

this check improves the accuracy of the missile inventory reports for item managers as well as dod's financial statements required by the cfo act .

we opened 108 missile containers to verify the presence of the correct missile in each container .

figures 1 and 2 show opened stinger and dragon missile containers .

all containers had a missile , but the serial number on one container did not match the one on the missile .

neither the item manger nor the site officials could determine the reason for the mismatch .

in another instance , a contractor official discovered that a missile going through an upgrade did not have the same serial number as its container .

the correct container was at the storage depot , and the missile inside belonged in the container located at the contractor's facility .

also , according to an army policy notice , the sample size and the results of missile container checks are to be reported to the item managers .

however , we found that army item managers were not receiving this information .

as a result of our finding , the chief of staff , army materiel command , issued a memorandum reemphasizing the reporting requirement .

some of the sites we visited were not in full compliance with service or dod security regulations .

personnel at one army location were not inspecting all vehicles leaving the storage area .

the army inspector general's 1996 report also noted that not all sites were fully enforcing physical security regulations .

the army inspector general included the national guard in its follow - up review of handheld missiles .

in its report , the inspector general noted that national guard sites were storing category i dragon missiles in violation of dod and army physical security policies .

both of these policies permit the national guard to use the missiles for training purposes only and store them temporarily at guard installations .

however , the inspector general found that some sites had the dragon missile in storage for many years .

as a result of the inspector general's report , the army national guard was directed to return the dragon missiles to the storage sites .

since that time , all missiles have either been returned or used for training .

the national guard requested approval to permanently store dragon missiles at selected sites .

the army denied this request because some storage sites were not in compliance with its physical security regulations .

for example , armed guards were not used to prevent unauthorized access of the storage structures when intrusion detection systems were inoperable .

however , if a site can meet physical security regulations , the army stated it would reconsider a request only to temporarily store dragon missiles at selected sites .

contractors are required to follow dod manual 5100.76 , physical security of sensitive conventional arms , ammunition , and explosives , for their security guidelines .

these regulations are not as stringent as the army's physical security regulations .

for example , army regulations require that storage sites be secured with two locks and keys and that no one person have possession of both keys at the same time .

dod regulations permit one lock and key , which allows single individuals access to storage sites .

we noted the following conditions , among others , at one of the contractor facilities we visited: the entrance to the storage area was not locked .

no guard was available to check vehicles entering or exiting the storage area .

there was no clear zone outside the security fence .

 ( this area was cleared , however , after our visit. ) .

one employee had keys to operate the locks to the storage site , security fence gate , and gate to a perimeter road that led to the main road .

this employee also had the code for calling in to security to deactivate the intrusion detection system .

we observed this employee leave the storage site in a truck , proceed to unlock the perimeter gate , and exit .

we believe that allowing one person such access leaves the missiles more vulnerable to theft .

after bringing this concern to the attention of the commander , army materiel command , a memorandum was issued requiring that the security requirements of army regulation 190-11 and the army materiel command supplement requiring that storage sites be secured with two locks and keys , among other things , be included in contracts for activities involving category i munitions .

the services have different procedures and requirements for maintaining oversight of at4 and law rockets .

the army and the navy manage at4 and law rockets by production lot and quantity .

the marine corps maintains oversight and visibility of at4 rockets ( it does not have any law rockets ) by serial numbers .

although we found no missing rockets in our physical count , three at4 rockets that were sent to the persian gulf for operation desert storm are missing from the marine corps' inventory .

the investigations were closed on these three missing rockets , but no conclusions were reached by the naval criminal investigative service on whether the rockets were missing , lost , or stolen .

the marine corps adjusted their physical inventory to reflect the decrease of the three at4 rockets .

however , the serial numbers will remain within its accounting and reporting system should these rockets be recovered .

the army manages at4 and law rockets by production lot and quantity .

however , the army item manager's oversight of the at4 rocket extends only to the quantities that are issued to the various major commands .

each major command then redistributes at4 rockets to the installations within that command , and oversight for installation inventories is maintained by the major command .

the item manager , therefore , does not know the quantities of at4 rockets at the installation level .

the army is developing a system , called unique item tracking , for all of its category i munitions , including the at4 .

this system is intended to provide weekly reports showing the serial number of each munition by location .

the purpose of the system is to identify the last accountable location of a weapon in the event that it is lost or stolen and recovered by law enforcement or other organizations .

however , the system will not include the law rocket , since it is being phased out of the inventory , and most laws do not have serial numbers .

the navy also manages at4 and law rockets by production lot and quantity .

the navy item manager does not oversee the rockets by serial number because it is not a requirement .

this situation could be problematic if a rocket is missing because the navy does not have a system in place to identify the missing rocket by serial number .

however , some storage locations report at4 rockets by serial numbers in addition to production lot and quantity .

we conducted a physical count of at4 and law rockets at army , navy , and marine corps storage sites and were able to match the physical count with the item managers' records .

we also opened 89 containers to verify the presence and correct serial number of each rocket .

we did not note any violations in the physical security regulations at the sites we visited .

another issue related to accountability over sensitive defense material relates to the financial management system .

in accordance with the cfo act of 1990 , each agency is to establish an integrated financial management system .

establishing an integrated , general ledger controller system , which ties together dod's accounting systems with its logistics and other key management systems , is critical if dod is to effectively ensure oversight and control over its sensitive materials .

for example , an integrated accounting and logistics system will automatically update both sets of records when missiles or other sensitive inventory items are purchased and received .

in addition , carrying out rudimentary controls , such as periodically reconciling dod's accounting and logistics records , will help oversee and identify any unaccounted for in - transit items .

audit reports have repeatedly pointed out , however , that dod's existing accounting and related systems , including its logistics systems , are not integrated and lack a general ledger .

as part of dod's efforts to reform its financial operations , the dod chief financial officer has stated that dod will develop property accountability systems that will meet the federal government's system requirements .

if properly designed and implemented as part of a dod - wide integrated financial management systems structure called for under the cfo act , these systems will be integral to ensuring effective accountability over dod's sensitive inventories of missiles and rockets and other sensitive material .

we did not find any documentation that terrorists or other extremists had stolen category i handheld missiles or rockets or category ii grenades , mines , and explosives from dod arsenals .

intelligence and dod officials said that it is more likely that terrorists would seek handheld surface - to - air missiles or other munitions from sources other than dod arsenals .

international terrorist groups receive financial aid and other forms of assistance from several nations .

the secretary of state has determined that these countries have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism by supplying , training , supporting , or providing safehaven to known terrorists .

intelligence officials told us that there are a variety of places around the world for terrorists to obtain weapons .

for example , several countries besides the united states , including bulgaria , china , egypt , france , japan , czech republic , pakistan , poland , romania , sweden , and the united kingdom produce handheld surface - to - air missiles .

terrorists tend to favor small conventional weapons — handguns , rifles , grenades , machine guns , or explosives — because they can be easily transported and hidden from view .

c - 4 plastic explosives can be purchased from several countries .

in addition , law enforcement officials told us that extremist groups have made their own c - 4 .

terrorists have used plastic explosives .

for example , less than one pound of semtex , similar to c - 4 , was used to bring down pan am flight 103 over lockerbie , scotland , in 1988 .

there have been thefts of category ii munitions and explosives by uniformed and dod civilian employees that involved quantities of items such as grenades , c - 4 explosives , and tnt .

we previously reported that military inventories remain more vulnerable to employee theft than outside intrusion .

table 2 shows the types and quantities of category ii items reported missing , lost , or stolen from 1993 to 1996 .

some of the weapons were recovered .

according to a law enforcement official , dod could not determine whether any of the unrecovered stolen dod weapons were in the hands of terrorists or other extremists .

we recognize that dod has made significant strides in gaining visibility and accountability over its handheld missile inventory .

dod has implemented several recommendations from our prior work and has already taken action to correct some of the problems we cite in this report .

we believe , however , that dod can take some additional actions to further improve physical security and ensure accurate reporting of its inventory of missiles and rockets .

therefore , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force and the commandant of the marine corps to develop a cost - effective procedure for periodically revalidating the category i inventory baseline by , for example , matching item managers' records with site records annually at a representative sample of storage sites ; develop a cost - effective procedure for opening containers of missiles and rockets , for example , by selecting a representative sample of pallets , rather than individual missiles and rockets , to inspect ; manage category i rockets by serial number so that the item managers will have total visibility over the numbers and locations of rockets ; establish procedures for ensuring that serial numbers are not changed during upgrades and modifications of category i missiles and rockets ; and continue to emphasize compliance with physical security requirements .

in commenting on a draft of this report , dod concurred with all of our recommendations ( see app .

ii ) .

dod noted that it had already begun taking action to address several of the recommendations .

for example , the services have developed or are developing procedures for revalidating the category i baseline .

dod also plans to issue guidance to manage category i rockets by serial numbers , develop procedures to ensure that serial numbers are not changed during upgrades and modifications of category i missiles and rockets , and continue to emphasize compliance with physical security requirements .

dod concurred with our recommendation to develop a cost - effective procedure to open containers of missiles and rockets .

dod's response also cited various existing regulations , which require that samples selected for inspection be representative of the entire lot under evaluation .

we discussed the comments with an official from the office of the secretary of defense and pointed out that during our review we found that this was not always being done .

for example , an army official told us that some inspectors only select and inspect the missiles that are easy to access in a storage facility .

the office of the secretary of defense officials agreed to issue guidance reinforcing the need to follow these procedures .

we met with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the army , the navy , the marine corps , and the national guard regarding the oversight and physical security of category i missiles and rockets and the physical security of category ii weapons .

we discussed the actions taken to correct problems cited in our 1994 report .

we also met with officials from the intelligence and law enforcement agencies to discuss the vulnerability of category i missiles and rockets to theft by terrorists and other extremists and obtain information on category i and category ii weapons that are missing , lost , or stolen .

we excluded the air force because of the limited number of missiles and rockets in its possession and because that service was not included in our prior report .

based on initial discussions on the scope of our work , the army inspector general added the national guard to its follow - up review of handheld missiles .

because the inspector general went to the same sites that we planned to visit , we did not visit any national guard sites .

to determine whether changes made to the oversight of category i missiles have improved the services' visibility over these missiles , we physically counted about 15,000 stinger , dragon , and javelin missiles by serial number at selected army , navy , and marine corps storage sites and two contractor facilities .

we selected sites that had a comparatively high incidence of problems found during our first review .

we opened 108 missile containers to ensure that a missile was in the container .

to inventory the missiles , we used the item managers' automated database .

we then entered this information into a notebook computer .

on site , as we physically inventoried , we entered into the computer the serial number of each of the missiles at that location .

this information was automatically compared against the database from the item managers .

missiles that were not in the database or at the storage location were reconciled with site and item manager information .

we also counted 6,637 at4 and law rockets at randomly selected army , navy , and marine corps storage sites .

at these locations , we opened 89 containers ( which contained different quantities of rockets depending on the type ) and physically verified the presence of 403 at4s and 261 laws .

we used the same procedures as the missiles to inventory the rockets at the marine corps storage site .

at the navy and the army rocket storage sites , an automated database of serial numbers was not available from the item managers .

at these two locations , we matched the inventory count against the item manager's or major command's records .

we tested the reliability of the systems' data by physically counting the missiles and rockets and matching the count to the item managers' records ; however , we did not test whether the information was provided to the item managers within 24 to 48 hours .

we conducted our review from september 1996 to july 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested congressional committees .

copies will also be made available to others upon request .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

sandra d. epps tracy w. banks the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

