in response to your request , we have reviewed the operations of the department of defense's office of the special assistant for gulf war illnesses .

this report focuses on the thoroughness of this office's investigations into and reporting on veterans' potential exposure to chemical or biological agents during the persian gulf war .

we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on appropriations , the house committee on government reform and oversight , the senate committee on appropriations , and the senate committee on governmental affairs and to the director , office of management and budget .

we will make copies available to others on request .

if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-5140 .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .

many persian gulf war veterans have complained of illnesses since the war's end in 1991 .

over 100,000 of the approximately 700,000 gulf war veterans have participated in health examination programs established by the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

many of those examined reported health complaints , including fatigue , muscle and joint pain , gastrointestinal problems , headaches , depression , neurologic and neurocognitive impairments , memory loss , shortness of breath , and sleep disturbances .

many veterans claim that their medical symptoms , some of them debilitating in nature , were not present before their service in the persian gulf war .

some veterans suspect that their health problems may be linked to chemical or biological warfare agents that iraq may have used during the gulf war .

various organizations have researched the causes of gulf war illnesses — the source of much controversy over the past 7 years .

by the end of 1996 , dod and the va together had funded 82 research projects related to gulf war illnesses .

despite these efforts , it remains unclear why some gulf war veterans became ill following their service in the persian gulf war .

it also remains unclear whether the rates of reported illnesses for veterans that deployed to the gulf are higher overall than the rates for those that did not deploy or than the rates for the civilian or military population as a whole .

also unexplained are differences in the frequency of symptoms reported by reserve units and active duty units and any correlations between the location of units and the occurrence of particular illnesses .

research designed to answer these and many other gulf war illnesses - related questions will not be completed for years .

of the 151 current federally sponsored research projects , less than 25 percent have been completed , and many are not scheduled for completion until after 2000 .

prompted by the continuing controversy over gulf war illnesses , president clinton , in 1995 , ordered dod and other federal agencies to reexamine whether possible exposure to chemical or biological agents occurred during the gulf war .

in march 1995 , the deputy secretary of defense established the persian gulf illnesses investigation team within the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs to explore this question .

the investigation team was established as dod began to lose credibility among veterans and veterans' groups in its efforts to determine the causes of gulf war illnesses and to support the problems experienced by veterans .

the 12-member team included intelligence officers , an army chemical corps officer , a pilot , a chemist , a physician , and a criminal investigator .

beginning in 1991 , senior defense officials had taken the position , in testimony before the congress and in press interviews , that iraq did not use chemical or biological weapons during the persian gulf war and that no u.s. forces were exposed to chemical or biological agents .

dod officials maintained this position as late as 1994 .

this position came under attack because both u.s. and foreign detection teams had reported that chemical warfare agents were present on the battlefield .

in 1995 and 1996 , central intelligence agency and u.n. reports established that during the gulf war , iraq had stored rockets filled with sarin , a deadly chemical warfare agent , at an ammunition storage site located at khamisiyah , iraq , about 60 miles from kuwait's border .

in june 1996 , dod announced that u.s. troops at khamisiyah in march 1991 were likely to have destroyed a bunker of rockets containing chemical agents .

by july 1997 , dod acknowledged that u.s. troops near khamisiyah may have unknowingly been exposed to low levels of sarin when they used demolitions to destroy these rockets .

in the midst of this controversy , dod became dissatisfied with the results of the investigation team's efforts .

the investigation team did not have the resources needed to accomplish its mission .

for example , it was unable to follow up on more than 1,200 toll - free calls received on dod's hot line with gulf war veterans .

in addition , its operation was criticized in the december 1996 report by the presidential advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses .

the report cited , for example , the investigation team's failure to take advantage of its unique access to classified and routine military records to fully investigate and help answer the public's questions about veterans' possible exposure to chemical and biological warfare agents .

a dod team asked by the deputy secretary of defense to evaluate dod's responses to gulf war illnesses concluded that dod's work in this area needed a broader focus , a strategy for systematically examining the various theories concerning the nature and causes of gulf war illnesses , and a method of effectively communicating dod's findings to u.s. veterans and the public .

on november 12 , 1996 , the deputy secretary of defense established the office of the special assistant for gulf war illnesses ( osagwi ) .

the goal of restoring public confidence in dod shaped the mission and organizational focus of osagwi .

osagwi's mission was broadly defined as ensuring that ( 1 ) veterans of the gulf war are appropriately cared for , ( 2 ) dod is doing everything possible to understand and explain gulf war illnesses , and ( 3 ) dod puts into place all required military doctrine and personnel and medical policies and procedures to minimize any future problems from exposure to chemical and biological warfare agents and other environmental hazards .

although osagwi's mission statement charges it with ensuring that veterans are appropriately cared for , specific responsibility for providing health care to servicemembers still on active duty and for conducting the health research program continues to reside with the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs .

similarly , va remains the primary health care provider for those who have left military service .

osagwi officials told us , however , that they assist servicemembers and veterans with health care matters related to gulf war illnesses by providing them with referrals to sources of health care or helping them with the registration and examination processes associated with dod's comprehensive clinical evaluation program or the va's persian gulf registry .

osagwi also works with the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs to ( 1 ) help ensure that reservists receive all entitled benefits and ( 2 ) recommend changes to legislation or rules where needed .

at the time of our review , osagwi believed that its core activity involved investigating and reporting on incidents of possible exposure to chemical and biological warfare agents and investigating related military operations during the gulf war .

after osagwi has completed its investigation of an incident , the investigator writes a summation document called a case narrative .

the purpose of osagwi's case narratives is essentially to get all of the facts before the american people about what osagwi has learned from its investigation of an incident .

the case narrative , a document updated as new evidence becomes known , is to contain all important investigative facts and osagwi's assessment — in terms of “definitely,” “likely,” “indeterminate,” “unlikely,” or “definitely not” — of the likelihood that servicemembers were exposed to chemical or biological warfare agents .

the standard osagwi used for its assessments was whether all available facts would lead a reasonable person to conclude that a chemical or biological warfare agent was or was not present .

as of january 1 , 1999 , osagwi had published a total of 19 reports — 13 case narratives , 2 environmental exposure reports , and 4 information papers .

at that time osagwi also had 27 active investigations under way .

appendix iii lists osagwi reports and their dates of publication as well as osagwi's active investigations .

on july 8 , 1997 , the ranking minority member of the house committee on veterans affairs asked us to examine osagwi operations .

specifically , we were asked to ( 1 ) describe dod's progress in establishing an organization to address gulf war illnesses issues and ( 2 ) evaluate the thoroughness of osagwi's investigations into and reporting on veterans' potential exposure to chemical or biological agents during the gulf war .

we did not review osagwi activities to coordinate and monitor research on the causes of gulf war illnesses because this subject is addressed by other reviews .

to determine dod's progress in establishing an organization to address gulf war illnesses issues , we obtained briefings from osagwi officials covering the range of activities performed to fulfill their mission objectives and reviewed associated documentation .

osagwi had issued eight case narratives at the time we began our review .

it pursued these eight cases first because they involved incidents that were the most prominent and controversial at the time .

to evaluate the thoroughness of osagwi's investigations and reporting on veterans' possible exposures to chemical or biological warfare agents , we reviewed six of these eight case narratives .

the case narratives we selected for review were ( 1 ) “reported mustard agent exposure” ; ( 2 ) “u.s .

marine corps minefield breaching” ; ( 3 ) “fox detections in an ammunition supply point ( asp ) orchard” ; ( 4 ) “al jubayl , saudi arabia” ; ( 5 ) “al jaber air base” ; and ( 6 ) “reported detection of chemical agent , camp monterey , kuwait.” we did not review the case narrative about the alleged exposure to chemical warfare agents at khamisiyah , iraq , because it was already being heavily reviewed by other organizations , such as the presidential advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses and the senate committee on veterans affairs' special investigation unit .

we also did not review the “possible chemical agent on scud missile sample” case narrative because it appeared to be less controversial than the other case narratives .

in reviewing each case narrative , we generally used as criteria osagwi's methodology , which had itself been derived from the united nations and other international community protocols for investigating chemical warfare incidents .

this methodology included ( 1 ) substantiating the incident by searching for documentation from operational , intelligence , and environmental logs ; ( 2 ) documenting the medical reports related to the incident ; ( 3 ) interviewing appropriate people ; ( 4 ) obtaining information available to external organizations ; and ( 5 ) assessing the results .

we also used the criterion that the case narrative should accurately and fully disclose all materially significant information relevant to the investigation of the incident in order to avoid any appearance that osagwi was selectively reporting what had actually happened .

we initially traced each statement in the published case narrative to its underlying supporting document to identify the accuracy and completeness of the text in the narrative .

for those statements missing adequate supporting documentation , we requested that osagwi provide us with the appropriate documentation .

we also reviewed additional documentation collected by the osagwi investigators in performing the investigation , even though some of this documentation might not have been cited in the published narrative .

we looked for any inconsistencies in information that was not addressed in the published narrative .

in addition , for the selected case narratives , we contacted 71 individuals interviewed by osagwi that were key sources of information and requested that they verify the accuracy and completeness of both the osagwi case narrative and the osagwi write - up of the investigator's discussions .

we also contacted some key participants not originally interviewed by osagwi to determine whether other relevant information was available that might affect osagwi's assessment of possible exposures to chemical warfare agents .

finally , we contacted several gulf war veterans organizations , including the following: the american legion ; the disabled american veterans ; the veterans of foreign wars ; the national gulf war resource center ; gulfwatch ; the desert storm justice foundation ; the operation desert storm / shield association ; the gulf war veterans of long island , new york ; and the chronic illnesses net for persian gulf veterans .

we asked them to provide us with any information they had that refuted or added to the osagwi information .

we did not systematically approach veterans' groups to obtain their assessments of overall osagwi effectiveness because this was beyond the scope of our review .

to further verify the case narratives , we interviewed officials and obtained pertinent documentary evidence from officials at the following locations: osagwi , located in falls church , virginia ; the u.s. army chemical and biological defense command at aberdeen , maryland ; the u.s. army chemical center and school at ft. mcclellan , alabama ; the office of the surgeon general of the navy , washington , d.c. ; the naval health research center , san diego , california ; the department of veterans affairs , washington , d.c. ; the deployment surveillance team , which operates the comprehensive clinical evaluation program , falls church , virginia ; and the u.s. army gulf war declassification project , falls church , virginia .

we conducted our review from september 1997 to january 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

in the face of severe criticism by veterans , veterans groups , and others of its handling of gulf war illnesses issues , dod committed additional resources to its efforts to determine the cause of veterans' health problems .

with greater resources and a much broader mandate than its predecessor , osagwi has made significant progress in reestablishing communications between dod and veterans .

in addition , osagwi is actively engaged in identifying improvements dod needs to make to protect servicemembers on contaminated battlefields .

dod is investing significantly more resources for osagwi's investigations and outreach efforts than it did for the persian gulf illnesses investigation team .

in 1996 , the investigation team operated with a staff of 12 persons and a budget of $4.1 million .

in contrast , as of october 9 , 1998 , osagwi had a staff of about 200 persons and a fiscal year 1998 budget of $29.4 million .

in addition , osagwi was given much broader authority than the investigation team .

finally , osagwi reports directly to the deputy secretary of defense ; the investigation team reported to the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs .

osagwi officials said that with an adequate budget and sufficient operating authority within dod , they were generally unconstrained in their efforts to pursue osagwi's mandate .

according to these officials , osagwi's operations have been fully funded , and osagwi has had largely unrestricted access to personnel , files , and other data necessary for its work .

for example , osagwi has had full access to classified information from the military services and intelligence agency sources .

to date , osagwi has over 12 million pages of classified information in its computerized database and approximately 500,000 additional pages of classified data in hard - copy format .

the special assistant ( the head of osagwi ) has been free to staff osagwi according to his needs .

this authority has made it possible for him to obtain the expertise needed for osagwi's investigations .

from the start , osagwi management decided to make extensive use of contractors to quickly obtain personnel with specific expertise and maintain the flexibility to change the mix of staffing as needed .

by october 9 , 1998 , 173 ( 87 percent ) of osagwi's personnel were contractor employees .

as needed , osagwi has obtained specialized expertise from individuals in various governmental agencies , such as the central intelligence agency , the defense intelligence agency , and the army's chemical and biological defense command .

osagwi also has the authority to contract with private organizations to perform specialized functions .

a key element of osagwi's attempt to regain credibility with veterans , veterans' organizations , and the public was to improve communications with them .

osagwi recognized that major improvements were needed from earlier dod efforts to listen to veterans' concerns and incorporate the information they provided into dod's investigations and help provide health referral services to veterans .

our review confirmed that osagwi has made significant progress in establishing communications with veterans and others .

osagwi established an e - mail address and encouraged veterans and others to use both this and the dod toll - free hotline to communicate with osagwi regarding gulf war illnesses issues .

within the first year of operation , it received almost 1,200 letters and 2,700 e - mail messages .

osagwi staff contacted over 3,900 veterans through personal telephone calls , which included the vast majority of the investigation team backlog of unanswered calls from 1,200 veterans .

according to osagwi , as of january 1 , 1999 , it had received 2,850 letters and 4,906 e - mail messages and answered 2,803 and 4,866 , respectively .

osagwi used a staff specifically trained to deal with gulf war veterans' concerns , obtain information from veterans , provide information about osagwi activities , and make referrals for those needing medical support from dod or va. osagwi uses a variety of methods to disseminate information on its operations .

for example , it uses a web site called gulflink on which it publishes its case narrative reports , information papers , and much of the supporting documentation used in its investigations .

osagwi reports that this site typically receives over 60,000 inquiries each week .

osagwi also publishes a bimonthly newsletter called gulfnews .

over 12,000 individuals receive the newsletter .

osagwi's leadership and staff have met with veterans at 18 town hall meetings and made appearances at 41 national veterans conventions .

in addition , osagwi officials frequently meet with veterans and military service organizations to discuss gulf war illnesses topics of interest to them .

finally , osagwi communicates directly with veterans that are affected by its investigations .

after osagwi completes an investigation and publishes the corresponding case narrative , it sends to each affected veteran a letter that contains a synopsis of the investigation's results .

for example , following its investigation of the potential chemical warfare agent exposure in khamisiyah , iraq , osagwi sent letters to 97,837 veterans concerning the possibility that they might have been exposed to low levels of sarin , a chemical warfare agent .

according to osagwi officials , osagwi must go beyond investigating and reporting on possible veterans' exposures to chemical or biological warfare agents and identify ways to better protect servicemembers from nontraditional battlefield threats .

from its investigations and reports on possible veterans' exposures to chemical , biological , or environmental agents , osagwi has identified force protection issues that need improvement .

these lessons learned generally fall into the following three categories: how to build trust and confidence in dod , how to better account for what happened on the battlefield , and how to better protect servicemembers on the battlefield .

specific examples of the lessons learned include the need for institutionalizing a veterans' outreach capability after osagwi is disestablished ; improving systems for tracking troop movements during a conflict so that accurate data is available to show where individuals or units were located on the battlefield at any point in time ; improving wartime records development and post - war records management systems and addressing issues such as the lack of a uniform records management program for joint commands ; improving chemical and biological warfare agent detection equipment to make it less prone to false alarms and requiring doctrinal changes to collect and retain detector - produced printouts of detections ; implementing techniques to better safeguard the health of deployed troops , such as deploying forward field laboratories early and taking samples to determine whether contamination may have occurred subsequent to the use of depleted uranium ammunition ; and improving and implementing depleted uranium training programs .

osagwi is presently working with dod agencies to implement the lessons learned .

discussions by the special assistant with the director of the joint staff and the military service chiefs of staff resulted in revised joint staff policy concerning record - keeping by joint commands .

osagwi was also instrumental in developing a dod - initiated requirement for the military services to review their depleted uranium training programs .

we did not review what impact osagwi's lessons learned have had toward making changes within dod .

until recently , osagwi had no office for monitoring and measuring the extent to which osagwi lessons learned were being acted upon .

in october 1998 , the special assistant created a new osagwi directorate to focus attention on ensuring that lessons learned are effectively communicated to and implemented by the responsible dod agencies .

we reviewed six of the eight case narratives osagwi had published at the time we began our review to evaluate the thoroughness and accuracy of osagwi's investigations .

osagwi generally followed its investigation methodology and used appropriate investigative procedures and techniques .

however , we found significant weaknesses in the scope and quality of osagwi's investigations for three of the six cases: the reported exposure to mustard agent , the marine minefield breaching , and the al jubayl , saudi arabia , case narratives .

also , osagwi did not use dod or department of veterans affairs medical databases on gulf war illnesses in conducting any of the six investigations .

despite the weaknesses we noted , in all but one case — the marine minefield breaching case — we found no basis to question osagwi's determinations of the likelihood that chemical warfare agents were present .

except for failing to take advantage of the va and dod medical databases , we did not find significant weaknesses in the remaining three cases: the camp monterey , the al jaber airfield , and the asp orchard case narratives .

in investigating these cases , osagwi followed its methodology , identified and interviewed important witnesses , appropriately used information from other key sources , included all important information in the case narratives , and accurately presented the information found .

these investigations were performed in a generally thorough manner , and the evidence collected by osagwi supported its assessments .

osagwi officials told us that they have revised their internal review processes for conducting and reporting investigations .

they said that ( 1 ) improvements to these processes have evolved since the publication of the six case narratives we reviewed , ( 2 ) some of the process revisions were influenced by the findings we reported as our review progressed , and ( 3 ) enhancements to their processes would considerably minimize the recurrence of similar weaknesses in future case narratives .

our review of the six selected case narratives disclosed some weaknesses in the investigations and in the accuracy and completeness of osagwi's reporting .

osagwi's investigations were usually conducted in accordance with the established methodology .

osagwi also generally identified and interviewed the appropriate witnesses , obtained relevant evidence and information , accurately documented witness testimonies , and otherwise generally used appropriate investigative techniques and procedures .

however , we found that three of the six selected case narratives still contained significant investigative and reporting problems .

the types of problems varied .

in three of the six case narratives , we found investigative problems such as failures to ( 1 ) follow up with appropriate individuals to confirm key evidence , ( 2 ) identify or ensure the validity of key physical evidence , ( 3 ) include important information , and ( 4 ) interview key witnesses .

following is a more detailed description of the three case narratives containing most of these weaknesses .

this case narrative addresses the reported exposure of an individual soldier to mustard agent while he was exploring an iraqi bunker .

osagwi assessed this incident as a “likely” exposure .

osagwi's assessment of this case has been highly controversial .

some veterans organizations and others believe that the evidence presented in osagwi's case narrative and the army's presentation of the purple heart medal to this soldier for his injuries warranted an assessment of “definite” exposure .

however , we found that this case was affected by many investigative and evidentiary problems .

some of these are more closely associated with shortcomings in dod procedural practices during the gulf war than with how osagwi did its investigation .

despite the problems identified , we believe that osagwi's original assessment of “likely” exposure remains appropriate for this case .

this case narrative addresses reports that u.s. marines might have been exposed to chemical warfare agents while breaching minefield barriers on the first day of operation desert storm's ground war .

osagwi concluded that the presence of chemical warfare agents was “unlikely” during this incident , in part because it found that no mechanism was present for delivering such agents .

however , we found that osagwi overlooked information indicating that a means for delivering chemical warfare agents might have been present , and that the case narrative does not include other relevant information indicating that chemical warfare agents might have been present .

we believe that these shortcomings are sufficient to cause a reasonable person to question osagwi's assessment .

regarding this case narrative about three significant events occurring in the al jubayl area during the persian gulf war , osagwi concluded that the presence of chemical warfare agents was “unlikely” for one of the events and “definitely did not occur” in the remaining two .

we believe that the available evidence generally supports osagwi's assessment , but osagwi is still performing work regarding alternate explanations for some events affecting this case .

however , we also found that osagwi did not include important information in this case narrative regarding the unusually high levels of post - war veterans' complaints of medical symptoms they associated with the incidents involved in this case .

furthermore , osagwi did not adequately identify and coordinate some of this information that could potentially provide evidence to help resolve research questions concerning whether there is a correlation between high levels of reported gulf war illnesses symptoms and duty during the gulf war at al jubayl .

dod and the va maintain databases that contain self - reported health information and clinical information on thousands of gulf war veterans .

some of these veterans may have symptoms associated with gulf war illnesses .

although osagwi's methodology calls for the use of the dod and va databases in its investigations , we found it did not access them for the six case narratives selected for our review .

therefore , osagwi missed an opportunity to determine whether individuals involved in possible exposure incidents were also reporting symptoms in the databases .

information thus obtained could provide leads to help scope and guide the nature of the investigation and potentially could be combined with other evidence and research efforts conducted by dod and others to help evaluate whether chemical warfare agents might have been present .

in response to the complaints of many military personnel that returned from the gulf war with health problems they believed were related to their deployment , dod and va created programs to track the health of gulf war veterans .

information collected in these programs is stored in databases that describe the health status of a large group of gulf war veterans who have undergone a standardized examination process to document their health .

each of the case narratives selected for our review describes possible chemical exposure incidents that involve individuals acting alone or as a part of larger units .

many of these individuals may have enrolled in either the ccep or the va registry .

osagwi could use this data to identify whether individuals involved in the incidents described in the case narratives might be experiencing health problems .

several of the case narratives included in our review describe events that could have been the subject of further analysis using the ccep and va registry .

for example , osagwi's asp orchard case narrative describes chemical warfare agent alarms at an ammunition storage facility near an orchard outside kuwait city , kuwait .

osagwi collected information from many of the personnel that inspected this facility and from a variety of other sources , such as the central intelligence agency and the defense intelligence agency .

osagwi concluded that the alarms were false and that chemical warfare agents probably had not been stored at this facility .

however , for the six case narratives we reviewed , osagwi investigators did not query the ccep or the va registry in an attempt to determine whether any of the several personnel that inspected the site or any of the hundreds of other personnel encamped nearby had enrolled and had reported or been diagnosed with health problems .

although it would not be definitive , unusually high levels of participation accompanied by the reporting of certain health problems and possible exposures might have led osagwi to investigate further .

performing this investigative step would serve to enhance the credibility of osagwi's case narratives and would confirm osagwi's intention to investigate these events leaving no stone unturned .

we noted that osagwi's investigative methodology includes the use of the ccep and the va registry and that osagwi had used such an analysis in investigating the khamisiyah incident and in developing its depleted uranium environmental exposure report issued on august 4 , 1998 .

for example , in performing the investigation on depleted uranium , osagwi investigators queried the ccep to determine whether an unusually high proportion of the participants involved in the case had experienced kidney damage — a possible medical effect of being exposed to depleted uranium .

according to osagwi , the analysis showed that these ccep participants did not suffer unusually high rates of kidney damage compared to the general u.s. population .

except for not using the dod and va medical databases , the al jaber air base , asp orchard , and camp monterey case narratives generally did not have the weaknesses we found in the other three cases .

in investigating these cases , osagwi followed its methodology , identified and interviewed important witnesses , appropriately used information from other key sources , included all important information , and accurately presented the information found .

these investigations were performed in a thorough manner , and the evidence collected by osagwi convincingly supported its assessments .

the camp monterey case is a good example .

in this case , soldiers of the 8th u.s. army infantry division were moving wooden iraqi crates containing metal canisters out of a building in a bivouac area north of kuwait city , kuwait , so that it could be used to house troops .

one of the canisters broke open , spilling a white powder - like substance and causing several soldiers to become ill. at the request of the local commander , two fox vehicles tested the spilled substance .

both fox vehicles initially reported detections of sarin , a deadly nerve agent , and this apparently led to some initial reports that soldiers had been exposed to a nerve agent .

later , mass spectrometer tests by these fox vehicles confirmed that the substance was actually a relatively harmless riot control agent rather than sarin .

osagwi found , and we confirmed , that after interviewing the personnel present ( including the fox crews ) and after reviewing fox crew and laboratory analyses of the fox printouts , the initial alarm for sarin was an error .

similarly , in both the al jaber and asp orchard cases , initial fox alarms for persistent chemical warfare agent could not be confirmed in some instances even by repeated attempts by the same fox vehicles .

osagwi concluded , and we agreed , that had the chemical warfare agents been present , they would have been detected in the repeated tests .

we believe that inadequate quality control procedures within osagwi contributed to the investigative and reporting problems discussed in this report .

during our review of osagwi operations , we periodically briefed osagwi officials on the nature and types of weaknesses we had found and on our preliminary observations .

osagwi officials agreed that they needed to improve their investigations and their reporting of the investigation results .

they said that they have instituted several changes to their internal quality assurance practices that they believe will considerably strengthen their investigative and reporting processes .

according to osagwi officials , their current investigative and reporting process has evolved over the 2 years since osagwi was established .

consequently , certain enhancements are now in place that were not present when the six case narratives we reviewed were published .

more specifically , osagwi now requires its investigators to prepare a written investigation plan .

the investigation plan must specify the information that will be obtained , the direction the investigation will take , and the schedule .

the plan is expected to mirror the overall methodology adopted by the division within the investigation and analysis directorate for its investigations .

the division chief is to review the investigation plan and provide feedback to the investigator on the scope and direction of the investigation and the proposed schedule .

following approval of the plan by the division chief , the investigator can begin the investigation .

also , the process now includes a requirement for a team directional guidance meeting when the investigation is 50- to 75-percent complete .

at this meeting , the investigator briefs a small group of analysts from within the investigator's division on the investigation's scope , direction , and findings to that point .

the purpose of the meeting is to identify at an early stage any problems in the direction of the investigation and to identify any major information sources that are not being used .

according to osagwi , each case investigation is now periodically reviewed by the director of the investigations and analysis directorate to allow the director to adjust , as necessary , the scope of the investigation and the case narrative development .

furthermore , the peer review process for case narratives is now more robust because the peer review team , comprising experienced individuals , reviews the completed case narrative along with the source materials .

the peer reviewers are responsible for ensuring that the text in the case narrative is supported by the source material and also for identifying portions of the text needing footnotes to source materials .

in addition , an osagwi official said the internal review of case narratives by key individuals within the osagwi organization is more rigorous than it used to be .

osagwi officials believe that these enhancements to their review processes will preclude the recurrence of the types of investigative and reporting weaknesses we found .

the weaknesses in the scope and quality of osagwi's investigations and in reporting the results of these investigations in the reported exposure to mustard agent , marine minefield breaching , and al jubayl case narratives are significant ; however , we agree with osagwi's assessments of the likelihood of the presence of chemical warfare agents in all but the marine minefield breaching case narrative .

in our opinion , the lack of effective quality assurance policies and practices within osagwi contributed to the weaknesses we noted .

a stronger quality control mechanism for its investigations would provide greater assurance that all relevant facts are included and that the information presented is accurately and properly sourced .

more consistent use of some types of medical information would also strengthen the rigor of osagwi's investigations .

by querying available medical databases for all cases , osagwi investigators might have been able to better determine whether personnel at or near the sites of incidents had reported or been diagnosed with unusual health problems , thus helping indicate whether increased investigative efforts regarding the potential presence of chemical warfare agents or other environmental hazards in these incidents might be appropriate .

osagwi's changes to its internal review process appear to be positive steps in ensuring the quality of investigations and the related case narrative reports .

because osagwi initiated these changes after the case narratives we reviewed were published , we could not determine their effectiveness in ensuring the quality of osagwi investigations and reports .

however , the procedures should incorporate two features to enhance the credibility of the review process .

first , it is critical that those named to review osagwi's investigations are independent of the team investigating the incidents to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest .

second , it is important that the procedures in place lead reviewers to thoroughly check to ensure that all relevant information obtained by the investigation teams has been included in the case narrative reports , that all important leads have been pursued , and that the investigation team has reached conclusions that are fully substantiated by the facts .

information about the potential for differences in the occurrence of gulf war illnesses symptoms between nmcb - 24 and nmcb - 40 developed during the al jubayl case investigation was not shared with the naval health research center for consideration for inclusion in its ongoing gulf war illnesses research .

we believe this information has potential for use in helping dod evaluate issues related to the high levels of health problems reported by many of the seabees stationed at al jubayl during the gulf war .

to ensure that osagwi's case narratives contain all relevant facts , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the special assistant for gulf war illnesses to revise the marine minefield breaching , exposure to mustard agent , and al jubayl , saudi arabia , case narratives to reflect the new and / or unreported information noted in our report and examine whether it should change its conclusion about the likelihood of the presence of chemical warfare agents in the marine minefield breaching case from “unlikely” to “indeterminate” in light of the additional information now known about this case .

to enhance the thoroughness of osagwi's investigative and reporting practices , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the special assistant for gulf war illnesses to use the dod and va gulf war clinical databases to assist in designing the nature and scope of all osagwi investigations ; include relevant medical information in its case narratives where it is needed to fully explain incidents of possible exposure to chemical agents or other potential causes of gulf war illnesses ; and ensure that its internal review procedures provide that ( 1 ) those reviewing an investigation and related report are independent of the team investigating the incident and ( 2 ) steps are in place that will lead the reviewers to thoroughly check that all relevant information obtained by the investigation teams has been included in the case narrative reports , all conclusions have been fully substantiated by the facts , and that all logical leads have been pursued .

because of the potential research value of information developed through osagwi investigations , we further recommend that osagwi contact the naval health research center regarding the usefulness and desirability of comparing data between the veterans of nmcb - 24 and nmcb - 40 for purposes such as helping to determine whether veterans of these two units are reporting the same types and numbers of symptoms .

dod generally concurred with a draft of this report , agreeing to revise the case narratives we reviewed to include new or unreported data , and to reassess case narrative findings based upon any new evidence .

in particular , dod agreed to update the marine minefield breaching case to reflect new information , conduct additional analysis on the issue of artillery fire during the breaching operation , and reassess its conclusions as appropriate .

dod disagreed with our proposed use of the ccep and the va gulf war health examination registry in osagwi investigations .

in commenting on this report , dod stated it was concerned that these databases might be inappropriately used to establish a causal relationship between an event and the medical findings of the registries .

dod therefore maintains it would be inappropriate for case investigations , which were designed to report simply on what happened on the battlefield , to make assumptions about the significance or validity of the data in these databases without the establishment of a causal association by scientific research .

dod also stated concerns about preempting scientific research in this area and drawing premature conclusions that would be fallacious .

however , dod agreed that these databases need to be examined and analyzed for what they can contribute to understanding the illnesses of gulf war veterans , and noted that the department has been involved in a number of research and other analyses of these databases .

we agree that information from these databases should not be used by investigators to establish a causal association and / or conclusions as described by dod , and did not intend that it should be used for this purpose .

we also agree that the establishment of gulf war illnesses causal relationships is most appropriately a research activity .

however , we also believe that the va and dod databases could potentially provide relevant information to the investigator about whether individuals who were at or near a site under investigation are reporting health problems , and that this information could be appropriately used , when combined with other information , to help guide the nature and scope of osagwi investigations .

for example , case investigators could use va registry and ccep data , particularly where it shows that large numbers of individuals at or near a given site are reporting health problems , as an indicator for providing investigative leads and for use in establishing the nature and scope of an investigation .

this does not mean , as implied in dod's comments , that such use of these databases would entail routine inclusion of the reviewed data in the published case narratives , their use as a replacement for research activities , or that its use would result in interpretations of non - scientifically based cause and effect relationships .

we believe that these databases can be used by investigators to help guide and scope their efforts without entailing the types of misuse described by dod .

we modified the final report text and recommendatons to clarify our position regarding this finding .

dod agreed that the al jubayl case narrative needed to be modified to place the events of this incident in fuller context , and that this would include that some servicemembers stationed at al jubayl , especially members of nmcb - 24 , have reported high levels of health problems .

dod also agreed to request that the naval health research center undertake an analytical comparison regarding nmcb - 24 and nmcb - 40 , and that independent reviewers are critical to a thorough and acceptable report on osagwi investigations .

va also disagreed with our proposed use of the ccep and the va gulf war health examination registry in osagwi investigations in its written comments on a draft of this report .

va's comments were similar to dod's regarding this matter .

va also expressed doubts regarding the usefulness to research of data comparisons involving nmcb - 24 and nmcb - 40 .

additional discussion of dod's and va's comments and our evaluation is included in appendixes i and ii .

