this report responds to your august 1997 request for information on the air force's c - 130 program .

specifically , you asked us to answer the following questions .

what is the mission of the current and planned c - 130 fleet ? .

what are the c - 130 requirements for the air national guard and air force reserve ? .

what is the c - 130 procurement history in the guard and reserve units ? .

what are the air force plans for retiring excess c - 130s in the master stationing plan ( msp ) ? .

is the air force's process for retiring c - 130 aircraft when replacement aircraft become available effective ? .

what is the air force c - 130j requirement and what other alternatives were considered ? .

what is the c - 130j logistics support funding shortfall ? .

the c - 130 hercules aircraft is a medium - range , tactical airlift aircraft designed primarily for transporting personnel and cargo .

the aircraft was originally flown in 1954 and has been under continuous production ever since .

the air force currently has approximately 700 c - 130s of various configurations in its current c - 130e and h fleet .

the average age of the active duty c - 130 fleet is over 25 years old , while the average age of the guard and reserve c - 130s is about 15 years old .

these aircraft are under the management and control of the air mobility command ( amc ) and are operated by the active air force , the air national guard , and the air force reserve .

the air force has just begun buying a new j model c - 130 .

lockheed martin corporation is developing the j aircraft as a commercial venture and expects it to ( 1 ) lower the cost of ownership of the fleet and ( 2 ) climb higher and faster , fly at higher cruise speeds , and take off and land in a shorter distance than the existing fleet .

the j will have the same structural characteristics as previous c - 130 models ; however , it differs in that it includes , among other things , an advanced integrated digital avionics system , a new engine and composite propellers , a heads - up display , and a redesigned flight station to facilitate operation by a three - man versus a five - man crew .

the j can also be bought in a stretched version .

the aircraft is currently undergoing developmental tests and the federal aviation administration ( faa ) certification process is expected to end in june 1998 .

see appendix i for an illustration of the c - 130j aircraft , along with the contractor's comparison of the capabilities for the c - 130e , h , and j .

at the time of our review , 23 air force c - 130js were on contract , with delivery of the first aircraft initially scheduled for december 1997 .

the schedule has slipped , however , and delivery of the first aircraft is now scheduled for october 1998 .

the schedule has been delayed due to technical problems and the pending faa certification .

the following sections provide the answers to each of your specific questions .

our scope and methodology for obtaining this information are discussed in appendix ii .

the current c - 130 fleet is comprised of 12 different variants and the missions vary with each variant .

while most of the current fleet is comprised of combat delivery aircraft , many of the c - 130 variants perform specialized missions .

the combat delivery c - 130 fleet , designated as c - 130es and c - 130hs , is used in a wide variety of wartime and peacetime missions .

in wartime , the c - 130 combat delivery aircraft primarily performs the intratheater portion of the airlift mission , leaving the long - range intertheater transport mission to larger aircraft such as the c - 5 and c - 17 .

these c - 130s primarily provide rapid transportation of personnel or cargo for delivery by parachute to a designated drop zone , or by landing at austere locations within the conflict area .

these aircraft are also the primary aeromedical evacuation aircraft in a conflict .

in peacetime , the combat delivery c - 130 is used for training flights , regularly scheduled channel operations , and special assignment missions.it is also used in fire fighting and humanitarian relief missions .

for example , it has been used to airlift heavy equipment into remote areas of other countries to build airports and roads , and transport local goods .

in addition to the missions performed by the basic combat delivery c - 130 aircraft , 11 other variants perform specialized missions .

these missions include ( 1 ) weather reconnaissance , performed by the wc - 130 aircraft ; ( 2 ) special communication missions , performed by the ec - 130 aircraft ; and ( 3 ) search and rescue , performed by the hc - 130 aircraft .

the 12 different c - 130 models that are currently in the fleet and their respective missions are summarized in table 1 .

appendix iii provides further details on these c - 130 models .

the air force plans to buy the c - 130j as a one - for - one replacement of c - 130es and c - 130hs as they reach their service life .

air force officials told us that the basic missions of the c - 130 fleet will not change when the new c - 130j aircraft enter the fleet .

however , it appears that these missions will be expanded .

specifically , air force officials told us that , as part of the air force's planned c - 130j procurement , it is planning to buy the new stretched c - 130j - 30 .

we were further told that because this aircraft will provide more room / airplane capacity , it could be used to augment intertheater missions , like strategic brigade airdrops .

final decisions regarding the procurement of the c - 130j - 30 and the aircraft's use , however , will not be made until fall 1998 .

at the time of our review , peacetime and wartime requirements for the air national guard and air force reserve combat delivery aircraft inventory totaled 264 aircraft .

requirements for the guard and reserves' c - 130 combat delivery aircraft are established in the air force's c - 130 msp , which was delivered to congress in 1997 .

the source of the requirements for these unit's special mission c - 130s varied depending on the model .

for example , we found that: the requirements for the weather reconnaissance wc - 130 were set at 10 aircraft by congress .

the requirements for the ski - equipped lc - 130 , according to officials from the national science foundation ( nsf ) and air national guard , are set at 10 aircraft .

these aircraft are used to conduct operations in support of military taskings and in support ( deliver supplies , people , fuel , and scientific equipment ) of the nsf's polar research missions .

the requirements for the psychological warfare ec - 130 , the search and rescue hc - 130 , and adverse weather special operations mc - 130 emanated from theater commander in chiefs .

according to air force officials , the specific required number of these aircraft is classified .

total combat delivery and special mission c - 130 inventory for the air force guard and reserve was 352 aircraft as of january 1998 .

appendix iv shows the inventory and locations for these aircraft .

as of march 1998 , air force officials stated that decisions regarding their plans for the future c - 130 inventory had not been made .

for the past 21 years , with the exception of five aircraft , congress has directed the procurement of c - 130s for the air national guard and air force reserve units .

according to c - 130 program officials , the air force has not requested these aircraft because aircraft in those units have many years of service life remaining .

figure 1 shows the annual procurement of the 256 aircraft that congress directed for the guard and reserve since 1978 .

these five aircraft were originally requested by the air force for active air force units but were subsequently scheduled to go to the reserves at keesler air force base in mississippi .

both the joint chiefs of staff's ( jcs ) june 1996 intratheater lift analysisand the air force c - 130 msp reviewed the service's combat delivery aircraft inventory and determined that there were more c - 130s in inventory than required for military operations in korea and southwest asia — the two major regional contingencies the department of defense ( dod ) uses for force structure planning purposes .

about 50 c - 130 aircraft were identified in the air force msp as excess over requirements .

thirty of these were in the air national guard and air force reserve units and the remaining were in the active duty force .

we were told that reductions in the active duty force structure was achieved by reclassifying some of the combat coded aircraft and designating others as ground trainers .

reductions in the air national guard were expected to be 24 aircraft ( from 190 to 166 aircraft ) and the air force reserve command units were to be reduced by 6 aircraft ( from 104 to 98 aircraft ) .

according to air force officials , these reductions were not made .

in accordance with restrictions in the conference reports on the 1998 department of defense appropriations act and the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 , these reductions were not taken .

specifically , the reports recommended that the air national guard and the air force reserve c - 130 aircraft remain at current levels — levels before the msp .

at the time of our review , air force officials told us that the air force was in the process of designing a plan for retiring excess c - 130s .

although the air force has a process governing the retirement of its aircraft , it has not been able to implement the process effectively .

as a result , some c - 130 aircraft have been retired with substantial service life remaining and / or shortly after the aircraft had been modified .

the air force , however , appears to be making changes to improve this process .

air force instruction 16-402 governs the process for retiring aircraft .

the process begins with a document called the force structure plan outlook .

this document tells the commands how many aircraft are excess to requirements in a given year , usually as a result of budget constraints or a change in requirements for the fleet .

once a decision has been made to excess a certain number of aircraft , the commands are to review: ( 1 ) the aircraft's remaining service life .

 ( 2 ) the recent maintenance history on the aircraft .

program depot maintenance and other inspection records are reviewed , at this point , to assess whether the aircraft had a lot of corrosion problems , maintenance troubles , and / or a known history of performance problems .

when a decision to excess a specific aircraft is finalized , air force headquarters is to determine whether other users — that is , active duty , guard and reserves , and ultimately other agencies — could use the aircraft .

if other users were not identified , the aircraft should be retired .

the air force has retired c - 130s with service life remaining on the aircraft .

program officials told us that such retirements have generally been driven by congressional direction to buy more c - 130s than the air force requested in its annual budget requests .

program officials told us that , accordingly , it was difficult to control the retirement of c - 130 aircraft .

they stated that , since retirement from the fleet had been based on congressionally directed acquisitions replacing existing c - 130 aircraft , they were not retiring aircraft because the service life had expired .

of the 49 c - 130s retired between june 1991 and may 1997 , 36 were c - 130bs with old technology and 13 were newer c - 130es .

of the 13 c - 130es , all had an average of 14 years of service life still remaining .

in addition , annual congressional appropriation language states that , with the exception of safety modifications , no modifications may be done if the service plans to retire an aircraft in less than 5 years after modifications .

we noted that of the 49 c - 130 aircraft the air force has retired since 1991 , 40 had modifications within 5 years of retirement , totaling about $9 million .

program officials told us that it is difficult to control modifications of c - 130 aircraft because the air force does not generally know 5 years in advance when a c - 130 aircraft will leave the fleet .

the air force appears to be taking steps to improve its c - 130 modifications and retirement process .

specifically , in october 1997 , the vice chief of staff , in a message to the lead air force commands for c - 130 aircraft , stated that additional c - 130j congressional adds should be expected for fiscal year 1998 and beyond and that the commands should plan and program accordingly .

air force officials have stated that they will incorporate this direction in the development of their c - 130 retirement plan .

in that regard , an amc tiger team looking at the c - 130 fleet has recommended to the air force chief of staff that 150 c - 130es with the worst service life problems be replaced with c - 130j - 30s .

we were told , however , that final decisions were not expected on the retirement of the old c - 130s and procurement of the js until late fall 1998 .

until these decisions are made and the plan released , it is too early to determine how well this directive will be implemented .

as of march 1998 , the air force had not decided how many c - 130js will be required .

according to c - 130 program officials , although the air force has a documented requirement for the c - 130j as the need arises , a large - scale c - 130j program is not needed at this time because the service life of the first c - 130e will not expire until 2002 .

accordingly , the air force has only been requesting one or two c - 130js per year since 1996 for the active force .

as previously shown in figure 1 , the remaining j acquisitions were congressionally directed buys for the guard and reserve .

the air force began procuring the j in accordance with directions from the air force chief of staff to use fiscal year 1994 guard and reserve procurement funds to buy two c - 130js .

originally , the two j models were going to the active duty air force , which provided the air national guard two c - 130hs as a swap .

these two j models will now be going to the air force reserves at keesler air force base , mississippi , following the flight test program .

the justification for the new c - 130j buys , according to requirements , acquisition , and budget documents , is to reduce the cost of ownership of the c - 130e and h fleet , with anticipated cost savings associated with the new technology and the reduced crew and maintenance needs of the j aircraft .

a review of the c - 130j program office's life - cycle cost estimate was completed in june 1996 by the air force cost analysis improvement group .

the report stated that operations and support savings are forecast from a program of 135 c - 130js bought over the 1996 to 2014 time frame with the new technology and the reduced crew and maintenance needs of the j aircraft .

air force officials , however , acknowledge that savings associated with this commercial buy will not be substantiated until several years after delivery / transfer of ownership is taken by the air force , which , as previously stated , is now expected in october 1998 for the first j aircraft .

additionally , during our review , some air force officials expressed concern that the normal requirements process was not followed in the recent j buys .

they stated that requirement documents for the ec - 130js and wc - 130js were written after the air force had made a commitment to buy the aircraft .

for example , congress appropriated funds for two unrequested ec - 130js — one in fiscal year 1997 and one in fiscal year 1998 .

an october 7 , 1997 , memorandum from the office of the secretary of the air force for acquisition noted , however , that a validated operational requirements document had not yet been generated .

additionally , these officials noted that there have been concerns that the ec - 130j buy may not address all of the problems in the current ec - 130 fleet — primarily , the lack of adequate space on the aircraft .

there are 12 crew stations aboard the ec - 130 aircraft and we were told that there is barely enough room for the broadcasting equipment needed for each station .

the air force has looked at the wide body boeing 757 as a replacement for the current ec - 130 fleet , but has since decided to use the j .

regarding alternatives to the j , we were told that alternatives have been evaluated and rejected in the past .

specifically , in december 1996 , an unsolicited proposal was submitted to modernize the c - 130 fleet .

appendix v summarizes the air force's reasons for rejecting this proposal .

in addition to rejecting prior alternatives to the j for cost and technical reasons , air force officials told us that the alternatives were premature since the first c - 130e is not scheduled to retire until 2002 .

air force officials also told us that the air force is currently considering alternatives presented by an amc tiger team .

among other things , the goals of the amc effort included developing an integrated plan to improve reliability and maintainability of the fleet , produce greater commonality in the fleet , and provide an overall acquisition strategy for the c - 130 weapon system .

after review of specific problems in the c - 130 fleet , which included the inability of the fleet to meet global air traffic management requirements and structural / corrosion problems of the aging fleet , the tiger team recommended that the air force ( 1 ) modify 360 of the “best structural” c - 130s with a block modification process that would essentially put a new front end , including a new engine and cockpit , on the older c - 130 aircraftand ( 2 ) replace aircraft with the worst service life / structural / corrosion problems — about 150 in this category — with new c - 130j - 30s .

final decisions on both matters , however , are not expected until the fall of 1998 .

air force c - 130 officials stated that funding shortfalls for the c - 130 fleet have historically been a problem , primarily because congress has added c - 130 aircraft to their budget without providing the needed funding for logistics support .

this support includes spare parts , training , and maintenance that is normally provided with a weapon system .

these officials further stated that the air force was able to deal with the shortfalls in the past because a large logistics support infrastructure was in place for the c - 130e and c - 130h models , which helped them to absorb the shortfalls .

however , they noted that because the c - 130j is so different from those prior models , the majority of the support in the current infrastructure cannot be used for the j aircraft .

additionally , these officials noted that the air force , with its constrained budgets and various weapon system priorities , has not budgeted for these funding shortfalls .

according to these officials , without the needed support funding , it is possible that some c - 130j aircraft may have to be cannibalized to support others in the fleet or the unsupported c - 130js may have to be parked on the ramp at some locations .

the latest air force funding shortfall document reported a cumulative logistics support shortfall through fiscal year 2003 of $302.11 million for the 23 c - 130j aircraft on contract through 1998 , the 1 requested in 1999 , and the 2 that are expected to be bought in 2002 and 2003 .

table 2 presents the annual and cumulative logistic support funding shortfalls associated with the c - 130j program as of january 7 , 1998 .

c - 130j program officials told us that the lack of commonality of the j with the existing fleet is causing the air force to fund the following .

interim contractor support ( ics ) .

this includes not only the typical ics costs such as on - site contractor personnel , technical data , and repair of reparables , but also a commercial supply support system .

this support system is needed because , unlike the previous c - 130 models , the air force does not yet have a database to determine the mean time between failure rates of the c - 130j spares .

as a result , the correct amount of spares to maintain the fleet's mission capable rate is not known .

hence , provisioning for the c - 130j will be contracted out with this contractor support supply system .

c - 130j training systems ( simulators ) and the associated costs of training flight and maintenance crews .

current plans are to buy five flight simulators for pilot training , a maintenance trainer , and a loadmaster trainer .

c - 130j peculiar support equipment .

this is the support equipment peculiar to the j and includes new or modified support equipment like testers , and special tools needed to test , remove , replace , or handle the c - 130j unique items on the aircraft .

air force officials stated that the j's funding problems are further exacerbated because the aircraft are being assigned to several different bases rather than a single base .

specifically , the 23 air force c - 130js on contract are assigned as follows: 9 wc - 130js and 4 combat delivery js will be located at keesler air force base , mississippi ; 2 ec - 130js will be located at the air national guard unit in harrisburg , pennsylvania ; and 8 combat delivery c - 130js will be located at the air national guard unit in baltimore , maryland .

these different base assignments result in redundant logistical support such as maintenance and training costs at each base .

additionally , there has been much discussion between the air force and the director of operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) regarding the scope of live fire test ( lft ) for the c - 130j program .

an agreement was reached in march 1998 , between the two and will be reflected in the c - 130j test and evaluation master plan and appropriate live fire test plans .

while there is currently a funding shortfall associated with the lft program , the air force has agreed to fund about $5.5 million for the following tests: ( 1 ) the wing dry bay , ( 2 ) the composite propeller , ( 3 ) engine fire suppression ( combat and non - combat ) , ( 4 ) the vulnerability analysis , and ( 5 ) the engine blade containment .

dot&e will fund the hydrodynamic ram testing and the mission abort assessment , which will be about $2.2 million .

air force and contractor officials have been working to remedy the c - 130j shortfall with such efforts as commercial supply support system , also called shared logistics .

shared logistics places high - cost , low - use support equipment at a centralized location , rather than at each base , while high usage and special mission spares are placed at each of the bases where the c - 130j will be located .

air force officials said that , according to data provided by lockheed martin , costs for spares would total about $20 million per base for a new aircraft like the c - 130j if each c - 130j base was provided a full complement of spare parts .

under the shared logistics concept , only $4 million would be required for each c - 130j base compared with the previously stated $20 million .

savings from this concept have already been incorporated into the air force's budget plan .

although no location has been selected for the centralized site , several have been suggested , including options for putting the centralized location where most of the planes will be based or at a location with access to overnight delivery services to facilitate just - in - time deliveries .

in addition to the shared logistics savings , congress has provided about $24 million in the fiscal year 1998 budget to help fund c - 130j support shortfalls .

dod concurred with our report .

dod provided technical suggestions for clarification and we have incorporated these suggestions in the text of the report , where appropriate .

the dod comments are reprinted in appendix vi .

we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the secretaries of defense and the air force .

we will also provide copies to other interested parties upon request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 , if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii .

the c - 130j hercules is the next generation medium - range tactical cargo and personnel aircraft that will be introduced into the existing c - 130 fleet of es and hs .

it is intended to replace aging c - 130e / hs as they approach the end of their service life .

even though the c - 130 fleet has been known as the “workhorse” for the active duty air force , the air national guard , and the air force reserve , the navy and other governments use the airplanes as well .

development of the c - 130j consists of the state - of - the - art technology , according to lockheed martin — the contractor for the “j” — and will reduce manpower requirements , operating costs , and life - cycle costs .

although the c - 130j essentially has the same structural characteristics as previous models , there are some significant differences .

these include the advanced two - pilot flight station with fully integrated digital avionics system with color multi - functional liquid crystal displays and head - up displays ; navigation systems with dual embedded global positioning systems , mission planning system , low - power color radar , digital map display , and new digital autopilot ; simplified fuel system with provisions for adding a receiver aerial refueling probe or tanker aerial refueling pods ; an extensive built - in test integrated diagnostics with an advisory , caution , and warning system ; and higher power turboprop engines with more efficient , six - bladed all composite propellers .

according to lockheed martin , the above enhancements will enable the airplane to climb higher and faster , fly farther at a higher cruise speed , and take off and land in a shorter distance than the existing c - 130 fleet .

table i.1 presents the contractor's comparison of the j and j - 30 capabilities with those of previous models and figure i.1 shows a c - 130j - 30 model .

maximum payload ( pounds ) maximum payload range ( nautical miles ) maximum effort take off roll ( feet ) cruise speed ( knots ) cargo floor length ( feet ) runway length / width / taxiway ( feet ) figure i.1 is a picture of the c - 130j - 30 aircraft .

to accomplish our objectives , we interviewed a number of officials within the office of the secretary of defense ; the joint chiefs of staff ; the office of the secretary of the air force ; the air mobility command , scott air force base , illinois ; the air combat command , langley air force base , virginia ; the air force materiel command , wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; the air education and training center , little rock air force base , arkansas ; air national guard headquarters , washington , d.c. ; air national guard readiness center , andrews air force base , maryland ; air national guard , harrisburg , pennsylvania ; the air force reserve command , robins air force base , georgia ; the warner - robins air logistics center , robins air force base , georgia ; air force reserve components in baltimore and minneapolis ; lockheed martin , arlington , virginia ; air force audit agency ; the national science foundation , virginia ; and the defense contract management command , marietta , georgia .

to ascertain the mission of the current and planned c - 130 fleet , we reviewed the air combat command's c - 130 total force plan briefing , c - 130 combat delivery mission area plan , and combat air forces concept of operations for theater airlift ; the air mobility command's 1998 air mobility master plan ; operational requirements documents for the various c - 130 model designs ; the joint chiefs of staffs intratheater lift analysis ; the air force c - 130 master stationing plan ; prior and current c - 130 selected acquisition reports ; and air force headquarters' written responses in this area .

to obtain the air national guard and air force reserve c - 130 requirement — including current and planned inventory and the c - 130 procurement history for these units , we obtained such information from the headquarters air national guard , washington , d.c. ; the air force reserve command , robins air force base , georgia ; and the air logistics center , warner - robins air force base , macon , georgia .

to ascertain the air force plans for retiring c - 130s identified as excess aircraft in the c - 130 master stationing plan , we reviewed the final c - 130 master stationing plan , and public law 103-335 , section 8125 , which requires the plan .

in addition , we obtained written responses from air force headquarters , air national guard , air force reserves headquarters , and the air mobility command on this matter .

to determine the effectiveness of the air force's system for retiring old aircraft when new c - 130s enter the fleet , we reviewed listings of modifications in the c - 130 system program offices' time compliance technical orders that were done to c - 130b and e models retired since 1978 , and applicable laws and regulations regarding modifying and retiring aircraft .

we also obtained views from c - 130 program officials on how retirement of the fleet was done in the past and how they expect it will be done in the future .

to determine the air force requirement / justification for the c - 130j aircraft and whether or not alternatives to buying the new j model were considered , we reviewed the c - 130j operational requirement document ; the single acquisition management plan and other applicable program documentation ; senate report 104-267 , which required the secretary of defense to report by march 1997 on the benefits of remanufacturing the c - 130 fleet and the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology's april 29 , 1997 , letter to congressional defense committees on this subject ; wright - patterson air force base's assessment of an unsolicited proposal to remanufacture the c - 130 fleet ; and data provided by air force headquarters regarding the requirement for the program .

we also toured the c - 130j - 30 on display at ronald reagan national airport .

to ascertain the air force logistic support funding needs for the c - 130j aircraft , we reviewed the october 1995 and november 1996 c - 130j contracts and applicable documentation for subsequent options that were exercised , and the quarterly c - 130j defense acquisition executive summary report for the c - 130j program .

we also obtained views , perspectives , and supporting documentation from officials at air force headquarters , air combat command , air mobility command , and the c - 130j system program office at wright - patterson air force base regarding the reasons for the funding shortfalls and initiatives / efforts to reduce the shortfalls .

we conducted this review from january 1997 to march 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

c - 130 model: c - 130e and h hercules ( combat delivery models ) commands: air mobility command , air combat command , air force reserve , air education and training , air national guard , and air force special operations command mission: the c - 130 hercules combat delivery models perform the intratheater portion of the airlift mission .

their primary mission is to provide rapid transportation of personnel or cargo for delivery by parachute to hostile areas , or by landing at rough , dirt strips within those areas .

the c - 130 e / h models can also be used as tactical transports and can be readily converted for aeromedical evacuation or aerial delivery missions .

the c - 130 is the primary tactical aeromedical evacuation aircraft .

during peacetime , it joins on mercy flights throughout the world , bringing food , clothing , shelter , doctors , nurses , and medical supplies as well as moving victims to safety .

special equipment / features: the c - 130h is generally similar to the e model but has updated turboprops , a redesigned outer wing , updated avionics , and other minor improvements .

in its airlift configuration , the c - 130e / h can carry up to 92 combat troops with equipment , 64 paratroopers , 74 litter patients , or 6 standard 463-l pallets .

it can transport various configurations of rolling stock , including some oversize vehicles .

c - 130 model: ac - 130h spectre command: air force special operations command mission: the ac - 130h is a gunship with primary missions of close air support , air interdiction , and armed reconnaissance .

additional missions include perimeter and point defense , escort , landing , drop and extraction zone support , forward air control , limited command and control , and combat search and rescue .

special equipment / features: these heavily armed aircraft incorporate side - firing weapons integrated with sophisticated sensor , navigation , and fire control systems to provide firepower or area saturation during extended periods , at night , and in adverse weather .

the sensor suite consists of a low light level television sensor and an infrared sensor .

radar and electronic sensors also give the gunship a method of positively identifying friendly ground forces as well as effective ordnance delivery during adverse weather conditions .

navigational devices include an inertial navigation system and global positioning system .

c - 130 model: ac - 130u spectre gunship command: air force special operations command mission: the ac - 130u's primary missions are nighttime close air support for special operations and conventional ground forces ; air interdiction ; armed reconnaissance ; air base , perimeter , and point defense ; land , water , and heliborne troop escort ; drop , landing , and extraction zone support ; forward air control ; limited airborne command and control ; and combat search and rescue support .

special equipment / features: the ac - 130u has one 25-millimeter gatling gun , one 40-millimeter cannon , and one 105-millimeter cannon for armament and is the newest addition to the air force special operations command's fleet .

this heavily armed aircraft incorporates side - firing weapons integrated with sophisticated sensor , navigation , and fire control systems to provide firepower or area saturation at night and in adverse weather .

the sensor suite consists of an all light level television system and an infrared detection set .

a multi - mode strike radar provides extreme long - range target detection and identification .

the fire control system offers a dual target attack capability , whereby two targets up to 1 kilometer apart can be simultaneously engaged by two different sensors , using two different guns .

navigational devices include the inertial navigation system and global positioning system .

the aircraft is pressurized , enabling it to fly at higher altitudes and allowing for greater range than the ac - 130h .

defensive systems include a countermeasures dispensing system that releases chaff and flares to counter radar infrared guided anti - aircraft missiles .

also infrared heat shields mounted underneath the engines disperse and hide engine heat sources from infrared guided anti - aircraft missiles .

c - 130 model: ec - 130e “command solo” command: air national guard mission: ec - 130e commando solo , the air force's only airborne radio and television broadcast mission , is assigned to the 193rd special operations wing , the only air national guard unit assigned to the air force special operations command .

commando solo conducts psychological operations and civil affairs broadcasts .

the ec - 130e flies during either day or night scenarios and is air refuelable .

commando solo provides an airborne broadcast platform for virtually any contingency , including state or national disasters or other emergencies .

secondary missions include command and control communications countermeasures and limited intelligence gathering .

special equipment / features: highly specialized modifications include enhanced navigation systems , self - protection equipment , and the capability to broadcast color television on a multitude of worldwide standards .

c - 130 model: ec - 130e airborne battlefield command and control center ( abccc ) command: air combat command mission: the ec - 130e is a modified c - 130 “hercules” aircraft designed to carry the abccc capsules .

while functioning as an extension of ground - based command and control authorities , the primary mission is providing flexibility in the overall control of tactical air resources .

in addition to maintaining control of air operations , abccc can provide communications to higher headquarters , including national command authorities , in both peace and wartime environments .

special equipment / features these one of a kind aircraft include the addition of external antennae to accommodate the vast number of radios in the capsule , heat exchanger pods for additional air conditioning , an aerial refueling system , and special mounted rails for uploading and downloading the capsule .

the abccc system is a high - tech automated airborne command and control facility featuring computer generated color displays , digitally controlled communications , and rapid data retrieval .

the platform's 23 fully securable radios , secure teletype , and 15 automatic fully computerized consoles , allow the battlestaff to analyze current combat situations and direct offensive air support .

c - 130 model: ec - 130h “compass call” commands: air combat command and air force materiel command mission: compass call is the designation for a modified version of the c - 130 “hercules” aircraft configured to perform tactical command , control , and communications countermeasures .

specifically , the aircraft uses noise jamming to prevent communication or the transfer of information essential to command and control of weapon systems and other resources .

it primarily supports tactical air operations but also can provide jamming support to ground force operations .

special equipment / features modifications to the aircraft include an electronic countermeasures system ( rivet fire ) , air refueling capability , and associated navigation and communications systems .

rivet fire demonstrated its effect on enemy command and control networks in panama and iraq .

commands: air combat command , air force reserve , and air national guard mission: the hc - 130h / n's mission is search and rescue .

the hc - 130p does aerial refueling of combat search and rescue helicopters and deployment of para - rescuemen .

the hc - 130p deploys worldwide to provide combat search and rescue coverage for u.s. and allied forces .

combat search and rescue missions include flying low - level , preferably at night aided with night vision goggles , to an area where aerial refueling of a rescue helicopter is performed or para - rescuemen are deployed .

the secondary mission of the hc - 130p is peacetime search and rescue .

hc - 130p aircraft and crews are trained and equipped for search and rescue in all types of terrain , including arctic , mountain , and maritime .

peacetime search and rescue missions may include searching for downed or missing aircraft , sinking or missing water vessels , or missing persons .

the hc - 130p can deploy para - rescuemen to a survivor , escort helicopters to a survivor , or airdrop survival equipment .

special equipment / features: h / n aircraft are equipped with an advanced avionics package .

improvements are being made to the hc - 130p to provide improved navigation , enhanced communications , better threat detection , and more effective countermeasures systems .

when fully modified , the hc - 130p will have a self - contained navigation system , including an inertial system and global positioning system .

it will also have a missile warning system , radar warning receiver , and associated chaff and flare dispenser systems .

command: air national guard mission: the primary mission of this model is arctic support .

two specific missions are support of ( 1 ) the national science foundation in antarctica and ( 2 ) assorted national and international scientific activities in greenland .

 ( the navy also operates seven lc - 130 aircraft in antarctica .

these aircraft move large amounts of cargo , personnel , and fuel throughout the continent. ) .

special equipment / features: lc - 130s are specially equipped with landing gear wheel / ski modification for operation in arctic regions .

c - 130 model: mc - 130e combat talon i and mc - 130h combat talon ii commands: air force special operations command , air force reserve , and air education and training command mission: the mission of the combat talon i / ii is to provide global , day , night , and adverse weather capability to airdrop and airland personnel and equipment in support of u.s. and allied special operations forces .

the mc - 130e also has a deep penetrating helicopter refueling role during special operations missions .

special equipment / features: these aircraft are equipped with in - flight refueling equipment , terrain - following , terrain - avoidance radar , an inertial and global positioning satellite navigation system , and a high - speed aerial delivery system .

the special navigation and aerial delivery systems are used to locate small drop zones and deliver people or equipment with greater accuracy and at higher speeds than possible with a standard c - 130 .

the aircraft is able to penetrate hostile airspace at low altitudes and crews are specially trained in night and adverse weather operations .

nine of the mc - 130es are equipped with surface - to - air fulton air recovery system , a safe , rapid method of recovering personnel or equipment from either land or water .

it involves use of a large , helium - filled balloon used to raise a 450-foot nylon lift line .

the mc - 130e flies toward the lift line and snags it with scissors - like arms located on the aircraft nose .

the person or equipment is lifted off , experiencing less shock than that caused by a parachute opening .

aircrew members then use a hydraulic winch to pull the person or equipment aboard through the open rear cargo door .

the mc - 130h features highly automated controls and displays to reduce crew size and workload .

c - 130 model: mc - 130p combat shadow commands: air force special operations command , air education and training command , and air force reserve mission: the mc - 130p combat shadow flies clandestine or low visibility , low - level missions into politically sensitive or hostile territory to provide air refueling for special operations helicopters .

the mc - 130p primarily flies its single - or multi - ship missions at night to reduce detection and intercept by airborne threats .

secondary mission capabilities include airdrop of small special operations teams , small bundles , and rubber raiding craft ; night - vision goggle takeoffs and landings ; tactical airborne radar approaches ; and in - flight refueling as a receiver .

special equipment / features: when modifications are complete in fiscal year 1999 , all mc - 130p aircraft will feature improved navigation , communications , threat detection , and countermeasures systems .

when fully modified , the combat shadow will have a fully integrated inertial navigation and global positioning system , and night - vision goggle - compatible interior and exterior lighting .

it will also have a forward - looking infrared radar , missile and radar warning receivers , chaff and flare dispensers , and night - vision goggle - compatible heads - up display .

in addition , it will have satellite and data burst communications , as well as in - flight refueling capability as a receiver .

the combat shadow can fly in the day against a reduced threat ; however , crews normally fly night , low - level , air refueling and formation operations using night - vision goggles .

c - 130 model: nc - 130a , e , h command: air force materiel command mission: test aircraft .

command: air force reserve mission: the wc - 130 hercules is a high - wing , medium - range aircraft used for weather reconnaissance missions .

it is a modified version of the c - 130 configured with computerized weather instrumentation for penetration of severe storms to obtain data on storm movements , dimensions , and intensity .

the wc - 130 is flown exclusively from keesler air force base by air force reserve organizations known as the hurricane hunters .

the hurricane reconnaissance area includes the atlantic ocean , caribbean sea , gulf of mexico , and central pacific ocean areas .

the wc - 130 is capable of staying aloft nearly 18 hours during missions .

it is equipped with two external 1,400 gallon fuel tanks , an internal 1,800 gallon fuel tank , and uprated engines .

an average weather reconnaissance mission might last 11 hours and cover almost 3,500 miles while the crew collects and reports weather data .

special equipment / features: weather equipment aboard the aircraft provides a high - density , high accuracy horizontal atmospheric sensing capability .

sensors installed on the aircraft measure outside temperature , humidity , absolute altitude of the aircraft , pressure altitude , wind speed , and direction once per second .

this information , along with an evaluation of other meteorological conditions , turbulence , icing , radar returns and visibility , is encoded by the on - board meteorologist and transmitted by satellite to the national hurricane center .

special equipment measures the atmosphere vertically by using an expendable instrument , which is dropped from the aircraft .

the 16-inch long cylinder is dropped every 400 miles while on a weather track and in the center or eye of a hurricane .

a vertical atmospheric profile of pressure , temperature , humidity , barometric pressure , wind speed , and direction is received from the instrument as it descends to the ocean surface , slowed and stabilized by a small parachute .

from this information , the system operator analyzes and encodes data for satellite transmission to the national hurricane center .

baltimore , md .

quonset , r.i. channel island ang sta , calif. reno , nev. peoria , ill. little rock , ark .

selfridge , mich. schenectady , n.y. nashville , tenn. charleston , w.va. louisville , ky. minneapolis / st .

paul , minn. dallas , tex .

oklahoma city , okla. st. joseph , mo .

charlotte , n.c. cheyenne , wyo .

savannah , ga. wilmington , del .

martinsburg , w.va. mansfield lahm airport , ohio mcentire , s.c. new orleans , la .

harrisburg , pa. suffolk , n.y. moffet nas , calif. schenectady , n.y. portland iap , oreg .

patrick afb , fla. eglin afb , fla. minneapolis / st .

paul , minn. keesler afb , miss .

willow grove , pa. gen. mitchell iap , wis. pittsburgh , pa. dobbins , ga. niagara falls , n.y. peterson afb , colo. maxwell afb , ala. patrick afb , fla. portland iap , oreg .

eglin afb , fla. eglin afb , fla. keesler afb , miss .

on december 16 , 1996 , an unsolicited proposal was submitted to the air force to modernize the c - 130 fleet .

the proposal anticipated a 21-month schedule to fabricate prototypes at a firm fixed - price of $50 million , with projected potential fleet - wide savings of $6 billion .

the c - 130 program office review of the unsolicited proposal concluded that , although the proposal was technically feasible , it was impractical due to cost , schedule , and technical risks .

the actual evaluation is labeled for official use only , precluding a detailed explanation of those risks in this report .

however , generic examples of the risks included: aggressive concurrency in program schedule ; reliance on reverse engineering in lieu of original manufacturer equipment data because of proprietary rights of original manufacturer ; use of unproven technology ; inadequate support equipment , manuals , training , and spares for the prototype , and for the test and evaluation effort ; inadequate software development and integration for an undefined avionics suite , including lack of crew - member workload analysis ; an additional $15 million for the test and evaluation effort would be required over the firm fixed - price proposal of $50 million ; and insufficient substantiation of the $6-billion claimed savings .

in recommending nonapproval of the unsolicited proposal , the c - 130 program office also cited the lack of program requirement , funding , and direction for the proposed c - 130 program as additional reasons for rejection .

finally , the program office concluded that the proposal was not unique and innovative as prescribed in the federal acquisition regulation for unsolicited proposals .

hence , even if the proposal was acceptable , it would not qualify for an exception to full and open competition .

daniel hauser the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

