we reviewed the accuracy of spare and repair parts data used in determining army inventory requirements and defense business operating fund budget requests .

our objectives were to evaluate ( 1 ) the accuracy of the databases used to determine item requirements and inventory levels for budget request purposes and ( 2 ) the actions taken to correct data problems that could affect the reliability of the budget estimates .

our scope and methodology are shown in appendix i .

the five major army inventory control points manage secondary items and repair parts valued at $17 billion .

these items are used to support army track and wheeled vehicles , aircraft , missiles , and communication and electronic systems .

the process for identifying the items and the quantity to stock begins with developing the budget request — the key to effective inventory management .

if too few or the wrong items are available to support the forces , then readiness suffers and the forces may not be able to perform their assigned military missions .

on the other hand , if too many items are acquired , then limited resources are wasted and unnecessary costs are incurred to manage and maintain the items .

the army uses different processes for determining its spare and repair parts budget requests and for determining which parts to buy or repair .

the process for determining spare and repair parts budget requests is based on data from the budget stratification reports , which show the dollar value of requirements and inventory available to meet the requirements .

when an item's available inventory is not sufficient to meet the requirements , it is considered to be in a deficit position .

the aggregate value of items in a deficit position then becomes the army's basis for determining its spare and repair parts needs .

as these needs are formulated into a budget request , the end result ( budget request ) is normally less than the aggregate value of items in a deficit position .

this makes it even more important that the true needs be based on accurate data .

otherwise , funds may be allocated to procuring spare and repair parts that should be spent on other priority needs .

using accurate data in the requirements determination process avoids such misallocation of funds .

we have previously issued reports pointing out data inaccuracy problems in the army's requirements determination process and the effect of these inaccuracies on inventory decisions .

see appendix iv .

the process for determining which items to buy or repair is based on information in the item's supply control study , which is automatically prepared when an item reaches a point when insufficient assets are available or due in to meet requirements .

when a study is prepared , the item manager validates the requirements and asset information in the study .

based on the results of the validated data , the item manager will decide whether to buy , repair , or not buy the quantity recommended by the study .

as of september 30 , 1994 , we reviewed 258 items from a universe of 8,526 items with a deficit inventory position .

the selected items represented 3 percent of the items in a deficit position but accounted for $519 million , or 69 percent , of the $750 million deficit inventory value .

we found that 94 of the 258 items , with a reported deficit inventory value of $211 million , had data errors that affected the items' requirements or inventory available to satisfy the requirements .

table 1 shows the results of our review for the army's inventory control points .

overstated requirements and understated inventory levels were the major reasons items were erroneously reported in a deficit position .

in addition , some items were incorrectly included in the process for determining funding requirements .

if the items' inventory position had been correctly reported , the true deficit value for the 94 items would have been about $23 million rather than $211 million .

table 2 shows the major reasons why items were incorrectly classified as deficit .

when insufficient inventory is on hand and due in to meet an item's requirements , the budget stratification process will report the item as being deficit .

if the item's deficit position is caused by overstated requirements , this means that resources could be wasted buying unneeded items .

as shown in table 2 , overstated requirements caused 53 items to be erroneously reported as being in a deficit position .

the overstated requirements resulted from inaccurate demand data , inaccurate leadtime data , and lower - than - expected requirements .

table 3 shows the number of instances where these reasons caused the items' requirements to be overstated .

the following examples illustrate the types of inaccurate data that caused overstated requirements: the item manager for an aircraft floor item used on the ch - 47 chinook helicopter said that the database still included demands from operations desert shield and desert storm .

including these demands in the requirements determination caused the budget stratification process to erroneously classify the item as having a deficit inventory position of about $500,000 .

if the outdated demands had been purged from the system , the item would not have been in a deficit position .

according to the item manager for the front lens assembly item used on the an / pvs - 7b night vision goggles , the item requirements shown in the budget stratification report did not materialize .

she said that the report showed the item as having a deficit inventory position of $2.4 million .

however , when it came time to procure the item , the project leader reduced the planned procurement quantity because the field units indicated they did not like the item .

the item's actual deficit position should have been only $18,000 .

according to the item manager , an angle drive unit used on the m2 / m3 , m2a1 / m3a1 bradley fighting vehicle system had an inflated safety level requirement in the budget stratification report .

the report showed a safety level of 6,887 units instead of the correct safety level of 355 .

as a result , a deficit inventory position of $6.6 million was reported .

when a prime stock number has authorized substitute items , the requirements and inventory for the prime and substitute items are supposed to be added and shown as one requirement and one inventory level under the prime number .

this did not happen .

the requirements for both types of items were shown as one requirement but the inventory was not .

as a result , the inventory to meet the overall requirement was understated , and the item was placed in a deficit position .

for example , according to the item manager for a night window assembly used on the tow subsystem for the m2 / m3 bradley fighting vehicle , the budget stratification report showed a deficit supply position of $800,000 for the item .

this occurred because inventory belonging to a substitute item was not counted toward the prime item's requirements .

the item manager said the true deficit for the assembly was $65,000 .

there were also requirements problems for items being repaired at maintenance facilities .

the requirements system did not accurately track stock in transit between overhaul facilities and the depots .

according to item managers at several inventory control points , they had problems either tracking the physical movement of inventory between the depots and repair facilities , or ensuring that all records were processed so the database accurately accounted all applicable assets .

these problems could cause items to be erroneously reported as being in a deficit position .

table 4 shows how often these reasons resulted in understated inventory levels .

our review of selected items identified nine items that should have been excluded from the budget stratification process .

by including these items , the budget stratification process identified funding needs for the items when , in fact , the funds to procure the items were being provided by another service , a foreign country under a foreign military sales agreement , or another appropriation .

table 5 shows the number of items that were incorrectly included in the budget stratification process .

the following examples illustrate the effect of including “excluded” items in the budget stratification process: according to the item manager for a fire control electronic unit used on the m1a2 main battle tank , the army issued a contract in august 1993 to procure items to meet the army's requirements as well as foreign military sales .

because the army is reimbursed for foreign military sale items , these items should have been excluded from the budget stratification process .

however , the items were included in the stratification process and were reported as having a deficit inventory position of $2.3 million .

the inventory control point procured a gas - particulate filter unit used in producing modular collective protective equipment .

according to the item manager , procurement appropriation funds , provided by the program manager's office , were used to buy the items .

because the stratification process is only supposed to deal with items procured by the defense business operating fund , the item should not have been included in the stratification process and a deficit inventory position of about $800,000 should not have been reported .

according to the item manager , the air force manages and makes all procurements for a panel clock item .

the army's budget stratification report showed this item had a deficit inventory position of $700,000 .

however , because the air force managed this item , the panel clock should not have been coded as an army secondary item for inclusion in the budget stratification report .

the item manager for an electronic component item said that the item should have been coded as an inventory control point asset rather than a project manager's office asset .

because project manager items are not available for general issue , these items were not counted against the item's requirements in the budget stratification report .

if these items had been properly coded , the item would not have been reported as having a $700,000-deficit inventory position .

according to the item manager , an electronic component item should have been coded as a major end item rather than a secondary item and not included in the budget stratification process .

the item was reported as having a deficit inventory position of $500,000 .

the army is aware of many of the processing , policy , and data problems affecting the accuracy of the requirements data .

furthermore , the army has identified 32 change requests to correct problems with the requirements determination and supply management system .

according to army officials , the cost to implement the 32 change requests would be about $660,000 , and in their opinion , the benefits would greatly outweigh the added costs .

the officials said these changes would correct many of the problems , including some of the ones we identified during our review .

nevertheless , not all of the requests have been approved for funding because the department of defense is developing a standard requirements system as part of its corporate information management initiative and does not want to spend resources to upgrade existing systems .

as a result , it has limited the changes that the services can make to their existing systems .

army officials said that the standard system is not expected to be implemented for at least 4 years .

furthermore , major parts of the existing system will probably be integrated into the standard system .

therefore , unless the data problems are corrected , they will be integrated into the standard system and the army will still not have reliable data .

army officials also cited examples where processing change requests are needed to correct other data problems in the requirements determination system .

for example , the depots do not always confirm material release orders / disposal release orders received from the inventory control points .

as a result , the inventory control points do not know if the depots actually received the orders .

they identified numerous instances where the depots put the release orders in suspense because of higher priority workloads .

this resulted in the release orders not being processed in a timely manner , processed out of sequence , or lost and not processed at all .

because the inventory control points could not adequately track the release orders , they could have reissued the release orders .

the reissuance could have caused duplicate issues or disposals , imbalances in the records between the inventory control points and the depots , and poor supply response to the requesting army units .

a system change request was initiated in november 1994 to address this problem , but the request has not yet received funding approval .

although army officials could not provide a cost estimate to implement the change request , it could save about $1 million in reduced workload for the inventory control points and depots .

according to army officials , one programming application in the requirements determination system uses reverse logic to calculate the supply positions of serviceable and unserviceable assets .

it compares the supply position of all serviceable assets to the funded approved acquisition objective ( current operating and war reserve requirements ) .

however , for the same item , the program compares the supply position of all unserviceable assets to the total of the current operating and war reserve requirements , the economic retention quantity , and contingency quantity .

the effect of this is that serviceable inventory can be sent to disposal while unserviceable inventory is being returned to the depots .

according to aviation and troop command records , the command disposed of $43.5 million of serviceable assets at the same time that $8.5 million of unserviceable assets , of the same kind , were returned to the depots between march and september 1994 .

by september 1995 , the command had disposed of $62 million of serviceable assets .

command officials said that a system change request was initiated in november 1994 to correct the programming logic problem .

however , the request did not receive funding approval because it violated department of army policy , even though the estimated cost to implement the change request would be less than $20,000 .

although this change will not reduce the reported deficit quantities , it will allow the commands to keep more serviceable items in lieu of unserviceables , and it will reduce overhaul costs .

furthermore , according to command records , this policy is causing the disposal of high - dollar , force modernization items that could result in re - procurement and adversely affect stock availability to field units .

we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to proceed with the pending system change requests to correct the data problems .

doing so could correct many of the problems identified in our report .

furthermore , the corrective actions would improve the overall reliability and usability of information for determining spare and repair parts requirements .

the department of defense agreed with the report findings and partially agreed with the recommendation .

it said that instead of the secretary of defense directing the army to proceed with the system change request , the army will be requested to present a request for funding for the system changes to the corporate configuration control board at the joint logistics systems center .

the board , as part of the corporate information management initiative , was established to consider and resolve funding matters related to changes to existing systems .

in our opinion , the action proposed by the department of defense achieves the intent of our recommendation , which was for the army to seek funds to correct the data problems in its requirements determination system .

defense's comments are presented in their entirety in appendix ii .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the army ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the chairmen , house committee on government reform and oversight , senate committee on governmental affairs , the house and senate committees on appropriations , house committee on national security , and senate committee on armed services .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

we held discussions with responsible officials and reviewed army regulations to determine the process used by the army to identify its spare and repair parts needs for its budget development process .

we focused on the process used to identify items in a deficit position .

as part of these discussions , we also studied the budget stratification process , which is the major database input used in the budget development process .

to identify the items in a deficit position , we obtained the september 30 , 1994 , budget stratification data tapes for the five army inventory control points: army munitions and chemical command , aviation and troop command , communications - electronics command , missile command , and tank - automotive command .

from the total universe of 8,526 secondary items with a deficit inventory position valued at $750 million , we selected all items that had a deficit position of $500,000 or more .

this resulted in a sample of 258 items with a total inventory deficit position of $519 million , or 69 percent of the total deficit .

for each of the 258 selected items , we obtained information from the responsible item manager to determine whether the item was actually in a deficit position as of september 30 , 1994 .

for those items that the budget stratification process had erroneously placed in a deficit position , we determined the reason for its misclassification .

we obtained this information by reviewing item manager files and discussing the items with responsible item management personnel .

we categorized the reasons for the erroneous classifications to determine frequency distribution for each type of reason .

we then determined through discussions with item management officials and review of system change requests what actions were taken or planned to correct the identified problems .

we performed our review from october 1994 to july 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

army inventory: growth in inventories that exceed requirements ( gao / nsiad - 90-68 , mar .

22 , 1990 ) .

defense inventory: shortcomings in requirements determination processes ( gao / nsiad - 91-176 , may 10 , 1991 ) .

army inventory: need to improve process for establishing economic retention requirements ( gao / nsiad - 92-84 , feb. 27 , 1992 ) .

army inventory: more effective review of proposed inventory buys could reduce unneeded procurement ( gao / nsiad - 94-130 , june 2 , 1994 ) .

defense inventory: shortages are recurring , but not a problem ( gao / nsiad - 95-137 , aug. 7 , 1995 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

