we evaluated the implications of the navy's decision to spend about $2.5 billion between fiscal years 1994 and 2003 for a limited ground attack upgrade and other modifications to about 200 f - 14 tomcat fighters .

subsequent to our review , the navy removed the ground attack upgrade from its program objectives memorandum .

however , the navy is currently awaiting the results of an ongoing cost and operational effectiveness analysis ( coea ) of potential f - 14 improvements to determine the magnitude of future modifications to the f - 14 , including this upgrade .

since this upgrade or a similar one continues to be a possibility , we are providing this report to assist you in ongoing deliberations of department of defense aviation modernization issues at a time of declining defense budgets and forces .

prior to recent congressional deliberations on the navy's fiscal year 1995 budget , the navy planned to spend over $2.5 billion to add limited ground attack capability and other improvements to 210 f - 14 tomcat fighter aircraft ( 53 f - 14ds , 81 f - 14bs , and 76 f - 14as ) .

according to the navy , the ground attack capabilities were required to partially compensate for the loss in combat capabilities during the period starting in 1997 , when all of its a - 6e intruder attack aircraft are scheduled to be retired , to the turn of the century when the f / a - 18e / f , the next generation strike fighter , is scheduled to arrive .

the f - 14 was to undergo two upgrades .

an initial upgrade , commonly called the a / b upgrade , included structural modifications to extend the f - 14's fatigue life to 7,500 hours , improved defensive capabilities and cockpit displays , and incorporation of digital architecture and mission computers to speed data processing time and add software capacity .

the a / b upgrade had to be incorporated into 157 f - 14 aircraft before the second upgrade , called the block i , could be added .

block i was to add a forward - looking infrared ( flir ) pod with a built - in laser to designate targets and allow f - 14s to independently drop laser guided bombs ( lgbs ) , a modified cockpit for night attack operations ( night vision devices and compatible lighting ) , and enhanced defensive countermeasures .

concerned about the navy's capability to maintain carrier - based power projection without a - 6es and with only limited f - 14 upgrades , the joint conference committee on the fiscal year 1994 defense authorization act directed the navy to add an f - 15e equivalent capability to its f - 14d aircraft , including the capability to use modern air - to - ground stand - off weapons .

the act restricted the obligation of fiscal year 1994 f - 14 procurement funds until 30 days after the navy submitted a report outlining its plans to add more robust ground attack capability .

the report , submitted on may 20 , 1994 , reiterated the navy's intent to add only the a / b and block i upgrades .

during recent fiscal year 1995 deliberations , the defense authorization act conferees eliminated funding for f - 14 block i ground attack upgrades , authorizing funds for only the a / b structural and survivability modifications .

in a subsequent similar action , defense appropriation act conferees did not appropriate funds for the block i upgrades .

the navy eliminated the block i ground attack upgrade from its program objectives memorandum .

however , navy officials continue to believe a ground attack upgrade is necessary .

a final decision on the extent of the upgrade depends upon the results of a coea and an acquisition milestone decision scheduled for the first quarter of fiscal year 1995 .

in a related response to congressional direction to add more robust capability to the f - 14 , beyond that mentioned above , the navy estimated it would cost $1.8 billion to add f - 15e - equivalent capability to 53 f - 14ds and another $9 billion to upgrade 198 f - 14a / bs .

according to the navy , an upgrade of that magnitude was not affordable .

most f - 14s , even after receiving the block i upgrade , will lack some important capabilities that the f / a - 18c currently has or will gain in the near future .

the absence of these capabilities could limit the combat effectiveness and utilization of the f - 14 under some adverse conditions .

the block i upgrade will permit f - 14s to drop lgbs , which are more accurate than unguided gravity bombs .

but the usefulness of laser targeting is limited when targets are obscured by clouds , smoke , haze , and moisture that prevent laser beams from illuminating and marking the targets and from providing a clear path for the bomb guidance system to follow .

thus , to assist crews in locating and identifying targets , attack aircraft need synthetic aperture radar with ground mapping capability .

the f - 14a / b models' awg - 9 radar is one of the most powerful u.s. military aircraft radars for detecting multiple air targets approaching at long range , but it is not ideally suited to pinpointing ground targets under some conditions .

for example , it does not provide a ground mapping capability that permits crews to locate and attack targets in adverse weather and poor visibility or to precisely update the aircraft's location relative to targets during the approach , a capability that improves bombing accuracy .

only the 53 f - 14ds , with their improved apg - 71 synthetic aperture ground mapping radar , will have this capability .

the 157 f - 14a / bs in the block i program , lacking the apg - 71 radar , will not be as effective in locating , identifying , and attacking targets , except in daylight and clear visibility conditions .

f / a - 18cs , which have synthetic aperture ground mapping radar with a doppler beam sharpening mode to generate ground maps , have greater capability , and they will get even more precise and clear radar displays when they receive the apg - 73 radar upgrade later this decade .

new production f / a - 18cs are scheduled to receive apg - 73 radars later in 1994 .

the navy , in a coea summary dated may 1992 comparing the f / a - 18 to various alternatives , wrote that “a strike fighter should be capable of effectively employing all navy strike and fighter weapons in the inventory and under development.” however , the block i upgrade will not add any weapon capability new to the f - 14 , except the ability to independently drop lgbs .

no block i f - 14s will be able to launch precision stand - off attack weapons such as the high - speed anti - radiation missile ( harm ) , harpoon antiship missile , maverick anti - armor missile , walleye guided bomb , and stand - off land attack missile ( slam ) .

f / a - 18cs and a - 6es can .

block i aircraft will not be able to employ future precision stand - off weapons , including the joint direct attack munition ( jdam ) and the joint stand off weapon ( jsow ) .

f / a - 18cs will .

the navy does plan to add the capability to launch the advanced medium range air - to - air missile ( amraam ) to f - 14ds when their computer software is updated .

 ( amraam is the defense department's newest air - to - air missile. ) .

the navy has stated that it cannot afford to add stand - off weapon capability to other f - 14s .

currently , f / a - 18cs have amraam capability .

table 1 shows the weapons carried by f - 14s and f / a - 18cs .

in defending the f - 14 upgrade , navy officials said f - 14s have a combat range and / or endurance approaching that of the a - 6e , which is considerably longer than the f / a - 18 .

while range ( distance ) and endurance ( loiter time in the target area ) are important capabilities , they are not as critical in littoral warfare , when carriers may operate close to shore .

operating close to the shore decreases the distance to targets and increases the amount of loiter time the aircraft has at or near the target .

the secretary of the navy , in the 1994 posture statement , stated that 85 percent of the navy's potential targets are within 200 miles of the world's shorelines .

although the f - 14 generally has greater range and endurance than the f / a - 18c , the majority of littoral targets should be within the f / a - 18c's range , even with an aircraft carrier operating 100 miles or more offshore .

the navy's atlantic fleet officials told us that f / a - 18cs carrying four 1,000-pound bombs and external fuel tanks have an unrefueled mission radius of about 340 miles .

future f / a - 18es are projected to carry the same weapon load up to 520 miles without refueling .

while the longer range f - 14s could potentially reach the 15 percent of the targets beyond 200 miles of shorelines , alternatives are available .

the navy's tomahawk cruise missile can strike fixed targets up to a range of about 700 miles .

air force bombers , with mid - air refueling , have even a greater range .

if aerial refueling is available , as should be the case with u.s. forces operating jointly , an aircraft's range , including the f / a - 18's , can be extended significantly .

the block i f - 14 aircraft will not have all of the capability of the air force's f - 15e strike eagle ( a long range , all - weather , multimission strike fighter with precision weapons capability ) , the navy's own f / a - 18c hornet , or its a - 6e intruder ( see table 2 ) .

f - 14a / bs can drop most unguided bombs , including 500- , 1,000- , and 2,000-pound gravity bombs , as well as cluster munitions .

they can also drop lgbs if another aircraft marks the target with a laser beam .

block i will add the capability to independently drop lgbs without external assistance .

f - 14a / b aircraft will not have a radar ground mapping capability to assist crews in locating , identifying , and attacking targets when visibility is poor .

no f - 14s , including the d model , will be able to launch precision stand - off weapons , and none will have all - weather terrain following capability .

although the navy justified the f - 14 upgrade as necessary to fill the gap between a - 6e retirements and delivery of f / a - 18e / fs , no f - 14s , under the original block i plan , were scheduled to begin receiving upgrades until fiscal year 1998 , a year after the last a - 6s were retired .

the navy plans to procure f / a - 18 e / f aircraft starting in fiscal year 1997 and expects the aircraft to enter service in the year 2000 .

in the interim , two carrier air wings have retired their a - 6es , and these air wings will operate for 5 years , at a minimum , before the first upgraded f - 14s are delivered in 1999 .

the uss constellation is scheduled to deploy late in 1994 , without a - 6es .

its f - 14ds cannot drop bombs because they lack the necessary computer software .

the first carrier air wing equipped with block i f - 14s will not deploy until fiscal year 1999 or 2000 .

the last f - 14s will not complete the upgrade until fiscal year 2003 .

by that time , if not earlier , the navy should start receiving squadrons of f / a - 18e / fs to replace f - 14s and older f / a - 18s .

as the navy eliminates a - 6es from carrier air wings , it plans to add a third squadron of f / a - 18s to each wing , increasing the number of f / a - 18s in each air wing from 20 to 36 .

the navy also plans to eliminate one f - 14 squadron from each air wing , reducing the number from 20 to 14 planes .

two air wings , including the uss constellation's , will receive this modified air wing mix in fiscal year 1994 .

two more air wings are expected to change their aircraft mix in fiscal year 1995 , with three more wings changing in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , respectively , until the configuration of all 10 active air wings is changed .

as noted earlier , most f - 14s , even after under going the block i upgrade , will lack some important capabilities that the f / a - 18c has or will gain in the near future .

the absence of these capabilities could limit the f - 14's combat effectiveness and utilization under some adverse conditions .

this view is supported by an april 1992 navy coea summary , which compared the f / a - 18 to various alternatives , including an upgraded f - 14d called quick strike .

this version was to have more capability than is planned for block i .

the analysis concluded that the f - 14 quick strike was a less capable strike aircraft than the f / a - 18c .

because the navy faces an uncertain budget environment and system affordability concerns , and , since planned f - 14 upgrades offer little or no improvement over current capabilities and may not be fielded before f / a - 18e / fs are delivered , the upgrades do not appear to be cost - effective .

current navy plans will not provide f - 14s with f - 15e - equivalent capabilities .

if the congress wishes to add these capabilities , navy estimates show that it will cost much more .

therefore , the congress may wish to defer authorizing or appropriating additional monies for the f - 14 until the navy can demonstrate that planned upgrades are essential when considering ( 1 ) the current f / a - 18c capabilities ; ( 2 ) the net weapon capability gain over current f - 14a / b levels ; ( 3 ) the absence of a ground attack radar in 157 of the 210 aircraft ; ( 4 ) the lack of precision stand - off weapons capability in all 210 f - 14 aircraft that limits the versatility and use of these aircraft in combat ; ( 5 ) the nearly simultaneous delivery of upgraded f - 14s and f / a – 18e / fs ; and ( 6 ) the navy's willingness to deploy carriers without a - 6es or upgraded f - 14s , as evidenced by the upcoming deployment of the uss constellation .

navy officials , commenting on a draft of this report , defended the f - 14 upgrade as necessary , even though they were aware that the block i ground attack upgrade capability had been eliminated from the navy's budget by the house and senate defense authorization conferees and from the navy's 1996 program objectives memorandum .

navy officials said the upgrade was only eliminated from the program objectives memorandum for the present .

they defended the need for this upgrade , which is one of several possible upgrades being considered in an ongoing coea .

the navy could resubmit the ground attack upgrade in a future budget .

however , if this upgrade is delayed , it is likely that new f / a - 18e / fs will be deployed before upgraded f - 14s enter the fleet , making a need based on capability more questionable .

navy officials said the key issue discussed in our report is not whether planned f - 14 upgrades duplicate strike capabilities available in the navy as well as in the other services , as suggested by us , but rather the contribution these aircraft would make to the capability of each carrier air wing .

commenting on the navy's willingness to immediately deploy carriers without a - 6es , relying completely on f / a - 18s for its strike capability , navy officials said this decision is a reflection of affordability constraints , not a willingness to forgo the capability .

we agree that affordability is part of the issue .

affordability provided the impetus for the navy to set priorities .

in setting its priorities , the navy eliminated the f - 14 upgrade from its program objectives memorandum , which was a clear admission that the navy weighed its needs and found it had more important priorities .

our data gathering and analysis focused on the navy's decision to upgrade 210 f - 14 aircraft .

we interviewed officials and reviewed documents from the office of the chief of naval operations ( director for air warfare ) ; the naval air systems command ; and headquarters , u.s. air force , in washington , d.c. we also interviewed personnel at the u.s .

naval air forces , atlantic fleet and pacific fleet ; headquarters , u.s. air force air combat command ; the naval strike warfare center , naval air station , fallon , nevada ; carrier air wings two and fifteen at naval air station , north island , california ; and naval air station , miramar , california ; and hughes aircraft company , los angeles , california .

we conducted our review between june 1993 and may 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , the navy , and the air force ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the chairman , commission on roles and missions of the armed forces .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3504 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

the major contributors to this report are william c. meredith , kenneth w. newell , and frances w. scott .

richard davis director , national security analysis the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

