as requested , we are providing information on ( 1 ) the government's recovery of nonrecurring research and development costs on sales of major defense equipment , ( 2 ) the effect of charging a flat or standard rate rather than the current pro rata fee , and ( 3 ) views from supporters and opponents of the recovery of these costs .

we believe that this information will help the congress in its deliberations on proposals concerning the legislative requirement to collect such charges on future military sales .

the department of defense ( dod ) has been recovering nonrecurring research and development and one - time production costs on sales of weapon systems to foreign governments since 1967 .

the requirement to recover a proportionate amount of these costs was codified in the arms export control act in 1976 , 22 u.s.c .

section 2761 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

the intent of the act was to control u.s. costs and the extent of weapons sales to foreign governments .

the law required the recovery of costs on foreign military sales ( government - to - government sales ) , but dod retained its policy to collect nonrecurring costs on direct commercial sales ( between the contractor and the buying entity ) as it had been doing before the law was enacted .

in 1992 , dod canceled its policy to recover nonrecurring costs on direct commercial sales in an effort to increase the competitiveness of u.s. firms in the world market .

in 1995 , a number of bills were introduced that could affect the recovery of nonrecurring costs on military sales .

dod interpreted the arms export control act as requiring the recovery of research and development costs on a pro rata basis .

between 1974 and 1977 , dod used a pro rata rate up to 4 percent of the total sales price .

currently , the services calculate the pro rata rate by dividing total research and development and other one - time production costs by the anticipated total number of units to be produced for both domestic and foreign use .

a separate charge is calculated for each item of major defense equipment .

the defense security assistance agency ( dsaa ) must approve all charges .

they are published in the major defense equipment list ( mdel ) as part of dod manual 5105.38-m. dsaa officials acknowledged that the current pro rata calculation is complex and subject to error , particularly if sales fall short of or exceed projections .

nonrecurring cost charges are considered offsetting proprietary receipts and are deposited into the u.s. treasury general fund .

they are credited to dod's total budget authority and total outlays but cannot be spent unless specifically appropriated .

the arms export control act also specifies that waivers or reduced charges of nonrecurring costs are permitted on sales to the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) countries , australia , new zealand , and japan to further standardization and mutual defense treaties .

however , each waiver and reduction requires written justification .

dod collected $181 million in nonrecurring costs under the foreign military sales program in fiscal year 1994 .

fiscal year 1990-92 collections total $559.4 million — $337.3 million for foreign military sales and $222.1 million for direct commercial sales .

fiscal year 1993 collections totaled $177.9 million .

dsaa estimated in february 1995 that collections during fiscal years 1995-99 could amount to $845 million .

dsaa based these estimates primarily on past sales .

dsaa also estimated that if the charge on foreign military sales is dropped as proposed , collections would decrease by $73 million through 1999 .

some collections would continue based on deliveries to be made on current contracts .

 ( see fig .

1. ) .

a dsaa official stated that collections would probably stop completely in fiscal year 2002 if the charge is repealed in fiscal year 1995 .

in may 1995 , dsaa estimated that if a requirement to collect nonrecurring costs on direct commercial sales were reimposed in fiscal year 1996 , it would resume collections in fiscal year 1998 , given production and delivery lead times , and recover about $198 million through fiscal year 1999 .

table 1 shows estimated collections on both foreign military and direct commercial sales ( including a charge on direct commercial sales ) .

dod waived $273 million in nonrecurring costs to nato members and japan in fiscal year 1994 , about $92 million more than dod collected in nonrecurring cost charges in the same year .

about 90 percent of the waivers involved norway's purchase of missiles and turkey's purchase of missiles , aircraft , gun mounts , sonars , and vertical launchers .

dod's justification for the waivers involving norway was to help achieve standardization , and the justification for waivers involving turkey related to base rights agreements .

table 2 shows the aggregated totals of authorized waivers to nato , 12 individual nato countries , australia , and japan for fiscal years 1991 to 1994 .

waivers on direct commercial sales represent sales agreements signed before the 1992 repeal .

we focused our analysis on the comparison of current pro rata charges with flat rate charges of 3 , 5 , 8 , and 10 percent on the acquisition cost of 68 weapon systems sold .

first , we calculated the charges on four categories of weapons — projectiles , missiles , aircraft , and aircraft engines .

the flat rate charges of 3 and 5 percent generally resulted in lower total charges for each category of weapon systems — in the aircraft category , the charge was considerably less at 3 percent — than the total pro rata charges .

flat rate charges of 8 and 10 percent in most cases resulted in comparable or considerably higher total charges than the current pro rata charges for the four categories of weapon systems .

for example , a 3-percent flat rate charged on the sale of each of 27 aircraft resulted in total charges of $20.4 million , or $9.5 million less than the $29.9 million recovered under the pro rata system .

on the other hand , a 10-percent flat rate charge on the sale of each of the 27 aircraft resulted in a total charge of $67.9 million , or $38 million more than the $29.9 million recovered under the pro rata system .

on the 68 weapon systems we examined , current pro rata charges ranged from 0.07 percent to 15.95 percent of acquisition cost and averaged 5.18 percent .

thus , for a given flat rate of 3 , 5 , 8 , or 10 percent , the difference between the flat rates and pro rata charges varies widely .

for example , a 3-percent flat rate would be greater than a pro rata charge for 19 of the 27 aircraft we examined whereas a 3-percent flat rate was larger than the pro rata charge for only 2 of the 13 missiles we examined .

however , on some sales of commonly sold military items , dod might not recover the same level of charges using a nominal flat rate that it would under the pro rata system .

for example , dod anticipated collections of $279 million in nonrecurring cost charges on the sales of 228 f - 16 a / b aircraft and 131 f - 16 c / d aircraft when they are delivered to the buying countries .

a flat rate of 3 percent on these sales would yield about one - half the pro rata charges ; a 6-percent flat rate would yield an amount comparable to the pro rata charges .

on sales of harm agm - 88 missiles to three countries , total pro rata charges for the 181 missiles sold amount to $3.85 million .

a 3-percent flat rate on these sales would provide only 40 percent of the pro rata charges ; a 7.5-percent flat rate would yield an amount comparable to the pro rata charges .

appendix i compares the current pro rata charges with flat rate charges of 3 , 5 , 8 , and 10 percent on the weapon systems we examined .

the benefit of computing nonrecurring cost charges with a flat rate is its ease of administration .

in addition , some of the u.s. government's research and development investment would be recovered , though perhaps not accurately or equitably for some specific weapons or categories of weapons .

total recoveries are affected by sales , which are affected by a buyer's assessment of economic factors such as price , quality , availability , and competition , and must also be considered .

we did not analyze flat rate charges on commercial sales because of the proprietary nature of commercial sales prices .

however , dsaa officials stated that the same rate would apply to both types of sales should the nonrecurring cost charge be reimposed on direct commercial sales .

we reported in 1986 that the pro rata system had inaccuracies that prevented dod from collecting accurate nonrecurring cost charges .

for example , dod was unable to accurately predict future costs and future u.s. and foreign quantity requirements .

at that time , we recommended that dod improve the existing pro rata system or develop a new approach for recovering research and development costs .

the approach we suggested was to apply a flat rate to the acquisition price of all equipment sold abroad .

we reported that with the use of a flat rate , dod would recover comparable research and development costs yet simplify the complex administrative and review process of calculating a pro rata fee .

in 1986 , dod opted to retain the pro rata calculation and stated that the arms export control act would need to be revised to permit the use of a flat rate fee .

dod's reasoning at the time was that a flat rate would not recover a “proportionate” share of investment on individual items as the law required .

dsaa's general counsel now interprets 22 u.s.c .

section 2761 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( b ) as allowing a flat rate to be collected because the law requires recovery of a proportionate amount , not a pro rata share .

thus , the dsaa general counsel concluded that the law would not have to be amended to permit the use of a flat rate .

in our view , it is not clear that dod would have authority under current law to use a flat rate .

supporters and opponents of recovery of nonrecurring costs differ on its benefits and drawbacks .

on one hand , supporters of nonrecurring cost recovery that we spoke with , including arms control advocates , argue that nonrecurring cost charges should be collected on both foreign military sales and direct commercial sales for a number of reasons .

some supporters believe that , from an economic standpoint , the united states should recover all its costs and not subsidize the weapons industry by forgoing recovery of a portion of its research and development investments .

others believe that arms sales decisions should be based on national security concerns , not the economic interests of private firms .

one group pointed to successful conversions of elements of the defense industry to competitive members of the international market for civilian goods as a means to counter declining defense production .

some arms control advocates assert that higher prices may deter sales and lessen any threat to the united states by reducing the availability of arms worldwide .

some supporters told us that recovered charges are deposited into the u.s. treasury and thus relieve the u.s. budget deficit and benefit u.s. taxpayers .

some groups believe waivers to nato and other foreign countries should be abolished as well .

opponents of recovery that we spoke with , generally industry representatives , favor repeal of the charge on foreign military sales and are adamantly against reimposing it on direct commercial sales .

they expressed concerns that the charges raise sales prices and inhibit u.s. businesses' competitiveness in the world market .

they asserted that any addition to the cost of weapons could price u.s. industry out of the world market with a cascading adverse impact on u.s. jobs , income , and tax revenue .

they also stated that lost sales , whether government - to - government or direct commercial sales , raise prices to the u.s. military services because they lose the benefit of lower unit costs .

industry officials also stated that the charge is an unfair tax that does not accurately represent u.s. research and development investment and is applied in an arbitrary manner .

many industry representatives said that the u.s. research and development investment benefits u.s. forces regardless of foreign sales and should not be imposed on foreign customers .

dod officials stated that they believe the elimination of the recovery charge would not negatively affect national security interests and the elimination of the recovery charge would , overall , be beneficial to the united states .

in a may 1995 report , we compared u.s. government support for military exports with that of france , germany , and the united kingdom .

we pointed out that , among other things , ( 1 ) the united states has been the world's leading defense exporter since 1990 , with almost 50 percent of the global market ; ( 2 ) based on orders placed but not yet filled , u.s. industry will likely remain strong in the world market , at least for the short term ; and ( 3 ) the u.s. government already provides substantial financial and other support to the u.s. defense exporters .

because of the large size of the u.s. domestic defense program , european businesses believe they are at a disadvantage when competing with u.s. firms .

in written comments on a draft of this report , dod concurred with the report .

dod indicated that ( 1 ) the department fully supported the administration's proposal to repeal the statutory requirement to recover nonrecurring costs on foreign military sales of major defense equipment , ( 2 ) a consistent policy for foreign military and direct commercial sales is essential , and ( 3 ) the current imbalance between the two types of sales should be eliminated .

dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii .

dod also provided technical suggestions to clarify the report and they have been incorporated where appropriate .

it should be pointed out that our review was not to assess the legislative proposals , but rather to focus primarily on the financial effects of using a flat rate instead of the current pro rata fees .

we obtained information for this review from officials of dod , dsaa , and the military services .

we reviewed applicable statutes and dod regulations governing recovery of nonrecurring costs on foreign military sales .

we also discussed the benefits and drawbacks of recovering nonrecurring costs with supporters and opponents of recovery .

to determine the effect of imposing a flat rate charge , we obtained from each of the services the acquisition value of selected major defense equipment sold under the foreign military sales program .

we calculated nonrecurring cost charges using flat rates of 3 , 5 , 8 , and 10 percent of the acquisition values of the selected weapon systems .

we did our work between january and march 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days from its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen of the senate and house committees on appropriations , the secretaries of defense and state , and the director of the office of management and budget .

copies will also be made available to others on request .

please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report were diana glod , barbara schmitt , and george taylor .

table i.1: pro rata and flat rate charges on projectiles nonrecurring pro rata charge ( percent of acquisition cost ) table i.2: pro rata and flat rate charges on missiles nonrecurring pro rata charge ( percent of acquisition cost ) table i.3: pro rata and flat rate charges on aircraft nonrecurring pro rata charge ( percent of acquisition cost ) ( table notes on next page ) without two j - 85 engines .

without engines , an / apg - 63 radars , multistage improvement program , and towed electronic warfare system .

with engines .

nonrecurring pro rata charge ( percent of acquisition cost ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

