as you requested , we reviewed the sale of advanced telecommunications equipment to the people's republic of china .

specifically , you asked about the transfer of broadband telecommunications equipment to huamei , a joint venture between scm brooks telecommunications , a u.s. limited partnership , and galaxy new technology , a chinese company primarily owned by an agency of the chinese military .

the equipment included asynchronous transfer mode ( atm ) and synchronous digital hierarchy ( sdh ) equipment , which were used to demonstrate the commercial capabilities of a broadband telecommunications network among several hotels in guangzhou , china .

atm and sdh operate on a broadband network to transmit voice , data , images , and video communications at high rates of speed .

our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the civil and military applications of the exported telecommunications equipment , its availability , and the importance of these applications to china's military and ( 2 ) the process and rationale for liberalizing the export of telecommunications equipment , such as the atm and sdh equipment shipped to huamei .

the u.s. department of commerce controls the export of u.s. dual - use commodities , software , and technology by requiring validated licenses prior to shipment unless a license exception applies .

a license exception , formerly known as a general license , is a broad grant of authority to export certain goods and technology without prior government review .

dual - use telecommunications items are controlled under the commerce control list , which specifies the items that require validated licenses , generally for reasons of national security .

during the cold war , the united states sought international coordination of export controls through the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls ( cocom ) , which was made up primarily of north atlantic treaty organization member countries .

with the end of the cold war , cocom members pushed for liberalization of many dual - use items , including telecommunications equipment , computers , and machine tools .

however , before cocom ended on march 31 , 1994 , participant countries agreed to continue controlling dual - use items , at each country's discretion , after cocom's expiration .

the new u.s. export control arrangement , established in 1996 , focuses export controls on several potential aggressor countries , such as iraq , libya , and north korea , and away from former communist countries .

broadband telecommunications equipment , such as atm and sdh , have numerous civilian and military applications and are becoming increasingly available in china as it strives to improve its telecommunications networks to meet international standards .

according to u.s. government officials , overall improvements to china's telecommunications networks will likely benefit the chinese military as well .

broadband networks employ atm and sdh equipment to transfer data , voice , and video communications simultaneously at high rates of speed .

atm is a flexible switching technique used to transfer information over advanced telecommunications networks .

sdh technology is used for high speed transmission of data , video , and voice traffic .

both atm and sdh equipment were developed by commercial industry for civil applications , and they are now increasingly used worldwide on broadband telecommunications networks .

civil applications of atm and sdh equipment generally allow work groups to collaborate quickly and efficiently over a computer network .

these applications include holding a meeting simultaneously in several locations ( video - conferencing ) , having people in different locations work simultaneously on the same document ( virtual notebook ) , and transmitting x - rays and other medical records from one location to another ( telemedicine ) .

atm and sdh equipment are necessary to have the speed of delivery , quick data retrieval , and clear video images that are needed for these applications to operate .

military applications for atm and sdh equipment are similar to civilian applications .

these applications include sharing of intelligence , imagery and video between several locations , command and control of military operations using video - conferencing , and medical support and telemedicine between the battlefield and remote hospitals .

when used in a military application , both types of equipment requires encryption devices to protect communications from interception .

the department of defense buys such equipment “off - the - shelf” and is still testing it for potential military uses .

according to defense officials , atm and sdh equipment will be beneficial to military functions , such as command and control , and will form the basis for future defense department communications networks .

both atm and sdh equipment are considered to be advanced technologies in the telecommunications industry and are now increasingly deployed worldwide .

while atm equipment has only recently become readily available , sdh has been commercially available for at least the last 5 years .

in 1993 , a u.s. company claimed that foreign producers of sdh equipment were marketing to china and urged the commerce department to reduce its controls on such equipment .

sdh equipment was found to be foreign available by the commerce department in 1994 .

former cocom member countries tightly controlled the export of such equipment until 1994 , when controls on telecommunications items were relaxed .

prior to the liberalization of exports of dual - use telecommunications equipment in april 1994 , the export of atm and sdh equipment to china would have required a validated license from the commerce department .

according to company officials , since the removal of most export restrictions on telecommunications equipment , the market for such equipment in china has grown quickly and large quantities of sdh equipment have been sold to china to modernize its commercial long - distance telecommunications network .

advanced telecommunications equipment , particularly sdh , is increasingly used to be consistent with the emerging international communications standards , and it should vastly improve china's outdated and underdeveloped telecommunications systems .

according to industry officials , u.s. companies sold tens of millions of dollars worth of sdh equipment in china in 1994 , and several joint ventures are currently manufacturing sdh equipment in china to build china's telecommunications network .

in contrast , there is little demand for atm equipment in china and there is no in - country production of such equipment .

company officials noted the demand for atm equipment in the united states is also limited .

officials at the defense department told us that the chinese military would like to improve its telecommunications capabilities .

according to these officials , the chinese military is seeking to acquire atm and sdh equipment , which may increase their operational readiness by the end of the next decade .

defense department officials told us that broadband telecommunications equipment could be used to improve the chinese military's command and control communications networks .

these officials also observed that the chinese military will benefit from the improvements to china's overall public telecommunications system , since they also make use of that system .

the chinese military may also benefit from the use of broadband equipment in its nonmilitary activities .

for example , chinese army hospitals , which also serve civilians , are interested in acquiring high - speed telecommunications links using atm switches to develop telemedicine capabilities and to extend health care to rural areas .

the chinese military operates at least one - third of the hospitals in china .

the commerce department created glx in 1994 , allowing nearly all dual - use telecommunications items to be exported to chinese civil end users without validated licenses .

as a result , the atm and sdh equipment exported to huamei did not require prior government approval before being shipped .

according to u.s. government officials , the commerce department created glx in april 1994 to ease export restrictions and reduce administrative burdens on u.s. exporters .

in september 1993 , the trade promotion coordinating committee , chaired by the secretary of commerce , recommended removing export controls on computers and telecommunications products to aid key u.s. industries .

commerce officials noted that there was an interagency effort to determine which items to decontrol before cocom expired at the end of march 1994 .

the commerce department used the advisory notes from the commerce control list as a basis for what items were to be included under glx .

advisory notes are included in the list to advise exporters of the items likely to be approved for export to certain locations .

the commerce department removed the requirement for a validated license and prior government review on all items with advisory notes because it viewed the items as being less sensitive .

according to a commerce department official , the advisory note items included under glx did not necessarily include the entire category of equipment , nor did they apply to china .

for example , one advisory note stated that licenses would likely be approved for the export of telecommunications transmission equipment , such as sdh , to china , provided that such equipment did not exceed certain capabilities .

under glx , all sdh equipment is eligible for export to china , regardless of capability .

another advisory note stated that licenses would likely be approved for the export of all controlled dual - use telecommunications equipment , including atm , for civil end use in estonia , latvia , and lithuania .

according to a commerce department official , since atm equipment was included in this advisory note , it became eligible for export under glx , even though the note did not apply to china .

our analysis of the telecommunications items included under glx showed that each item category was covered by some advisory note on the commerce control list .

because most of the telecommunications items on the list were covered by advisory notes , they became eligible for export under glx .

the only telecommunications items covered by an advisory note that were not included under glx were radio frequency hopping equipment and radio receivers with certain scanning and frequency switching capabilities .

items included under glx were telecommunications transmission equipment , switching equipment , optical fiber communication cables , and phased array antennas .

however , technology for the development and production of the telecommunications equipment may not be exported under glx .

the commerce department officially requested comments from other agencies on glx on march 17 , 1994 , and the creation of glx was announced in the federal register on april 4 , 1994 .

according to government officials , the period of time given to other agencies to comment on the new license category was limited due to the expiration of cocom at the end of march 1994 .

senior commerce and defense department officials stated that while the comment period provided to the agencies for approving glx was limited , the items included under glx were less sensitive and had been previously considered for liberalization under earlier cocom - related negotiations .

the departments of defense , energy , and state all approved the new license category .

at the time that at&t exported u.s. telecommunications equipment to huamei in 1994 , the commerce department had already created glx , so at&t did not need to apply for a license to ship atm and sdh equipment to china .

in 1993 , scm brooks telecommunications entered into a joint venture with galaxy new technology , a chinese company controlled by the commission of science , technology , and industry for national defense ( costind ) , an agency of the chinese military , to form guangzhou huamei communications limited .

the purpose of the huamei project was to demonstrate the commercial capabilities of a broadband telecommunications network , using several hotels in guangzhou .

the demonstration included video - conferencing , virtual notebook , and teleradiology applications .

huamei contracted with at&t to provide the equipment necessary for the project .

at&t exported three atm switches from the united states under a general license and four sdh transmission systems from the netherlands under a dutch validated license to guangzhou in the fall of 1994 .

glx allows the export of atm and sdh equipment to china without a validated license , if the exports are going to “civil end - users for civil end - uses.” however , commerce department regulations do not define a “civil end - user” or offer any guidance on how an exporter is to determine who is a civil end user in china .

u.s. company and government officials stated that determining end users in china is problematic because the chinese military is often involved in commercial activities .

the chinese military invests in and owns numerous commercial entities in china to obtain profits and to help fund its military activities .

for example , according to industry officials , the military has investments in such enterprises as the palace hotel in beijing , various entertainment projects , and even restaurants .

huamei , while a commercial enterprise , has as its principal chinese partner , a company controlled by the chinese military .

as shown in figure 1 , scm brooks telecommunications and galaxy new technology each own 50 percent of huamei .

however , the chinese military is the primary shareholder of galaxy new technology , with two other chinese government agencies each holding a minority interest in the company .

several members of the huamei board of directors are military officers or have direct ties to the chinese military .

such a high degree of involvement in huamei could indicate a strong military interest in this company .

u.s. company and government officials stated that huamei was a civil end user .

in determining that , company officials considered the end use of the equipment , the location of the installed equipment , and the customers for the equipment .

since the equipment was being used for video - conferencing among several chinese hotels to demonstrate the commercial applications of this technology , company officials were confident that the export of this equipment would satisfy the civil end - user requirement of glx .

according to commerce department officials , the agency does not have guidance for its staff to use in making civil end - user determinations for exports under glx ( or its successor , civ ) , nor has it issued guidelines on end - user determination for exporters .

for an export to china that requires a validated license , the commerce department normally conducts a review of the application and determines if the export is going to a military or civil end user on a case - by - case basis , using available government resources such as embassy personnel and intelligence reports .

exporters do not have such resources available to them when making a civil end - user determination .

currently , there is no guidance or criteria available to exporters on how much military involvement in a commercial entity is needed before it is considered a military end user .

according to commerce department officials , an exporter is responsible for knowing its end user when exporting under glx ( or civ ) .

an exporter is encouraged to come to the commerce department for an end - user check if there are any abnormal circumstances in a transaction that indicate the export may be going to an inappropriate end user .

according to commerce department guidance , these circumstances can include orders for items that are inconsistent with the purchaser's needs or a customer declining installation and testing when included in the sale price .

if there are no suspicious circumstances , the exporter is not required to verify the buyer's representations of civil end use .

at&t officials stated that they did not ask the commerce department to determine if huamei was a civil end user , nor were they required to under glx .

commerce officials stated that the civil end - user requirement in glx was specifically included to allow commerce to review exports going to the military .

however , in the export of telecommunications equipment to huamei , the commerce department did not have an opportunity to review the end user because prior government review is not required under glx .

consequently , the equipment was exported to huamei without commerce review , even though the company was partially controlled by several high - level members of the chinese military .

in commenting on a draft of this report , the departments of commerce , defense , and state generally agreed with the information we presented .

commerce noted that our suggestion that it assess the need to provide additional guidance to exporters on determining civil end users as it gains experience under civ ( formerly known as glx ) was helpful .

commerce also asserted that our report confirmed that its decision to make certain telecommunications equipment available to china without requiring a validated license was consistent with both u.s. national security and economic interests .

however , it should be noted that determining consistency with u.s. interests was not within the scope of our work .

we made minor technical corrections to the report where appropriate based on suggestions provided by the departments of commerce and defense .

comments from the departments of commerce , defense , and state are presented in appendixes i , ii , and iii , respectively .

to obtain information about the huamei project — when it was created , its purpose , and the equipment it employed — we interviewed scm brooks and at&t officials and examined company agreements and project descriptions .

to determine civil and military applications of atm and sdh equipment , availability of the equipment , and the importance of those applications to china's military , we interviewed officials from at&t and scm brooks and obtained technical descriptions of the products and potential applications .

we also interviewed officials from the national security agency , the defense technology security administration , the defense intelligence agency , and the defense information security agency , as well as the commerce department bureau of export administration to get expert assessments of advanced telecommunications equipment and data on telecommunications equipment availability in china .

in addition , we interviewed telecommunications industry and u.s. embassy officials in china to obtain information about the applications and availability of atm and sdh equipment in china .

to examine the process and rationale for liberalizing the export of broadband telecommunications equipment , we reviewed a chronology of the export of at&t equipment .

we also interviewed officials from the departments of defense , commerce , and state , and the national security agency to obtain data on the rationale and purposes of creating the glx license category , as well as agency positions on the inclusion of telecommunications equipment under glx .

we reviewed defense and commerce department documentation on the development of glx .

we also compared the items on glx with the commerce control list items covered by advisory notes to confirm the method used to develop glx .

we performed our review from march to october 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after its issue date .

at that time , we will send copies to other congressional committees and the secretaries of defense , commerce , and state .

we will also make copies available to other interested parties upon request .

please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4383 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report .

major contributors to this report were karen zuckerstein , david c. trimble , and john neumann .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

