this is our annual report on the status of open recommendations resulting from the general accounting office's ( gao's ) audits , evaluations , and other review work in federal departments and agencies .

to encourage prompt , responsive actions on our recommendations , we systematically followup on them and annually report on their status .

we are sending copies of this report to the office of management and budget and federal departments and agencies so that they may respond to inquiries during appropriations and oversight hearings .

we are also sending copies to the chairs and ranking minority members of all house and senate committees and subcommittees to better inform them of our open recommendations .

each year , gao's work contributes to many legislative and executive branch actions that result in significant financial savings and other improvements in government operations .

some , but not all , are identified through gao's system for periodically following up to determine the status of actions taken on the recommendations made in its audit and evaluation reports .

about 70 percent of the recommendations made over the past 5 years have been implemented .

this report includes summaries highlighting the impact of gao's work and associated key open recommendations — those recommendations which have not been fully implemented .

it also includes a set of computer diskettes with details of all open recommendations .

this information should help congressional and agency leaders prepare for upcoming appropriations and oversight activities and stimulate further actions to achieve the desired improvements in government operations .

the diskettes have several menu options to help users find information easily .

for example , a user may search for an open recommendation by using product numbers , titles , dates , names of federal entities , congressional committees , or any other word or phrase that may appear in the report .

instructions for operating the electronic edition have been enclosed with the diskettes and are also in appendix i of this publication .

the name and telephone number of the gao manager to contact for information or assistance about a product is included in the diskettes .

information or questions not related to a specific product or recommendation should be referred to gao's office of congressional relations on 202 / 512-4400 .

copies of complete gao printed products may be ordered by calling 202 / 512-6000 ( or tdd 202 / 512-2537 ) or by facsimile at 202 / 512-6061 .

although the national defense budget has declined significantly over the past decade , the department of defense ( dod ) still spends almost $80 billion annually to research , develop , and acquire weapon systems .

dod's leadership has emphasized its commitment to streamlining and improving the acquisition process to reduce acquisition costs while ensuring technological leadership and a strong , competitive industrial and technology base .

the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) has similar efforts underway .

during fiscal year 1997 , we reviewed ( 1 ) the justifications for new and modified systems to determine whether they are reasonable and support the national military strategy , ( 2 ) system development programs to determine whether systems are being acquired in an effective and efficient manner , and ( 3 ) acquisition strategies to determine whether dod and nasa have selected the lowest risk and least costly acquisition strategies consistent with the need for the planned system or modification .

our reviews included systems such as the b - 2 , f / a - 18e / f , f - 22 , c - 17 , and f - 14 aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles .

we also continued our work on dod's development of space systems , including the defense satellite communications system and expandable launch vehicle program .

to determine whether dod and nasa are streamlining and improving their acquisition processes , practices , and infrastructure , we evaluated the implementation of governmentwide acquisition reform legislation and reviewed new proposals .

we also assessed dod's efforts to utilize opportunities for international cooperation in the development and production of weapon systems .

in addition , we assisted the senate and house appropriations committees , the senate armed services committee , and the house national security committee , by examining dod's fiscal year 1998 budget and prior years' appropriations and identifying opportunities to reduce dod's procurement and rdt&e funding by about $1.38 billion .

we provided congress with information to assist in its oversight responsibility on many occasions .

for example , we reported that dod needs to reorient its aircraft investment strategy to recognize the reality of a constrained overall defense budget for the future .

otherwise , a significant imbalance is likely to result between the funding requirements , particularly the major commitments for the initial procurement of all the planned aircraft programs ( such as the f / a - 18e / f and f - 22 ) over the next several years , and available funding .

our work on the use of major weapon systems warranties resulted in congress repealing 10 u.s.c .

2403 and reducing dod's procurement budget by $75 million for fiscal year 1998 to account for potential savings .

we reported that theater high altitude area defense project had not achieved a successful intercept during the four tests conducted in the engineering , manufacturing , and development phase of rdt&e .

subsequently , congress denied dod's program request for $262 million for fiscal year 1998 .

our work regarding defense industry restructuring showed that dod did not include data on grants provided by the department of labor in its annual restructuring reports to congress .

as a result , dod agreed to include such information in future reports in order to provide congress more complete information about federal funding used to assist workers affected by restructuring .

we also found that tracing savings into contract prices was extremely difficult given other factors that affect a contractor's operations and costs .

subsequently , congress requested that we determine whether defense contract prices are lower than they would have been had restructuring not occurred and to evaluate the impact of defense industry consolidation on competition .

our work on the federal acquisition computer network ( facnet ) showed that agencies had good business and technical reasons for not using facnet and recommended that the government needs a coherent strategy and flexibility to implement alternative electronic commerce technologies and purchasing methods that make good business sense and are aligned with commercial applications .

as a result , the fiscal year 1998 defense authorization act repealed the mandated use of facnet .

in addition , the president's management council tasked a high - level management committee to review electronic commerce implementation government wide and develop a more integrated federal strategy .

our work on whether dod provides congress accurate information on contracts for advisory and assistance services showed that dod may be significantly underreporting those costs .

in the president's budget submission , dod reported fiscal year obligations of about $3 billion on advisory and assistance service contracts .

our analysis of dod's contract data indicated fiscal year 1996 obligations of almost $12 billion for services involving advising or assisting dod management .

as a result , the congress reduced dod's budget by $300 million and attributed this reduction to our work .

subsequently , the senate appropriations committee requested a review to more fully examine the reasons for the underreporting on contracts for advisory and assistance services .

defense acquisitions is the point of contact for three areas that have been designated as high - risk — defense weapon systems acquisition , defense contract management , and nasa contract management .

our work in contract management concluded that unless dod achieves cost - effective control over its payment process , it will continue to risk hundreds of millions of dollars in potential overpayments and other financial management and accounting control problems .

further , improving the efficiency of the payment process could save additional millions of dollars annually in reduced processing costs .

we recommended that dod ( 1 ) thoroughly evaluate the information requirements of the user , procurement , and accounting communities in terms of their impact on the payment process' ability to produce useful information ; ( 2 ) evaluate whether the structure that the columbus center uses to charge its customers for accounting services needs to better reflect the cost of servicing contracts ; ( 3 ) establish a dod - wide policy for closing out existing contracts that cannot be reconciled because accurate and complete data are lacking ; and ( 4 ) explore increased opportunities for using best practices .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-37 , gao / hr - 97-4 ) in may 1995 , we reported that the unclear lines of jurisdiction over stealth - related items may lead to the inappropriate export of military sensitive materials and technology .

we recommended that the state department clarify the licensing jurisdiction between the commerce control list and u.s .

munitions list for all stealth - related commodities and technologies with a view towards ensuring adequate controls under the arms export control act for all sensitive stealth - related items .

 ( gao / nsiad - 95-140 ) our work on the defense satellite communications system ( dscs ) showed ( 1 ) dod's anticipated increase in requirements for high capacity satellite communications , ( 2 ) the relative high cost of leasing commercial satellite communications and apparent cost - effectiveness of acquiring commercial - like satellites instead of leasing equivalent services from commercial providers , and ( 3 ) the potential for saving about $2.8 billion in future years if the first launch of the replacement satellite were to occur in fiscal year 2003 .

we recommended that dod accelerate the introduction of a dscs replacement system from fiscal year 2006 to 2003 , or as soon as practicable , if the emerging requirements are deemed valid , the estimated acquisition and commercial costs are considered credible , and the necessary acquisition funds can be made available .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-159 ) in our work on the navy's cooperative engagement capability program on the transfer of certain frequency spectrum to the federal communications commission for reallocation to the private sector , we reported that fragmented dod management responsibilities have resulted in inadequate coordination within dod on spectrum issues and preparation of long - range plans .

we recommended that dod assign responsibility for overall dod spectrum management to a specific organization .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-131 ) in may 1997 , we reported that the army's current hellfire missile requirement of 12,722 may be overstated by over 8,300 missiles and that significant cost reductions can be achieved with lower missile quantities .

we recommended that the army ( 1 ) reduce longbow hellfire missile procurement requirements to reflect the current information on the number of missiles that the apache can carry , the correct residual readiness computational procedures , and the appropriate hellfire ii to longbow hellfire mix ratio and ( 2 ) prepare a new procurement strategy that reflects the reduced equipment and recomputed expected cost .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-93 ) see also chapter 5 , financial and information management programs , defense financial audit issue area and information resources management issue area systems .

defense managers are confronted with many challenges to their ability to continue accomplishing their missions as they strive to streamline operations , reduce existing infrastructures , improve the management of closed / realigned facilities , enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the defense supply chain , and better control high interest programs .

our overall strategy for defense management issues is to identify new initiatives that are innovative , efficient , and cost effective approaches to improving dod's management and in reducing defense costs .

it focuses on the implementation and effectiveness of dod cost reduction initiatives as they apply to dod's support infrastructure activities with special emphasis on logistics - related business activities which include operations and functions such as depot maintenance , the purchase of parts and supplies for inventory , storage and disposal , and transportation .

our work encourages the reengineering and streamlining of dod operations through new processes and best management practices and , where appropriate , the privatization or outsourcing of defense functions and activities .

defense logistics - related business activities and infrastructure functions consume a major share of dod's budget — perhaps as much as $80 billion in fiscal year 1997 .

dod recognizes the need to cut these costs and is seeking a reduction of $20 billion annually in order to fund acquisitions for weapon systems modernization .

initiatives dod has undertaken to achieve reductions include privatization , acquisition reform , technology insertion , organizational streamlining and consolidation , management process reengineering , base and facility closures , personnel reductions , inventory reductions , and private sector use of facilities .

key areas we focused on in fiscal year 1997 included the transition of former bases to civilian use , depot maintenance workloads , inventory management , property disposal activities , and opportunities to improve operations through the use of best management practices .

we also addressed dod environmental costs and programs and problems associated with the disposal of the chemical weapons stockpile .

defense management is the point of contact for the following two high - risk areas: defense inventory management and defense infrastructure .

to achieve management improvements , increase operations efficiencies , and produce dollar savings , dod needs to take action on the following key recommendations .

the secretary of defense should identify options and take steps to minimize the impediments to interservicing to realize potentially significant savings in base support costs through interservicing - type arrangements .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-108 ) the secretary of defense should establish reasonable timeframes for concluding negotiated sales of surplus real property and when practical , rent unoccupied , surplus housing and other facilities as a means of preserving property pending final disposition .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-149 ) the secretary of the army should begin the disposal determination process for ( 1 ) all excess real property not needed for replenishment requirements at the kansas , louisiana , and sunflower army ammunition plants , and ( 2 ) all inactive plants retained only for their unique capabilities when those capabilities can be adequately provided by other sources .

an integral part of this process will be identifying the costs involved in accomplishing the disposal of unneeded properties .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-56 ) the secretary of the navy , working with the defense logistics agency , should develop a demonstration project to determine the extent to which the navy can apply best practices to its logistics operations .

the specific practices that should be tested are ( 1 ) inducting parts at repair depots soon after they break , ( 2 ) reorganizing repair workshops using the cellular concept to reduce repair time , ( 3 ) using integrated supplier programs to shift consumable inventory responsibilities to suppliers , ( 4 ) using local supplier distribution centers for quick shipment of parts to mechanics , and ( 5 ) expanding the use of third - party logistics services to store and distribute spare parts .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-156 ) the secretary of defense should direct the defense transportation reengineering efforts to simultaneously address process and organizational structure improvements including ( 1 ) the need for separate traffic management component command headquarters staff , ( 2 ) the consolidation of separate field subordinate command traffic management staff , and ( 3 ) the elimination of all remaining duplicative field - based subordinate command support staff .

further , the secretary of defense should clarify which u.s. transportation command mobilization costs should be passed along to its customers .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-60 ) the secretary of defense should , at a minimum , explain the methodology used to estimate savings in future base realignment and closure ( brac ) budget submissions and these submissions should note that all brac - related costs are not included .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-67 ) in order to strengthen dod's budgeting process and ensure that correct assumptions are being made regarding expected reductions in base operating costs , dod needs to improve its periodic updating and reporting of savings projected from prior brac decisions .

accordingly , the secretary of defense should provide guidance to ensure that its components have and follow a clear and consistent process for updating savings estimates associated with prior brac decisions .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-151 ) further , if congress authorizes future brac rounds , the secretary of defense should ( 1 ) work with the task force on defense reform and the national defense panel to address the important organizational and policy issues in various cross - service areas , ( 2 ) convene a dod joint working group , as soon as practical , to develop policy guidance , improve brac processes and decision - making tools , and ( 3 ) ensure full audit access to all parts of dod's brac process .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-151 ) if congress considers legislation for future brac rounds , it may wish to ( 1 ) model it on the 1990 brac legislation as a starting point , ( 2 ) pass such legislation early to allow the lead time needed for dod and the commission to organize their processes , and ( 3 ) consider the relationship between new brac authority and section 277 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 pertaining to laboratories and test and evaluation facilities .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-151 ) see also chapter 5 , financial and information management programs , defense financial audit issue area and information resources management issue area .

the congress is continuing to rethink the u.s. role in international affairs , including the level of resources devoted to and the effectiveness of current programs in advancing u.s. political and economic interests .

to assist the congress in this regard , our work focused on assessing the relevancy , priority , effectiveness , and management of international affairs activities , and addressed issues of current national concern , such as u.s. involvement in bosnia , north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) enlargement , and the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

our reviews examined the rationale , structure , and reform agenda of the international organizations that receive u.s. funding , and examined the cost , management , and results of the u.s. bilateral programs and activities in critical regions of the world , including the broad range of programs designed to enhance u.s. security and those aimed at reducing the flow of illegal drugs into the united states .

in addition , we completed work that assisted the debate on current trade issues and examined the need for u.s. government export and investment promotion programs .

the work has had a significant impact on efforts to address major international relations and trade issues .

our assessment of the bosnia peace operation concluded that only limited progress had been made toward achieving the dayton agreement's goal of establishing a unified , democratic government that respects the rule of law .

this situation , we noted , was due principally to the failure of bosnia's political leaders to fulfill their obligations under the dayton agreement and to promote political and social reconciliation .

this report was a seminal assessment of the bosnia issue and was instrumental in influencing the administration's decision to revise its bosnia strategy .

our assessments of u.s. programs and those of other nato member countries showed that they are helping former eastern bloc countries prepare for possible membership in the nato .

in a separate study that examined the likely cost of nato enlargement , we concluded that dod's estimated cost of about $27-35 billion was speculative and that the actual enlargement costs could be substantially higher or lower .

this work led to a request for gao to testify at an october 1997 hearing as additional congressional concerns were raised about the impact of nato expansion on dod's budget .

our work on nafta addressed concerns about the economic impact of the agreement , examined the implementation of the supplemental side agreements on labor and the environment , and described the agreement's dispute settlement process and the efforts made to help workers displaced by imports from mexico or canada .

we continued to examine the extent to which u.s. participation in multilateral institutions advance u.s. interests and whether there are opportunities to reduce costs .

our examination of u.n. peacekeeping operations showed that there are eight costly , long - standing , and marginally effective operations for which the state department had not established clear exit strategies .

in response to our recommendation , the state department outlined exit strategies and criteria for these operations and notified the congress that it would continue to review this matter to ensure effective reforms were implemented .

we also completed a major review of the united nations development program ( undp ) — the central financing and coordinating mechanism for development assistance within the u.n. system — to determine the progress that it had made in reducing administrative costs and improving its management of projects .

the recommendations we made for improved project management are currently being implemented .

our comprehensive examination of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) found that 5 years of reform have resulted in a smaller aid bureaucracy that has achieved some operational efficiencies but that the full benefits were not yet clear and fundamental questions about the effectiveness and relevance of these programs remain .

our evaluations of how the federal government manages its overseas real estate identified deficiencies that resulted in additional and unnecessary costs .

we recommended that dod negotiators obtain and use estimates of the market value of installations in negotiating with foreign governments on recouping the residual value of closed overseas facilities .

the additional revenue realized in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 from implementing this recommendation was estimated to be $222 million .

during fiscal year 1997 , the state department sold three of the properties , we identified as unnecessary , for $7.6 million .

with respect to arms control , we reported that progress has been made in reducing the threat from weapons of mass destruction through the dismantling of nuclear weapons in the former soviet union , the provision of better international accountability for nuclear materials , and the imposition of effective export controls .

acting on a recommendation we made in our 1995 report on dod's cooperative threat reduction program , dod improved its reporting on program management and assistance .

our evaluation of whether u.s. export control policy toward hong kong will adequately protect u.s. national security interests after hong kong's reversion to china revealed hong kong will continue to have easier access to sensitive technology that is more tightly controlled for china .

we also found that the u.s. government has limited ability to monitor such technology to ensure that it is not diverted .

we made recommendations to improve these weaknesses .

this report could form the cornerstone of any congressional deliberations to change the application of u.s. export controls to hong kong .

we also reported on issues surrounding the sales of high performance computers to russia's nuclear weapons laboratories .

this testimony influenced the legislative debate over whether the recently relaxed export control rules need to be reexamined .

the congress has a continuing interest in the operations and the effectiveness of u.s. counternarcotics programs .

our comprehensive report on the u.s. drug control effort was based on over 10 years of review of various aspects of u.s. drug control strategy .

the report concluded that despite long - standing efforts and expenditures of billions of dollars — about $20 billion over the past 10 years — these efforts have not materially reduced the availability of drugs .

during the past year , we completed comprehensive reviews of u.s. programs aimed at promoting u.s. interests through export and investment promotion and greater market accessibility .

these reviews focused on the continuing relevance of these programs and whether increased efficiencies and reduced costs are possible .

our reports on the u.s. export - import bank ( eximbank ) ( 1 ) presented options for saving millions of dollars in subsidy costs by raising fees or reducing program coverage in higher - risk markets , ( 2 ) documented the amount of the funding and programs of competitor nations , and ( 3 ) summarized the results of the eximbank's efforts to meet the financing needs of small business and to comply with laws governing the financing of dual - use ( civilian and military ) defense exports .

our work at the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) identified important changes in the private sector's willingness to invest in foreign markets and ways that the risks of opic's programs could be reduced .

we also discussed a number of issues that would need to be addressed if the agency were not reauthorized .

our review of the 1994 u.s. - japan insurance agreement found that most u.s. insurance providers in japan were of the opinion that japanese government actions to implement the agreement did not result in significant liberalization and had no effect on their ability to compete in the japanese insurance market .

our assessment of u.s. agricultural export assistance programs found mixed evidence regarding the continued relevance of these programs .

in 1994 , we recommended that the state department develop a fully integrated , objective , quantifiable methodology to help ensure a sound basis for allocating personnel in line with u.s. interests overseas .

state plans on using this methodology in making its staffing resource decisions in fiscal year 1998 .

because stationing staff overseas is costly , state must be able to ensure that it places no more staff than is needed at each of its overseas posts .

 ( gao / nsiad - 94-228 ) in 1995 , we recommended that the congress terminate usaid's housing guarantee program because it was not achieving its original goals and objectives .

this program was not terminated by the congress , but its appropriation was reduced in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 .

 ( gao / nsiad - 95-108 ) in 1996 , we reported that the state department had done relatively little to implement reforms and streamline its operations to save money .

we concluded that state needed to ( 1 ) plan how it could become a smaller , more efficient , and less expensive organization ; and ( 2 ) conduct a fundamental rethinking of functions , locations , and practices to determine what is essential and affordable to support u.s. interests .

in addition , we reported that state could generate millions of dollars by selling unneeded real estate at its overseas locations .

we identified a number of options that the state department could take to address possible budget reductions , including developing a downsizing strategy for adjusting to potentially lower funding .

actions have not been taken on these recommendations because state objects to the report's overall premise that major budget reductions will occur , saying that such reductions could undermine the u.s. foreign policy infrastructure .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-124 ) in 1996 , we recommended that the director of the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) develop a regional action plan focused on the caribbean transit zone for cocaine coming to the united states .

this plan should determine resources and staffing needs and delineate a comprehensive strategy to improve caribbean nations' antidrug - trafficking capabilities and commitment to counternarcotics interdiction .

ondcp is considering our recommendation as part of an ongoing evaluation of the entire drug control strategy .

in 1997 , we recommended that the director , ondcp , develop a long - term plan with meaningful performance measures and multiyear funding needs that are linked to the goals and objectives of the international drug control strategy .

ondcp says that in fiscal year 1998 it will present the congress with a 10-year strategy with multiyear budget plans and measurable performance objectives .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-119 and gao / nsiad - 97-75 ) also in 1996 , we recommended that the secretary of the treasury monitor and periodically report to the congress measurable indicators of the world bank's progress in reforming its operations to improve their effectiveness .

if the indicators do not show satisfactory progress , we recommended that the secretary should report on the actions taken to do so .

the treasury department is monitoring the world bank's new reform initiative , called the strategic compact , and will report on the results of this initiative in the upcoming year .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-212 ) .

dod faces unprecedented challenges as it strives to plan and budget for military operations that range from peacekeeping and disaster relief to humanitarian assistance and warfare at the highest level of intensity .

to effectively meet these challenges , dod must maintain a high readiness level and strike the proper balance between the need to fund weapons modernization and the need to maintain dedicated and high - quality personnel .

our overall strategy to assist congress with military operations and capabilities issues is to: ( 1 ) identify potential reductions to operations and maintenance budgets , while recommending ways to improve planning for future military operations ; ( 2 ) identify shortfalls and excesses in capability in relation to military requirements ; ( 3 ) alert congress to existing or projected readiness shortfalls that could leave military forces ill - prepared to conduct effective operations ; and ( 4 ) recommend ways to improve dod's ability to recruit , train , and retain a high - quality active , reserve , and civilian workforce .

in fiscal year 1997 , we completed reviews of dod's fiscal year 1998 budget requests for operations and maintenance and military personnel programs , and identified changes to other military programs that could save millions of dollars .

we also provided congress with information on the readiness of war reserve equipment prepositioned afloat ; reviewed dod's chemical and biological defense capabilities ; identified dod efforts to protect u.s. forces from terrorist attacks ; assessed the telemedicine strategies among dod , other federal agencies and the private sector ; and evaluated dod's study on the need to increase the number of general and flag officers .

during our review of dod's $94 billion operations and maintenance budget requests , we identified potential budget reductions of about $3.7 billion .

of this amount , about $1.6 billion is for the purchase of inventory in excess of current operating and war reserve requirements .

likewise , we identified potential reductions of about $390 million in the services' military personnel requests .

of this amount , about $304 million can be reduced because the services began fiscal year 1998 with 12,300 fewer active military personnel than budgeted for .

we identified significant per - year dollar savings that could result from our recommended changes in other military programs .

for example , the navy could save about $140 million annually by turning over the operation of eight multiproduct ( oil , ammunition ) ships to the military sealift command for crewing with civil service mariners .

these savings are due primarily to a much smaller crew size than has been traditional on military crewed auxiliary ships .

likewise , dod could save as much as $95 million annually by converting roughly 9,500 administrative and support positions , now held by military officers , to lower - cost positions that could be filled by civilians .

since the 1950s , a dod directive has required the services to staff positions with civilian personnel unless the services deem a position military essential .

moreover , dod could save about $54 million per year in personnel costs once the army removes unneeded war reserve equipment from central europe and aligns its resources with the reduced mission .

during our assessment of the readiness of the army's war reserve equipment prepositioned on ships , we found that 25 percent of the unit sets do not meet the army's readiness goal for full mission capability .

we reported that , as of april 1997 , equipment in 13 of 51 reportable unit sets did not meet the 90-percent readiness goal .

factors contributing to lower readiness status include the deterioration of the equipment while in storage aboard ships and the limited ability to conduct maintenance on the equipment while in storage .

the army plans to conduct maintenance on prepositioning ships every 30 months .

our examination of u.s. chemical and biological defense capabilities resulted in two classified reports .

one report contained a series of recommendations to the secretary of defense aimed at improving the protection of u.s. forces from biological agents .

dod is in the process of implementing several corrective actions , after concurring with all of our recommendations .

the other report addressed u.s. chemical and biological protection at critical ports and airfields in high threat areas overseas .

this work contributed to a refocusing of some commander - in - chief's priorities , doctrinal changes , and other actions designed to improve various aspects of chemical and biological defense .

our work on dod's efforts to protect u.s. forces overseas from terrorist attacks showed these forces to be better protected today than in june 1996 , when a bomb detonated near the khobar towers military complex and killed 19 u.s. service personnel .

during our visits to 30 overseas sites , we found security improvements were most evident where the risk of terrorism appeared greatest , such as turkey and the middle east .

dod has initiated several changes aimed at improving its antiterrorism program , including a newly - created office for combating terrorism on the joint staff .

during our work examining dod's use of telemedicine ( the use of communications technology to help deliver medical care without regard to the distance that separates the participants ) , we found that dod was the largest federal investor between fiscal years 1994 to 1996 .

of the nine federal departments and independent agencies that collectively invested at least $646 million in telemedicine projects during this period , dod invested more than any other agency and is considered a leader in developing this technology .

opportunities exist for federal agencies to share lessons learned and exchange technology .

in 1995 , the joint working group on telemedicine was created within the department of health and human services to help coordinate federal programs .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1997 required us to examine dod's study on general and flag officer requirements .

due to dod's delay in issuing a final report , we issued an interim report on dod's draft report .

our review showed that dod's draft does not clearly identify requirements for general and flag officers and does not explain the basis for its recommendations to increase the number of officers by 54 active and 32 reserve positions .

we estimate the cost of implementing dod's draft recommendations would be at least $1.2 million annually , assuming the services reduce the number of colonels / navy captains by the same amount as the increase in general and flag officers .

however , the cost will exceed $1.2 million if the services do not reduce their colonels / navy captains .

we made several recommendations to the secretary of defense to address the weaknesses we identified in 1996 in the chemical and biological defense areas .

among them was a recommendation that the secretary reevaluate the priority and emphasis given to this area throughout dod .

also included was a recommendation that the secretary consider modifying the services' readiness reporting requirements so that unit reports would more directly capture the units' chemical and biological readiness status and more accurately reflect shortcomings in their abilities to meet existing chemical and biological training standards .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-103 ) u.s. special operations forces are considered highly capable , elite forces that are trained and maintained to address critical u.s. national security objectives .

in response to our questionnaire , many unit leaders of these special forces are convinced that the high use has adversely affected readiness , retention , and morale .

to maintain the readiness of these forces to support national security objectives and help ensure that readiness is not degraded through overuse or improper use , we recommended that the secretary of defense direct the commander of the u.s. special operations command to complete efforts to develop an information system for monitoring how the command's forces are used and establish a methodology for periodically comparing these forces' usage with the commanders - in - chief's priorities and special forces training needs .

we also recommended that the secretary direct the commander to exploit potential opportunities to reduce deployments that do not prepare these forces for unique missions in support of national security objectives and that can be performed by conventional forces .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-85 ) during the cold war , the army stored about nine brigade sets of equipment in central europe .

the army plans to remove seven brigade sets of equipment due to its reduced european mission .

since dod could save about $54 million per year in personnel costs once the equipment is removed , we recommended that the secretary of defense , among other things , direct the secretary of the army and the commander of the army materiel command to develop a specific and timely disposition plan for all equipment not needed in central europe .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-158 ) thousands of recruits are separated from military service in the first 6 months because the services do not adequately screen applicants for disqualifying medical conditions or for preservice drug use .

all military services agree that reducing early attrition is desirable .

to this end , three services have attrition - reducing targets that could realize immediate short - term annual savings ranging from around $5 million to $12 million .

possible long - term savings could range from more than $15 million to $39 million .

to reduce the attrition of enlisted personnel during the first 6 months of their terms of enlistment , we recommended that the secretary of defense , among other things , issue implementing guidance on dod's separation codes and direct the services to strengthen their recruiter incentive and medical screening systems .

we also recommended that drug testing for all the services be moved to the military entrance processing command .

 ( gao / nsiad - 97-39 ) see also chapter 5 , financial and information management programs , defense financial audit issue area and information resources management issue area .

dod continues to face difficult policy , programmatic , and budgetary decisions as it seeks to strike a balance between maintaining sufficient force structure to address current dangers , while also investing in the new systems and technologies needed for the future .

dod's recently completed quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) stated a preference for reducing the size and cost of defense infrastructure in order to make the investments needed to modernize the future force .

the qdr also recognized the challenge of making these choices in a fiscally constrained environment , marked by a national consensus to balance the federal budget by year 2002 .

our reports and testimonies on budget , force structure , strategy implementation , and intelligence issues have been cited frequently by the congress as it debates how best to prepare america's armed forces for this new environment .

a key recommendation stemming from our work on aircraft requirements calls for the secretary of defense to direct the secretary of the air force to develop and use supportable and consistent criteria to justify backup aircraft inventories and future procurement of backup aircraft as the navy is doing .

 ( gao / nsiad - 95-180 ) after assessing key combat air power missions , we recommended that the secretary of defense develop an assessment process that yields more comprehensive information on joint mission requirements and capabilities than current processes provide .

our recommendation described the scope of these assessments and the general procedures for conducting them .

the department of defense plans to spend hundreds of billions on new fighter and attack aircraft over the next several decades , and tens of billions of dollars more on weapons for combat air power missions .

if implemented , these assessments would improve the information available to assist decisionmakers in making key decisions on air power plans , programs , and budgets .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-177 , gao / nsiad - 96-72 , gao / nsiad - 96-45 ) in our report assessing air force aircraft , we recommended that the secretary of defense , in his efforts to reduce the department of defense's infrastructure costs , should require the secretary of the air force to develop an implementation plan to operate the air force's fighter force in larger , more cost - effective squadrons .

if the secretary of defense believes that the plan could reduce costs , he should seek congressional support for it .

 ( gao / nsiad - 96-82 ) see also chapter 5 , financial and information management programs , defense financial audit issue area and information resources management issue area .

the energy , resources , and science issue area encompasses a broad and diverse group of agencies with concerns and topics ranging from cleaning up the nuclear weapons complex — estimated to cost up to $265 billion — to finding better ways to manage the 650 million acres of land owned by the federal government , equal to almost one - third of our nation's total land surface .

agency responsibilities include the department of energy ( doe ) and related agencies , such as the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , the federal energy regulatory commission , and tennessee valley authority ( tva ) .

a second grouping encompasses various land management and natural resource agencies , including the department of the interior , the forest service within the department of agriculture , and the army corps of engineers .

finally , there's an array of science and technology - related agencies , including the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology , the patent and trademark office , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , and the national technical information service .

programs and activities within these agencies account for over $60 billion in gross federal obligations each year with annual revenues of about $10 billion spanning 10 of the government's 19 budget functions .

but , more importantly , the activities of these agencies pose significant implications for the nation's security , environment , and economic well - being .

our primary objective is to assist the congress in examining the role of government in this broad area of responsibility , with particular emphasis on finding ways to promote a more efficient and cost - effective government .

our efforts this past year have gone a long way in contributing to this objective and many of our key open recommendations , as outlined in the section below , are intended to help focus the debate on some difficult choices that still need to be made .

examples of our contributions this past year include helping the congress: continue to assess questions and issues regarding the role and missions of doe and how to restructure it in a post - cold war environment ; better ensure that the government will receive a fair price in the planned sale of the naval petroleum reserves at elk hills , deliberate on the potential privatization of doe's five power marketing continue its search for an acceptable alternative for disposing of nuclear waste and in assessing the safety , reliability , and security of our nation's nuclear arsenal ; evaluate u.s. vulnerability to oil disruptions ; develop legislation to prevent u.s. funding to the united nations from going to the development of cuban reactors ; deliberate on the u.s. / north korean nuclear reactor agreement ; leverage the use of “carry - over” balances and find other ways to reduce doe's , nrc's and commerce's budgets ; consider legislation that was ultimately passed to terminate the federal receive the first - ever comprehensive accounting of western water projects , including the costs associated with providing interest - free financing of irrigation projects ; and make more informed decisions about the future of the patent and trademark office .

other recommendations led to administrative actions to improve government programs .

for example , based on our work: doe postponed and later canceled an unneeded waste vitrification project at its hanford site , reducing costs $823.3 million .

doe strengthened its controls over the amount and type of litigation expenses it will reimburse its contractors , resulting in a savings of $25 million .

nrc established criteria for determining when states' radiation regulatory programs are in compliance with nrc's requirements and developed procedures for suspending or terminating certain state programs that are in non - compliance .

doe began consolidating the purchase of laboratory analyses and , since then , has experienced a 30 percent reduction in its costs .

doe developed a strategic plan for spending u.s. funds to upgrade soviet - designed nuclear reactors .

nsf terminated its academic research infrastructure program , as a savings of $50 million .

the forest service took action — for the first time ever — to recover the costs of granting special use permits within the national forests even though it had authority to do so since 1952 .

the bureau of reclamation took action to recoup or share future costs to operate and maintain recreation facilities at reclamation projects .

the department of the interior adopted regulations to strengthen its ability to prevent unauthorized activities on hardrock mineral claims on federal lands .

the department of interior revised its regulations to ensure that lessees on federal lands will not be issued new coal mining leases unless they have met statutory coal production requirements .

the national park service took action to correct erroneous financial information and made significant progress in its financial reporting .

we designated doe contracting as a high - risk area in 1990 based on its vulnerability for waste , fraud , and abuse .

protecting the environment will remain an important and challenging objective for the nation as we move into the next century .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has designed its new strategic plan to assist the congress with its renewed interest in environmental protection .

since epa's inception more than 25 years ago , the nation has seen and come to expect continued improvements in the quality of its air , water , and other resources .

these improvements , moreover , have come with increasingly higher compliance costs .

further increases are expected .

real spending for environmental compliance grew 7.3 percent in 1994 — according to the government's latest available estimates .

this growth rate represents the largest single - year increase in a decade .

 ( prior year increases were about 3 percent. ) .

in 1994 the nation spent $122 billion in current 1996 dollars on environmental protection — or 3 percent of the gross domestic product .

thus , epa's almost $7 billion budget has a significant impact on the nation's economy .

rising costs , demands for more environmental protection , and efforts to reduce government spending highlight the need for innovative approaches and demonstrated results .

in the past , the nation has taken a strict “command and control” approach toward environmental protection .

under this approach , epa has set specific limitations on pollutant discharges and prescribed , in detail , how these limits are to be met .

while this strategy may have served its purpose in the past , a consensus among industry , regulators , and even some in the environmental community is growing that this approach will not effectively control future sources of pollution .

this prescriptive approach has also strained relationships between epa and the states .

both the congress and epa seem poised to allow states , localities , and business more flexibility to carry out their environmental responsibilities without extensive direction or oversight from epa .

our work has been in the forefront , highlighting our nation's recurring environmental problems and recommending ways in which the congress and epa can effectively address those concerns .

in an effort to seek a more realistic balance between environmental expectations and available resources , we have continued to review epa's efforts to incorporate strategic planning into the agency's management and operations .

this approach would help ensure that limited resources are targeted to high - risk environmental and public health problems .

for example , we have recommended that the agency establish benchmarks for implementing and monitoring a complex project directed towards integrating its management processes for planning , budgeting , and ensuring accountability .

this project's success is important for epa to better measure the costs and results of its programs .

finally , our work over the past several years has stressed the need to adequately fund those programs that address high risks to the public and to adopt more cost - effective methods of achieving environmental results through alternatives and supplements to traditional regulatory approaches , including pollution taxes , pollutant trading , public disclosure of emissions , and pollution prevention .

epa has started to implement these key recommendations — several of which will require years to fully put in place .

also , epa and the congress appear increasingly open to alternatives to traditional regulatory approaches as the environmental statutes go through the reauthorization process .

we designated epa's superfund program management as a high risk area .

the food and agriculture issue area covers the domestic food and agriculture programs at the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the third largest civilian agency in the federal government , with a budget of about $57 billion .

usda , and the food and agriculture industry it supports , is a vital part of the lives of millions of americans .

approximately two - thirds of the department's budget , or about $39 billion , is spent on federal food and nutrition assistance programs for needy citizens .

each year , american agriculture accounts for about 13.5 percent of the gross domestic product and for about 10 percent of all exports .

in addition , about 23 million americans have jobs related to the food and agriculture economy .

in 1997 , many of usda's programs changed dramatically .

many of these changes , most of which were mandated by the congress in 1994 and 1996 , reflect a body of work produced by the food and agriculture issue area , particularly in the farm commodity program , farm credit , and food safety areas .

specifically , usda began implementing the provisions of the 1996 farm bill , which , among other things , pushed farm assistance programs to a more market - oriented approach and strengthened the integrity of the farm lending programs .

usda also began to implement the provisions of hazard analysis and critical control point ( haccp ) , which fundamentally changes the approach to food safety inspections .

additionally , usda's food stamp program has changed significantly as the result of the major changes to federal welfare programs .

while these program changes are occurring , usda is undergoing the most massive reorganization in its history .

during the past year , we have assisted the congress and the department in assessing usda's implementation of these changes .

for example , we reported on conflict - of - interest problems within the newly organized farm service agency's state and county offices ; reported on the progress usda has made in meeting congressionally mandated reorganization and streamlining changes ; identified opportunities for reducing government costs to deliver crop insurance through private sector companies ; analyzed the strengths and weaknesses of options to increase availability of credit to rural america ; evaluated the financial condition of $43 billion loan portfolio held by usda's rural utilities ; evaluated alternatives for improving the delivery of the more than $6 billion federal school meal programs ; and evaluated the impact of the 1996 farm bill on usda's county office workload .

furthermore , during this past year , a number of our prior recommendations have been implemented by usda and the congress .

for example , the following occurred as a result of our work: the congress enacted legislation requiring states to ensure that prisoners are not counted in households for purposes of providing food stamps .

usda will routinely monitor the expenses of crop insurance reinsurance companies to ensure that the administrative expense reimbursement is reasonable for the service provided .

the congress did not provide any budget authority for the enrollment of additional acres in the conservation reserve program in fiscal year 1997 , which reduced the federal budget by $48.6 million , because the program had already reached its legislative acre limit .

the congress combined two usda food distribution programs to streamline administration of these programs .

usda agreed to improve the monitoring and administration of food service management companies' contracts to ensure that these contracts comply with federal requirements .

usda submitted a legislative proposal that would allow it to recover overpayments to farmers regardless of whether the overpayments were made in error or the repayment would cause the farmer a hardship .

we designated usda's farm loan programs as a high risk area in 1992 .

there are more than 300 federal programs and activities , scattered among 28 agencies , that are aimed at providing decent , affordable housing and healthy , vibrant communities .

the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , including the federal housing administration ( fha ) , is the principal federal agency responsible for about 240 of these programs and activities .

other key agencies with housing or community development programs include the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , the rural housing service , the small business administration ( sba ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the congress continues to deliberate significant changes in the structure and functions of some of the aforementioned agencies .

major debate also exists regarding how the federal government should address the housing needs of its citizens , especially in light of welfare reform .

also , heightened sensitivity exists within the congress regarding future budget needs — over $100 billion — for these agencies' programs .

the housing and community development issue area's work has significantly added to congressional debate and decision - making on the future of housing and community development at the federal and state levels .

highlights of some of our work are listed below .

in congressional hearings , we ( 1 ) discussed hud's management deficiencies , its progress on reforms , and remaining challenges ; ( 2 ) questioned the need for hundreds of millions of dollars in potentially duplicative section 8 funding and premature community development aid included in hud's fiscal year 1998 budget request ; ( 3 ) discussed the challenges facing hud's indian housing program ; and ( 4 ) discussed sba's estimates of credit subsidies for the guaranteed business loan and certified development company programs .

in our report on a congressional proposal to dismantle hud , we provided the congress with critical information on the consequences of coupling reduced federal funding with basic changes in the federal role in housing and community development .

our report on hud's portfolio reengineering proposal discussed the potential costs and savings associated with the proposal and key issues that must be considered in formulating legislation on that subject .

our report on hud's $1.58 billion hope vi - urban revitalization demonstration program will assist congressional decisionmakers on the future of this program .

we identified substantial problems with hud's preservation program that need to be addressed , either through program reforms or its termination .

our report on hud's economic development loan fund made recommendations to correct monitoring and information management problems we identified .

we presented the congress with information on the impact of a reduction in fha's insurance coverage on ( 1 ) home mortgage lenders , the home mortgage market , and the types of borrowers served by fha ; ( 2 ) the financial condition of fha's insurance fund ; and ( 3 ) hud's government national mortgage association .

the work we have performed in past years has influenced the congress , hud and its agencies to take actions during fiscal year 1997 that will result in financial benefits and program improvements .

examples of these improvements are shown below .

the congress did not appropriate $845 million to hud for bonus funding during fiscal year 1997 for high - performing grantees in four of its six new block grants since adequate performance measures and supporting information systems had not been developed .

hud , sba , and fema revised their strategic plans to comply more fully with the requirements of the government performance and results act .

hud directed its field offices to discontinue utilities once hud acquires an fha foreclosed property .

this will reduce costs by $5.5 million over a 2-year period .

fha now conducts an annual analysis of recent multifamily rental property loan defaults to test the validity of its loan loss reserve assumptions about defaults , which will allow fha to better estimate its billions of dollars in loan loss reserves .

hud has established procedures to monitor the financial performance of facilities in its nursing home portfolio and issued new program underwriting guidance , which will help prevent loan defaults and make underwriting loans less risky .

fha has established a data base that will allow lenders and investors to evaluate and price the risk of multifamily housing loans and issued new program guidance for participating institutions .

the rural housing service implemented centralized servicing of their single family housing loan portfolio , which will save the federal government about $69.7 million over a 2-year period .

the federal housing finance board issued new regulations that we consider key in ensuring that the federal home loan banks continue to meet their statutory and regulatory obligations under the affordable housing program .

hud has taken steps to improve oversight of approximately 3,000 public housing authorities through training and increased emphasis on mandatory oversight activities .

hud implemented new lead - based paint regulations that will help ensure safe housing and that children are protected from further exposure to lead - based paint hazards .

for surplus properties to be used to shelter the homeless , hhs revised its lease to include language holding the federal government harmless for injuries that may occur .

hud revised its community development block grant regulations that includes an incentive for grantees to fund projects that will produce high quality jobs .

sba has improved its oversight and management of its small business investment company ( sbic ) program , which will help identify financially troubled firms and allow the federal government to recover an estimated $304.4 million in losses .

we identified an error that substantially inflated sba's estimates of the costs of its loans .

correction of this error enabled sba to make $2.47 billion in additional small business loans .

fema has modified its appropriation request to show the estimates of funds required for past disasters , which should prevent depletion of the disaster relief fund and subsequent suspension of disaster assistance to stricken communities .

we have designated hud as a high - risk area in 1994 .

hud's missions have resulted in a department that is intricately woven into the nation's financial and social framework and that interacts with a number of diverse constituencies , such as public housing authorities , private property owners , and nonprofit groups .

hud also spends a significant amount of tax dollars in carrying out its missions .

the total budget outlays for hud's programs were just over $36 billion in fiscal year 1996 , the vast majority of which was for assisted and public housing programs .

hud is also responsible for managing more than $426 billion in mortgage insurance , $497 billion in guarantees of mortgage - backed securities , and about $170 billion in prior years' budget authority for which it has future financial commitments .

in 1994 , we designated hud as a high - risk area because of four long - standing , department - wide deficiencies: weak internal controls , inadequate information and financial management systems , an ineffective organizational structure , and an insufficient mix of staff with the proper skills .

in february 1997 , we reported that hud had formulated approaches and initiated actions to address these deficiencies .

however , we also reported that hud's efforts were far from reaching fruition ; that hud programs continued to pose a high risk to the government in terms of their vulnerability to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement ; that hud needed to complete its corrective actions ; and that hud and the congress needed to work together to implement a restructuring strategy that focuses hud's mission and consolidates , reengineers , or reduces hud's programs so as to bring the department's responsibilities in line with its management capacity .

in june 1997 , hud announced its hud 2020 management reform plan that seeks to realign the agency's programs and activities , increase accountability , and restore the public's trust .

the plan calls for reducing the number of programs or activities from over 300 to 70 ; reducing staffing levels from about 10,600 to 7,500 by the end of fiscal year 2000 ; retraining the majority of staff ; reorganizing the 81 field offices ; modernizing and integrating the financial and management information systems ; developing and strengthening internal controls ; and increasing program monitoring and measurement .

many of the reforms are expected to be implemented by the end of fiscal year 1998 .

transportation issues significantly affect many aspects of our daily lives .

the transportation sector is crucial to maintaining a healthy economy , as well as ensuring our competitiveness in the world markets and serving the expanding demands of our businesses and industries , as well as the american public .

despite the vast federal , state , and local resources that go to maintain this infrastructure , with the forecasted dramatic increase in air travel in the next decade and no slowdown expected in the demand for surface and water transportation , there is concern about the adequacy of the present infrastructure to continue to meet the needs of the traveling public safely .

as detailed below , our work has focused on budget , program management , and safety related issues .

it has influenced the congress , the department of transportation ( dot ) and its agencies to take many actions that should improve transportation safety and the efficiency and the effectiveness of transportation policies and programs .

in the wake of major airline these crashes in 1996 , we provided numerous reports and testimonies which highlighted the need forthe federal aviation administration ( faa ) to undertake actions more quickly to protect the flying public from the threat of explosives .

during 1997 , in response to our recommendations , faa convened consortia at major airports to develop vulnerability assessments and action plans for addressing identified vulnerabilities ; and assessed commercially available explosive detection equipment for screening checked baggage and purchased 54 such systems for deployment at airports .

during 1997 , faa also took action on two of our key open recommendations concerning a long - term national strategy to improve aviation security and monitoring progress in implementing a series of safety improvements .

faa has established short - and long - range target dates to address the recommendations of the white house commission report on aviation safety and security , which provides a comprehensive framework for improving aviation security ; is deploying a computerized training and testing system to improve screener performance ; and created an implementation plan that outlines the objectives for its safety improvements , provides points of contact for each , and links those recommendations to ones made by other faa safety studies .

our work also influenced the congress to enact legislation which impacted aviation funding .

for instance , the congress passed legislation which reinstated the taxes which financed the airport and airway trust fund , averting a major funding shortfall and providing $2.7 billion in tax revenue for fiscal year 1997 .

also , based on our recommendations , the congress eliminated the set - aside funding for reliever airports , resulting in cost reductions of $123 million for fiscal years 1997 and 1998 ; and reduced faa's fiscal year 1997 appropriations by $34.5 million .

finally , in response to findings that faa's culture was contributing to persistent problems in its air traffic control system modernization efforts , faa issued a report entitled “strategy for acquisition culture change.” this report will serve as an important building block toward long - term efforts to change faa's culture .

in 1997 , dot , its agencies , and the congress took action on several recommendations dealing with surface transportation and the coast guard .

for example , dot provided the congress with the estimated cost and funding sources for each of the 55 action items that it identified to improve highway - rail crossing safety ; the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) increased its role in state environmental planning by assisting the council on economic quality in ( 1 ) publishing a handbook that explains how to assess a project's cumulative impact on the environment , and ( 2 ) planning a series of workshops for environmental assessment practitioners on how to use the handbook ; fhwa corrected errors in programming transportation enhancement funds and took steps to ensure that future funds were programmed only for eligible projects ; the congress eliminated a total of $122.6 million in federal funding from two very large transportation projects — san francisco's rapid transit extension to its airport and the los angeles red line subway ; and the congress decided not to fund the coast guard's $6 million request for procurement of additional systems and reduced the agency's 1997 budget request by $15.9 million .

finally , in 1997 , the coast guard took action on our key recommendation to explore less costly alternatives to its plans to expand installation of vessel traffic service systems .

although many actions and initiatives have been taken by the congress , dot , and its agencies in response to our recommendations , some important recommendations remain open and warrant priority attention .

our work has been aimed at strengthening faa's ability to meet its mission of providing safe and efficient air travel .

to this end , we have designated faa's air traffic control modernization , a $34 billion dollar effort to develop and implement over 200 projects ranging from facility upgrades to software - intensive information system projects , as a high risk area and focused our attention on identifying the root causes of past modernization project failures , and making recommendations to correct these problems .

we have also continued to follow - up on past recommendations concerning other aviation safety functions that faa performs .

during this fiscal year , we issued several reports on faa's air traffic control system modernization .

these reports addressed systemic weaknesses in the modernization's management structure and processes , including the organizational placement of the chief information officer , the definition and enforcement of a complete systems architecture , the maturity of software acquisition processes , and the adequacy of cost estimating and cost accounting practices .

faa has acted to address many of the recommendations made in the reports .

during this year , faa implemented our recommendations to improve a key modernization project , which contributed to the project being completed ahead of schedule , as well as our recommendations to improve the quality of the data used by faa's safety analysis system , which will strengthen faa's ability to target limited inspection resources .

each of these accomplishments is discussed below .

we have designated the faa's air traffic control modernization program as a high risk area .

our work on faa's air traffic control modernization showed pervasive and fundamental problems in faa's approach to managing the modernization .

to address these problems , we have made a series of detailed recommendations aimed at correcting key modernization management problems .

our report on faa's system architecture recommended that faa ensure a complete architecture is defined and enforced before faa decides on the architectural characteristics for replacing the host computer system .

we also recommended that faa establish an effective management structure for developing , maintaining , and enforcing the complete air traffic control systems architecture , including adopting a chief information officer ( cio ) structure similar to that required under the clinger - cohen act .

the agency has actions underway to expand on past architectural efforts .

 ( gao / aimd - 97-30 ) our report on faa's cost estimating processes and cost accounting practices found numerous weaknesses .

we recommended that faa institutionalize defined processes for estimating air traffic control projects' costs that include ( 1 ) a corporate memory , ( 2 ) structure approaches for estimating software size and complexity , ( 3 ) cost models calibrated to past experiences , ( 4 ) audit trails that record cost model inputs , ( 5 ) approaches for dealing with cost and schedule constraints , and ( 6 ) data collection and feedback processes .

we also recommended that faa should disclose the inherent uncertainty in all air traffic control projects' official cost estimates presented to the congress and executive oversight agencies , should acquire or develop and implement a managerial cost accounting capability , and should report its lack of a cost accounting capability as a material internal control weakness in the department's fmfia reports .

faa agreed to implement all but the final recommendation .

it has since formed a life cycle cost estimating working group to develop cost estimating processes in line with gao's recommendations ; it has committed to disclosing the inherent uncertainty in projects' cost estimates ; and it plans to implement an initial cost accounting capability by october 1 , 1997 , and a full cost accounting system by october 1 , 1998 .

faa did not implement the final recommendation because it believes that its current lack of a cost accounting capability is not a material weakness .

we disagree and until faa has a full cost accounting capability system , it will continue to lack adequate cost information needed to effectively manage air traffic control system acquisitions .

disclosure of such a management control weakness is one of the objectives of the fmfia , and therefore should be reported as a material weakness .

 ( gao / aimd - 97-20 ) our report on faa's software acquisition process maturity reiterated our earlier recommendation for faa to implement a cio structure similar to that specified in the clinger - cohen act and recommended that faa improve its software acquisition processes by ( 1 ) assigning responsibility for software acquisition process improvement to faa's cio , ( 2 ) providing faa's cio with the authority to implement and enforce air traffic control modernization software acquisition process improvements , ( 3 ) requiring the cio to develop and implement a formal plan for air traffic control software acquisition process improvement based on gao's software acquisition capability maturity model ( sa - cmm ) evaluation results , ( 4 ) allocating adequate resources to ensure that planned initiatives are implemented and enforced , and ( 5 ) requiring that , before being approved , every air traffic control modernization acquisition project have software acquisition processes that satisfy at least sa - cmm level 2 requirements .

faa has efforts underway to address some of the recommendations .

 ( gao / aimd - 97-47 ) see also transportation and telecommunication issue area of this chapter .

the education and employment issue area focuses on the nation's educational efforts — from preschool through higher education programs — and its efforts to develop skilled workers , link potential workers with employment , and ensure basic workplace protections .

the quality of life in this country and our ability to compete in the international marketplace are heavily influenced by the nation's investment in educational and employment programs .

the departments of education and labor are the federal agencies with primary responsibility for overseeing this investment .

working with state and local governments , the federal government invests over $60 billion annually to promote access to quality education and to advance opportunities for productive employment under safe and equitable conditions .

our education work continues to alert the congress and executive branch agencies to important issues .

in this regard , the next section discusses the multibillion dollar federal student financial aid programs — one of the high - risk areas that gao has identified as being vulnerable to waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement .

our latest high - risk series report summarizes and updates both our continuing concerns about the department of education's vulnerabilities in managing and overseeing the student aid programs as well as progress in strengthening the programs' fiscal and management control systems .

our work on proprietary schools revealed that students are obtaining federal student financial aid for training in occupations with a surplus of trained workers .

in may 1997 , we reported the potential inability of the district of columbia public schools to manage the magnitude of work involved in doing repairs before the 1997-98 school year .

as a result , a request for supplemental federal funds for this purpose was withdrawn , creating a $37 million savings for taxpayers .

we have also provided the congress information on numerous other education topics , including the existence of multiple federal youth programs , comparative per pupil funding in poor and wealthy school districts , the relationship between school performance and reliance on federal student financial aid in the proprietary school sector , comparative levels of activity in the direct and guaranteed student loan programs , and the role of state commissions in implementing the americorps national service program .

the focus of our workforce skills and jobs work has been on identifying ways in which federal programs can better assist workers to acquire the skills they need to become economically self - sufficient and help employers recruit and hire qualified employees .

our work on various aspects of job corps has been a major part of this effort .

for example , we reported on the extent to which job corps participants are served in centers located within their state of residence and the job corps program capacity within each state relative to the number of participants from that state .

with respect to the employment service , which is administered jointly by the department of labor and the states , we recommended that the secretary of labor work with the states to identify and solve problems affecting employment service quality and performance .

as a result , the labor department now recognizes states as partners in program management .

several employment service revitalization projects involve state and local partners as standard operating practice in efforts to improve program performance .

with respect to worker protection , our work has focused on the maintenance of workplace protections for employees while minimizing the regulatory compliance burden on employers .

our work played a major role in the development of recent initiatives that the department of labor's occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) took to improve its policies and procedures .

we recommended that osha promulgate a regulation requiring employers to submit evidence of the corrective actions taken to abate safety and health hazards .

on march 31 , 1997 , osha issued an abatement verification regulation requiring employers to document the corrective actions that have been taken to abate hazards .

we also recommended that osha implement procedures for ensuring that employers accurately record occupational injuries and illnesses .

in response , osha has initiated a records audit program under which it will conduct 250 record audits each year .

in addition , we recommended the national labor relations board identify labor law violators who receive federal contracts .

procedures have been established for the board to obtain tax identification numbers , which will allow the board to use treasury department records to determine if a labor law violator is also a federal contractor .

these procedures will enable the national labor relations board to use federal administrative and income tax refund offsets to enforce compliance with orders to restore wages .

further , in other work involving unemployment insurance , we made recommendations that would prevent military reservists from being overpaid in unemployment insurance benefits .

we recommended that the components of the military notify all reservists of their income - reporting responsibilities with respect to state unemployment insurance benefits in a message included on their leave and earnings statement .

such messages are now included annually in reservists' leave and earnings statements .

we also recommended that the department of labor provide assistance to state unemployment insurance programs in reviewing the administrative forms or procedures used to gather information about a prospective or continuing claimant's wages and making revisions to clearly identify to claimants the types of reserve income they must report for the offset of benefits .

the department has provided assistance through correspondence .

finally , we reviewed several of the draft strategic plans that federal agencies were required to prepare under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) .

the agencies used many of our observations and suggestions to produce substantially improved final plans .

for example , we highlighted numerous ways labor's draft plan could be improved so that labor could most benefit from this strategic planning process and be in compliance with the results act .

in a letter to the house committee on education and the workforce transmitting a revised version of its plan , labor noted that our findings provided the impetus and guidance to advance its plan .

the final plan addressed many concerns we had raised .

as a result of the improvements made in labor's plan and in others , the agencies will now be able to take greater advantage of the strategic planning process envisioned by the act and be in a better position to manage their organizations .

we have designated student financial aid as a high - risk area .

the veterans' affairs and military health care issue area is responsible for gao's evaluations of health care directly provided by the federal government as well as nonhealth benefits provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

our work on health care delivery focuses primarily on the services provided to over 34 million veterans and military beneficiaries by va and dod through their $32 billion systems of hospitals , clinics , and managed care contracts .

we also evaluate health care provided by the indian health service and bureau of prisons .

for va nonhealth benefits , our evaluations address disability compensation , pensions , vocational rehabilitation , and life insurance .

these programs serve over 3 million veterans and cost about $18 billion a year .

rising health care costs and substantial budget deficits have prompted major congressional concerns about whether these agencies are delivering quality health care to their beneficiaries as efficiently and cost - effectively as possible .

the downsizing of the military forces and the declining but aging veteran population has also prompted a concern about the structure of dod and va health delivery and va's benefits systems .

our objectives are to ( 1 ) identify opportunities to improve existing va and dod health care systems' and va benefit programs' management and accountability ; ( 2 ) assess efforts to structurally reform va and dod health care and va benefits systems to better accomplish their missions ; ( 3 ) evaluate the implementation of , and lessons learned from , managed health care strategies in va and dod ; and ( 4 ) determine whether federal agencies are effectively serving the unique health care needs of special populations .

we reported that dod resource - sharing arrangements with tricare support contractors were resulting in about 5 percent of the estimated $700 million in new savings , potentially causing financial losses for both dod and the contractors and higher tricare costs .

we recommended that dod pursue promising resource sharing arrangements while also seeking alternatives to resource sharing in its existing and future contracts .

we also recommended that dod continue to focus on implementing needed contract change order process improvements , and to link tricare contractors' administrative payments to actual health care costs .

dod is in the process of improving its tricare contracting procedures .

 ( gao / hehs - 97-130 and gao / hehs - 97-141 ) also of key importance are our recommendations that dod begin gathering certain data on who is using dod health care under the tricare program , as well as dod's success in providing timely access to its beneficiaries .

this data will be critical in the eventual evaluation of tricare's overall success .

 ( gao / hehs - 96-128 ) va has struggled for years to develop a method for equitably allocating resources among its facilities nationwide .

to enhance the potential for success of va's new allocation system — the veterans equitable resource allocation system , we recommended that va ( 1 ) develop more timely and detailed indicators of changes in key system workload measures and medical care practices , and ( 2 ) improve oversight of veterans integrated services networks' allocation of resources to their facilities to help ensure that veterans receive equitable access to appropriate care .

 ( gao / hehs - 97-178 ; gao / hehs - 96-48 ) va hospitals too often serve patients whose care could be more efficiently provided in alternative settings , such as outpatient clinics or nursing homes .

in july 1996 we testified and reported that va facilities could save billions by reducing nonacute admissions and days of care in va hospitals .

toward this end , we recommended that va establish an independent , external preadmission certification program for hospitals .

on the basis of our recommendation , va has directed its veterans integrated services networks to establish preadmission certification programs .

however , the program va established did not involve contracts with independent external reviewers or establish any financial risk / incentives for va physicians to adhere to the review findings .

 ( gao / hehs - 96-121 ) as the number of veterans aged 65 and older increases , nursing home care is becoming an increasingly important health care service .

as part of va's ongoing efforts to improve nursing home resource management decisions , we recommended that va more accurately accumulate and report nursing home costs , assess the availability of community nursing home resources , and identify locations where current reimbursement rates are not competitive .

 ( gao / hehs - 97-27 ) in an effort to enhance veterans' access to health care and place more emphasis on primary care , va has begun to establish free - standing outpatient clinics .

in doing so , va has identified what could be a cost - effective way to enhance the availability of health care , especially for veterans residing in underserved areas .

however , va has not developed a plan to ensure that outpatient clinics are established in an affordable manner .

we recommended that va provide the congress with a report that presents the overall va plan and time schedule for the systemwide establishment of outpatient clinics to assist congress in determining the affordability of the va plan .

va has stated its intent to establish a work group to develop a plan for the systemwide establishment of outpatient clinics .

 ( gao / hehs - 97-7 ) three va - administered life insurance programs have and for the foreseeable future will continue to have sufficient excess funds to pay their own administrative costs .

this would save an estimated $27 million annually in appropriated monies .

in order to pay for this , veterans' annual dividends ( which currently range from $274 to $373 ) would be reduced by about $10 .

insured veterans have no statutory or contractual right to excess funds .

however , because the law now requires the government to pay the administrative costs , a legislative change would be required to allow these programs to pay their own administrative costs .

thus , in march 1992 we recommended that the congress amend 38 u.s.c .

1982 to require that the three va insurance programs pay administrative costs from excess interest income .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-42 ) in response to our recommendations focusing on preventing overpayments in compensation and benefits claims , va is determining the causes of overpayments and developing strategies for targeting preventive efforts .

 ( gao / hehs - 95-88 ) .

our work on the nation's public and private health insurance programs encompasses some of the most important and expensive issues facing the country .

medicare and medicaid are the primary insurers for more than 70 million people and the federal government will spend an estimated $315 billion on these programs in fiscal year 1997 with the states contributing an additional $72 billion to medicaid .

although enactment of the balanced budget act of 1997 shored up the medicare hospital insurance trust fund , extending its expected depletion data from 2001 to 2010 , the program still faces longer term problems with the aging of the baby boom generation who will begin turning 65 in 2010 .

as the main insurer of long - term care , medicaid also will be facing increased costs as the population ages , and especially as the number of those over 85 increases .

we continued to assess the ongoing transition in the medicare and medicaid programs from fee - for - service to various forms of managed care , including the effects of this evolution on the insured as well as on providers of care .

at the same time , we examined new developments in the private insurance sector , helping congressional decision making on issues such as ( 1 ) the new children's health insurance program , authorized by balanced budget act of 1997 , that is envisioned to cover uninsured children with expenditures of $20 billion over 5 years ; ( 2 ) federal efforts to help citizens gain access to insurance through implementation of new provisions enacted in the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ; and ( 3 ) other trends in coverage under employer - sponsored health plans , such as decreasing coverage for retirees .

one unifying theme to much of our work this year was a focus on improving the design of public health insurance programs .

during the congress' consideration of the balanced budget act of 1997 , we provided , through reports and testimonies , many suggestions for how medicare and medicaid reform proposals could be made more effective , the kinds of issues that needed to be addressed , and information on the likely effects of actions .

we also raised a number of issues surrounding the design of prospective payment systems for medicare home health and skilled nursing facility services including selection of the unit of service for payment purposes , the adequacy of current data for rate - setting purposes , the importance of utilization and quality monitoring systems under prospective payment , and the potential effect of payment systems design decisions on these monitoring systems .

we addressed problems with how medicare sets payment rates for health maintenance organizations and the need for enhanced monitoring of , and furnishing beneficiaries more information about , these organizations .

many of these matters were addressed in the final legislation .

gao also provided key information on a public health insurance design issue that preceded the landmark balanced budget act of 1997 provisions .

under 1993 legislation , hhs had been required to establish a data bank containing information on about 160 million employees and their dependents covered by employer group plans .

its purpose was to identify those medicare and medicaid beneficiaries with other insurance that they should have used to pay medical bills before drawing on their medicare or medicaid coverage .

in 1994 and 1995 , we reported and testified that the proposed data bank would create an avalanche of unnecessary paperwork for both hcfa and employers and would likely achieve little or no savings while costing millions .

in fiscal year 1997 , congress repealed the medicare and medicaid coverage data bank , resulting in identifiable budgetary savings of $55 million .

in another area , the debate over the creation and design of a children's health insurance program last year , a critical issue was how to allocate federal monies to the states , particularly because the new program — unlike medicaid — has a limit on funding .

we provided information to the congress and assisted in devising a method of allocating federal funds to the states .

we also provided assistance in the revision of an older americans act formula for allocating federal monies among the states to assist the elderly with independent living .

in addition , we assisted the substance abuse , mental health services administration in implementing an improved cost of services indicator to be used as a criterion for allocating federal funds among the states .

we also provided important information to congress showing the share of federal dollars — in the form of state medicaid disproportionate share payments — that were going to institutions for mental diseases .

limits on such payments , which became part of the budget agreement , will result in substantial savings in future years .

we designated medicare as a high - risk area .

the health services quality and public health issue area focuses on evaluating access to high - quality health care and on measuring the outcomes and effectiveness of federally funded health and medical programs , research , and regulatory activities .

gao's work on health services quality and public health issues concentrates on: evaluating whether the programs administered by public health service agencies are ensuring the public's health efficiently and effectively , assessing opportunities for ensuring the quality of health care under fee - for - service and managed care payment arrangements , assessing opportunities for improving the nation's access to health care and improving accountability , and appraising the implications of emerging biomedical research , health care technologies , and information systems .

in the course of our work , we have examined the ongoing transformation of u.s. health care , its effects on local markets and public health institutions , information about health care quality , and the performance of public health agencies .

the federal public health agencies , including the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the national institutes of health , the centers for disease control and prevention , the health resources and services administration , the substance abuse and mental health services administration , the indian health service , the agency for health care policy and research , and the office of public health and science ( formerly the office of the assistant secretary for health ) , spend $24 billion annually .

more efficient and effective use of these resources could improve agency performance in promoting the public's health .

income security programs operating through the social security administration ( ssa ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of labor ( dol ) account for nearly 40 percent of all federal spending .

millions of americans rely upon programs like social security , disability insurance ( di ) , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , and various means - tested programs for financial support and services .

in addition , americans are dependent on dol to provide oversight of private pension plans , an important source of income for millions of retired workers .

our work provided information and recommendations directed at ( 1 ) ensuring that public assistance program funds are spent efficiently and protected from fraud and abuse , ( 2 ) improving ssa's service to the public at reduced cost , ( 3 ) evaluating the adequacy of social security and public and private pension systems for future retirees , ( 4 ) redesigning the nation's disability programs to provide disabled people with greater opportunities to work , ( 5 ) monitoring implementation of the 1996 welfare reform legislation , and ( 6 ) assessing government efforts to protect children's welfare .

the work has contributed significantly to legislative and executive actions that will result in financial savings and improvements in program efficiency and cost effectiveness .

for example , relying on our analysis of weaknesses in administering the individualized functional assessment , as a part of last year's welfare reform law , congress eliminated the individualized functional assessment as a basis for awarding benefits to disabled ssi children .

specifically , ssi eligibility criteria for disabled children have been tightened , and less severely impaired children are no longer eligible for ssi .

as a result , ssa anticipates removing 135,000 children from the disability rolls and awarding benefits to fewer children , at an estimated savings of nearly $5.4 billion over the next 6 years .

based on the results of our work , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 contained a provision that allows states to use recoupment to collect any food stamp overpayments , including those caused by agency error .

this provision will result in a yearly $40 million savings from 1997 through 1999 and a yearly $45 million savings from 2000 through 2002 .

our work has resulted in several actions taken to improve ssa's disability claims process .

for example , in response to our recommendations , ssa revised its implementation strategy for redesigning its disability claims process to address major program delays and management obstacles .

it reduced the number of initiatives and selected those critical in producing significant measurable reductions in claims - processing time and administrative costs to ensure that dramatic results could be achieved .

further , we had reported that the management of the administrative law judges underlies many of the problems affecting ssa's disability programs and that ssa had not consistently defined what actions it could legally employ to better manage administrative law judges' activities .

citing our work , the commissioner of ssa requested a review of any conflict between administrative law judges' decisional independence and ssa's management authority over them .

as a result of the review , ssa's authority in setting program policy and ensuring those policies are carried out was clarified .

this authority also included the ability to establish production targets and similar goals critical to addressing the appeals backlog .

finally , we reported that ssa's short term disability plan had enhanced the office of hearings and appeals' ability to dispose of appealed cases , helped decrease the number of cases awaiting a written decision , and reduced processing time for some cases .

based on our recommendation , ssa extended the short term disability plan's key initiatives , which will result in ssa's disposing of approximately 39,000 additional cases between january 1 , 1997 , and september 30 , 1997 .

we have designated the supplemental security income program as a high - risk area .

americans continue to rank crime and fear of crime as top national concerns .

the administration of justice issue area focuses on the federal role in protecting the public .

we provide analysis and information on , and recommendations for improvements to , federal criminal justice programs .

within our purview are issues related to ( 1 ) law enforcement ; ( 2 ) grant programs supporting criminal justice research and evaluation and assisting states and localities in meeting their public safety needs ; ( 3 ) immigration ; and ( 4 ) litigative and judicial activities .

criminal justice program responsibilities cross the jurisdictions of several federal departments and agencies , and they involve close interaction with state and local law enforcement officials , as well as private academicians and researchers .

as a result , a broad theme of our work is to seek coordination among policymakers across jurisdictions to avoid duplication and put available resources to the most effective use .

we designated the federal government's management of its asset forfeiture programs as a high - risk area .

the federal management and workforce issue area focuses on cross - cutting management , workforce , and statistical issues .

these include government performance goals and measurement , restructuring and downsizing , regulatory reform , privatization , oversight of the civil service , human resource management , and the quality , reliability , and dissemination of census and other social and economic statistical data .

agencies within the purview of the issue area are the executive office of the president , the office of management and budget , office of personnel management , merit systems protection board , office of special counsel , federal labor relations authority , office of government ethics , department of commerce , government printing office , bureau of labor statistics , library of congress , and the national archives .

however , managerial , personnel , and statistical / information issues involve all other agencies as well .

in 1997 , gao continued to contribute to congressional oversight of the implementation of the landmark government performance and results act ( known as gpra or the results act ) and the use of the act to improve decisionmaking .

the issue area's support for congress was centered on three key efforts: ( 1 ) assisting congress as it reviewed agencies' draft strategic plans , highlighting the key strategic planning issues most in need of sustained attention , ( 2 ) providing congress with information and perspectives on how the results act can be used to improve congressional decisionmaking , and ( 3 ) assessing agencies' progress in implementing the act .

most prominently , our june 1997 report on the prospects for effective implementation of the results act showed the progress that had been made during the act's pilot phase , but also pinpointed the key challenges that remain .

in addition to work on the results act , we analyzed other major management initiatives as well .

for example , the issue area's often cited work on states' experiences with public sector privatization initiatives has been used within congress to consider how best to structure federal efforts .

we also testified on initiatives to bring a more market - like orientation to federal management and the proposed creation of performance based organizations .

in response to recommendations in gao's report on 185 “reinvention labs” established under the national performance review ( npr ) , an npr task force announced that the national academy of public administration would serve as a needed clearinghouse for propagation of validated operational improvements .

we have also contributed to oversight of the federal regulatory system .

for example , the unified agenda of federal regulatory and deregulatory actions is used to satisfy the requirements of section 610 of title 5 , which requires agencies to identify the rules it will review pursuant to the regulatory flexibility act during the next 12 months to determine whether they should be amended , rescinded , or continued .

however , we concluded that the size of the unified agenda makes it difficult for the public to locate those items that are being reviewed .

therefore , we recommended that the unified agenda contain an index or special section for rules that agencies plan to review .

in june 1997 , the administrator of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs notified all regulatory policy officers that the october 1997 edition of the unified agenda would have a separate index for section 610 entries .

during 1997 , congress and the executive branch continued to press for a more streamlined , effective , and efficient civil service system .

trimming the federal workforce continued , but we found that six agencies' fiscal year 1997 buyouts were better planned and implemented than was generally the case among non - defense agencies in 1994 and 1995 .

these agencies generally linked their buyouts to achieving specific organizational objectives and implemented their buyout programs in ways that tended to increase savings .

indeed , based on our analysis of five agencies where demographic data was readily available , we estimated that by using buyouts to separate 887 employees , three agencies generated over $3.75 million more in fiscal year 1997 savings than if they had used reduction - in - force .

the two remaining agencies we examined will start accruing savings in fiscal year 1998 .

the improvements in agencies' buyouts came on the heels of our earlier work which found that buyouts typically offer greater savings than reductions - in - force .

it also followed our work demonstrating that agencies needed better workforce and strategic planning to guide their downsizing decisions .

congress incorporated requirements for such planning in recent buyout legislation .

although downsizing has reduced the federal workforce to levels not seen since the 1960s , the federal government remains a major employer with attendant personnel management concerns .

we published several reports that contributed to deliberations on possible changes to federal compensation and benefits .

for example , our report comparing federal physicians compensation under title 5 and compensation of physicians in private practice and under other federal pay plans contributed to congress' decision to reauthorize physicians' comparability allowances .

our seven reports on federal retirement program issues , including our comparison of federal and private sector retirement program benefits and our analyses of options for potential budgetary savings , added a factual foundation and valuable perspectives for decisions affecting this core element of the federal employee compensation system .

as agencies move toward the results act mandate of managing for results and being held accountable for achieving those results , agencies are increasingly interested in gaining greater flexibility in the management of their human resources .

dod and the internal revenue service ( irs ) are but two of the largest agencies seeking revamped personnel systems more tailored to their circumstances .

our report on the excepted service profiled the agencies already having statutory flexibilities differing from those available under title 5 and identified the complexities of determining whether those flexibilities have paid off in improved performance .

in the information and statistics area , we issued reports detailing the governmentwide costs of subscriptions and news clippings , as well as the costs and distribution of government - maintained web sites on the internet .

we also contributed to the growing congressional debate on the best way to conduct the 2000 census , concluding that incomplete information on the effects of the census bureau's plan to incorporate sampling into its design was contributing to its inability to reach agreement with congress over the design and funding .

we designated the 2000 decennial census as a high - risk area. .

we reported in 1994 that one reason for agencies' lack of compliance with the regulatory flexibility act is that the act does not expressly authorize the small business administration ( sba ) to develop criteria for agencies to follow in reviewing their rules .

although the act says sba should monitor agencies' compliance , sba has not issued guidance defining key terms in the act .

therefore , we recommended that , if congress wishes to strengthen the implementation of the act , it should consider amending the act to provide sba with clearer authority and responsibility to interpret the act's provisions .

although the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act of 1996 made several changes to the regulatory flexibility act , it did not clarify sba's authority or responsibility to interpret the act's provisions .

 ( gao / ggd - 94-105 ) in reviewing the fiscal year 1997 buyout programs of six agencies , we found that they had been better managed than was generally the case governmentwide during the 1994 and 1995 non - defense buyout window .

however , we also concluded that opportunities for still further savings may have been identified if omb had required agencies to not only estimate the savings generated by buyouts , but to compare them to estimated savings produced by alternative separation strategies , such as reductions - in - force .

to achieve the full potential savings consistent with other organizational objectives , we recommended that the director of omb require all agencies to include in any future requests for buyouts information comparing the costs and savings of buyouts versus other separation strategies for the separation year and a reasonable number of subsequent years for which accurate assumptions and estimates could be made .

 ( gao / ggd - 97-124 ) in the area of equal employment opportunity , our recommendations addressed the guidance that the equal employment opportunity commission provides to federal agencies for affirmative employment planning .

according to the commission , it has made substantial revisions to its proposed management directive and continues to discuss these changes with the department of justice .

once these discussions are complete and the proposed directive is approved within the commission , the directive will be sent to external agencies for comment .

 ( gao / ggd - 91-86 , gao / t - ggd - 92-2 , gao / ggd - 94-71 ) we reported in 1992 that the basic design of the decennial census had exhausted its potential for counting the population accurately and cost - effectively .

we reported also that the key to a successful reform effort would be vigorous congressional oversight .

we therefore recommended that congress schedule oversight hearings throughout the decade to ensure that consistent progress is being made in designing and planning the 2000 census .

in a 1997 report we concluded that the bureau of the census needed to provide congress with detailed data , updated as necessary to meet the objective of full and open disclosure , on the expected effects of the bureau's census design proposals .

 ( gao / ggd - 97-142 ) we reported that the current practice of updating the expenditure weights used in the consumer price index only every 10 years was a source of inaccuracy in this key economic indicator .

we recommended that the commissioner of the bureau of labor statistics update the weights on a more frequent schedule .

 ( gao / ggd - 98-2 ) .

financial institutions and markets continue to change at a rapid rate .

banks and thrifts , which used to be clearly distinct institutions , perform increasingly similar functions .

in an attempt to increase profits and maintain a customer base , banks are increasingly taking on new lines of business — such as mutual funds and securities underwriting — which make them look more like securities firms .

the products offered by banks , securities firms , and insurance companies look more and more similar .

as markets become more global , foreign and domestic institutions perform similar functions and interact with savers and investors in similar ways .

our work explores the implications of these changes for the industry , its customers , and its regulators .

we examine these issues to provide information , analyses , and recommendations to congress and regulators on changes in and oversight of the financial services industry .

we analyze: ( 1 ) various emerging issues in the financial services industry ; ( 2 ) regulatory practices to see if they work as intended ; and ( 3 ) the continued appropriateness of federal policies governing financial institutions and markets .

our work has improved the operation of the financial system as a whole and individual components of it .

our primary mission — work on safety and soundness issues — helps protect the taxpayer from the need to rescue one or more financial institutions or sectors .

our work also has an investor / customer focus to help ensure that financial services industry customers get what they pay for .

our work on agency operations has led to improvements in their effectiveness .

our recent review of the operations of the federal reserve suggests that the system is facing a number of major challenges that could affect the nature , size , and distribution of its activities and resources .

we found that the system needs to become more cost conscious and that it should undertake a thorough re - examination of its mission , structure , and work processes to assure that it is operating as efficiently and effectively as possible .

our work on over - the - counter derivatives market has provided the framework for debating the complex issue .

our report suggested that linkages among major u.s. dealers , especially bank dealers , represented a potential threat to the financial system if one or more major dealers were to fail or withdraw from the market .

the report also identified major gaps in the regulatory structure .

our work on the federal home loan bank system identified the need for major reform .

we expressed concerns about the system's capital structure and the mixture of voluntary and mandatory members .

we also expressed substantial concern about whether the federal housing finance board could act as an arm's - length regulator , and recommended a single regulator for all three housing - related government sponsored enterprises .

this report helped to spur an ongoing debate in this congress on how to reform the system .

our work focuses primarily on two of the government's largest business entities: the general services administration ( gsa ) , which controls or oversees over $60 billion in annual government spending , and the united states postal service ( usps ) , which has annual revenues of more than $55 billion .

their activities have far - reaching implications for federal agencies and the general public .

through them , the federal government owns and controls assets worth hundreds of billions of dollars and provides goods and services to federal agencies that directly affect mission accomplishment .

also , this past year , our work has involved the activities of other entities , including the treasury , federal communications commission , national oceanic and atmospheric administration , smithsonian institution , kennedy center for the performing arts , library of congress , government printing office , architect of the capitol , federal prison industries , administrative office of the u.s. courts , and governmentwide assignments dealing with construction project labor agreements , user fees , and employee relocation costs .

the reforms that gsa has made in recent years appear responsive to many of the concerns we and npr have continued to express .

gsa is deeply involved in government downsizing and reinvention issues , contracting out some of this effort while adjusting to new leadership .

it has reorganized its public buildings service to separate its policy / oversight and service - provider responsibilities and help facilitate the delivery of real estate services to federal agencies .

we continue to emphasize several key obstacles — such as federal buildings fund shortfalls , budget scorekeeping rules , and the lack of strategic focus and planning — that impede gsa's and the congress' ability to pursue the most cost - effective housing and asset management options for meeting federal space needs and managing existing federal buildings .

key areas of work this past year have involved the design , construction , and use of federal courthouses ; construction of and the housing plan for the ronald reagan federal building and international trade center ; proposed disposal of the toledo federal building ; federal building security upgrades ; and gsa actions to deal with the $846 million federal buildings fund shortfall in fiscal year 1997 .

our efforts at usps have continued to focus on persistent problems as well as the prospect that major reform legislation may place usps in a more competitive arena with its private - sector counterparts .

the problems include poor labor - management relations , an inability to properly control the receipt of mail and ensure proper revenue collection , as well as the need to control costs in order to reap projected benefits from major automation investments .

in both reports and testimonies , we have highlighted the major issues facing usps: ( 1 ) how competition will affect both the service's revenues , costs , and rates ( domestically and internationally ) and the federal government's role in mail delivery ; ( 2 ) how poor controls have resulted in revenue losses and mismanagement in some major purchases ; and ( 3 ) how efforts to improve labor - management relations have been fragmented and difficult to sustain .

our postal work made major contributions to the postal reform legislation reintroduced in 1997 .

we also handled a wide range of congressional requests covering diverse agencies and issues .

for example , we reported that , contrary to reports in the press , the library of congress did not violate the buy america act in its contracts to convert printed materials into electronic formats , portions of which were done in jamaica and the philippines .

in the currency area , we testified that pending proposals to change the denominational mix of the coins and currency could significantly affect capital investment plans of the mint and the bureau of engraving and printing ; treasury studies on merging the two agencies were inconclusive ; treasury has not pursued further outsourcing of money production ; and strategic plans of the mint and the bureau do not consider total government production and distribution costs or alternative mixes of coins and currency .

in another area , we reported on the potential for duplication of audit efforts resulting from a mandated gao audit of the kennedy center's use of appropriated funds .

further , we reported on the center's development of a facility management structure and the related systems required to manage and operate the facility since congress gave the center's board responsibility for operation and maintenance and capital improvement in 1994 .

examples of our contributions this past year include the following: gsa ended its virtual monopoly in providing leased office space to federal agencies by delegating authority to lease general purpose space , regardless of geographic location , to the heads of all federal agencies .

congress approved a measure , which the president signed , barring the payment of surcharges to sponsors of commemorative coins until all of the mint's costs associated with that coin are recovered .

the postal service implemented actions to reduce express mail corporate account losses , which amounted to about $800,000 in revenue during fiscal year 1995 .

the smithsonian institute and the library of congress collaborated in the acquisition of artifacts , thereby ensuring that the government's cost of acquiring material for its collections were not driven up by competitive bidding by the agencies .

the national archives implemented a new systemic approach to identify customers' needs , compare those needs with services provided , and examine how to meet shortfalls .

gsa increased direct delivery of supplies by adding supply system features such as ( 1 ) ordering direct - delivery products over the internet , ( 2 ) lowering the direct - delivery threshold for items that have limited shelflives , and ( 3 ) adding a supplies contract that promotes the use of a contractor to supply agencies directly .

the tax policy and administration issue area's mission is to provide congress , the executive branch , and the public with timely , accurate , and objective analyses and information to improve our nation's tax system and its administration .

accordingly , this issue area's responsibility encompasses the revenue side of the budget — the $1.4 trillion in tax receipts that finance federal government operations and the $400 billion in tax expenditures used to promote numerous social and economic objectives — and the federal agency responsible for tax administration — the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

the federal treasury will realize over $1.8 billion in increased tax revenues and cost reductions over 2 years as a result of statutory and administrative changes we recommended during the last few years .

of that total , ( 1 ) about $1.1 billion comes from a phaseout of the section 936 tax credit in u.s. possessions ; ( 2 ) about $514 million from a reduction in the fiscal year 1997 tax system modernization appropriation ; ( 3 ) about $90 million from the cancellation of irs' corporate accounts processing system ; ( 4 ) about $82 million comes from additional tax collections by sending semiannual reminder notices to delinquent taxpayers ; and ( 5 ) about $27 million comes from the termination of a pilot program for private debt collection assistance .

the increased tax revenues represent only one aspect of our work's impact .

for example , in response to our recommendations , ( 1 ) federal agency chief financial officers must certify that procedures for issuing information returns on payments to corporations providing services are in place ; ( 2 ) irs developed a definition of taxpayer complaints ; ( 3 ) irs created the office of the taxpayer advocate ; ( 4 ) irs changed the requirement that treasury's general counsel review all offers - in - compromise greater than $500 ; ( 5 ) irs reduced the volume of its undeliverable mail ; ( 6 ) irs has limited the prior audit protection rule in section 530 ; ( 7 ) irs made changes to improve the processing of undeliverable mail ; ( 8 ) irs initiated a program to use private companies in collecting delinquent debt ; ( 9 ) irs established a government program management office ; and ( 10 ) congressional spending limits for irs' fiscal year 1997 information systems appropriation were approved .

at irs , we designated the problems in the management and collection of billions in taxes and the significant levels of tax filing fraud as two high - risk areas .

over the last decade , irs has been trying to modernize its tax processing systems , which are used to annually collect and account for over $1 trillion in revenue .

irs' efforts to modernize these systems have been largely unsuccessful .

our work has concentrated on identifying the causes of the agency's past modernization failures and recommending solutions to these problems .

our work has also focused on strengthening security over irs' computer resources and facilities and its taxpayer data .

in july 1995 , we identified serious management and technical weaknesses in the modernization program that jeopardize its successful completion , recommended many actions to fix the problems , and designated irs' modernization as a high - risk area .

during this year , we closely monitored irs' progress in implementing these recommendations , particularly its efforts to develop and enforce a systems architecture , develop and enforce disciplined investment management processes , and implement mature software development and acquisition processes .

through report recommendations , testimonies , and congressional briefings , we worked to restrict irs spending until it fully implements these recommendations , thereby putting in place the internal capability to effectively invest in systems .

additionally , this year we identified and recommended corrective action for many weaknesses in irs' computer security program that place tax processing operations at risk of being disrupted and taxpayer data being improperly used , modified , or destroyed .

irs has started implementing virtually all of our recommendations to improve its modernization management and technical capability and to strengthen computer security .

this has resulted in hundreds of millions in cost reductions through the cancellation of poorly managed modernization projects — initial steps in improving modernization management and technical capabilities , greater attention to computer security , and elimination of some computer security weaknesses .

each of these accomplishments is discussed below .

we have designated irs tax system modernization as a high - risk area .

our work on tax systems modernization identified pervasive management and technical weaknesses with irs' approach to managing its modernization .

it also highlighted that irs does not have disciplined software acquisition practices and requisite financial and management controls to effectively manage all of its contractors .

our work on computer security found many serious weaknesses remain uncorrected , leading us to conclude that irs' current approach to computer security is ineffective .

to address these problems , we made a series of specific recommendations aimed at correcting key modernization management and technical weaknesses and strengthening the effectiveness of irs' management of computer security .

our report on irs' modernization weaknesses recommended that irs ( 1 ) formulate a comprehensive business strategy for maximizing electronic filings ; ( 2 ) improve irs' strategic information management by implementing a process for selecting , prioritizing , controlling , and evaluating the progress and performance of all major information systems investments , ( 3 ) implement disciplined , consistent procedures for software requirements management , quality assurance , configuration management , and project planning and tracking , and ( 4 ) complete and enforce an integrated systems architecture , including security and data subarchitectures .

in june and september 1996 , we reported that although irs had initiated actions to implement our recommendations , none had been fully implemented .

over the past year , we have reported to the congress that although irs continues make some progress in correcting its management and technical weaknesses , a great deal remains to be done to fully implement essential improvements specified in our recommendations .

 ( gao / aimd - 95-156 and gao / aimd - 96-106 ) in our report on irs' acquisition of its cyberfile electronic filing system , we recommended , among other things , that the commissioner report to congressional appropriations , authorization , and oversight committees on ( 1 ) the weaknesses in irs' acquisition and financial management processes and controls that permitted cyberfile mismanagement to occur , ( 2 ) actions to correct the weaknesses , and ( 3 ) irs' plans for completing the project .

while irs subsequently canceled the project , it has yet to report to the congressional committees as recommended .

an irs official told us that irs had prepared a report and submitted it to the department of the treasury for approval .

until we can assess the report's contents , we will not know what steps irs has taken to ( 1 ) correct these serious problems and ( 2 ) ensure that it has the disciplined processes and controls in place to effectively acquire and manage all of its contractors .

 ( gao / aimd - 96-140 ) our report on irs' computer security weaknesses recommended that the commissioner ( 1 ) prepare a plan for correcting all the weaknesses identified at the five data processing facilities that we visited as well as identifying and correcting security weaknesses at the other irs facilities , ( 2 ) provide the plan to congressional appropriations , authorization , and oversight committees , ( 3 ) report on irs' progress against the plan in its fiscal year 1999 budget submission , and ( 4 ) identify the computer security weaknesses we found as being material in irs' federal managers' financial integrity act report to treasury .

in addition , because longstanding computer security problems continue to plague irs operations , the report reiterated our prior recommendation that the commissioner , through the deputy commissioner , strengthen computer security management , including reevaluating irs' current approach to computer security , preparing plans for improvement , and reporting the results to the congressional committees cited above .

the report also recommended that the commissioner ( 1 ) ensure that irs completely and consistently monitors , records , and reports the full extent of electronic browsing for all systems that can be used to access taxpayer data and ( 2 ) report disciplinary action taken against employees caught browsing and include these statistics and an assessment of progress in eliminating browsing in irs' annual budget submission .

 ( gao / aimd - 97-49 ) irs is working to correct the computer security weaknesses and implement our recommendations .

for example , irs assigned sole responsibility for computer security , including employee browsing , to a single office within the office of the chief information officer .

in addition , irs provided to congressional committees an action plan for correcting the weaknesses and a report containing the results of its computer security management reevaluation .

irs also has taken the necessary steps to correct some of the identified weaknesses .

taken together , these steps represent a good start for the irs , but a sustained , disciplined effort will be needed to ensure that all the remaining weaknesses are corrected in a timely fashion .

until then , irs runs the risk of its tax processing operations being disrupted and taxpayer data being improperly used , modified , or destroyed .

 ( gao / aimd - 97-49 ) see also chapter 4 , improving justice and general government programs , tax policy and administration issue area and chapter 5 , financial and information management programs , budget issue area .

during fiscal year 1997 , we focused on deficit reduction and opportunities to improve the budgetary information available to policymakers and the public .

we are the primary issue area in gao examining the budget and budget process of the u.s. government .

an important part of our mission is to make gao's work more accessible to and usable by those involved in the congressional budget debate .

the following paragraphs discuss our work in various areas .

our civil agency audit work continues to demonstrate the importance of reliable financial information and effective systems in strengthening accountability and improving control over the federal government's financial resources and program activities .

the preparation and audit of accurate and useful financial statements depends upon the quality , usefulness , and availability of the financial information on which they are based and , ultimately , the adequacy of the underlying systems and related internal controls .

overall , progress is being made .

but much remains to be accomplished to successfully implement the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act — especially as it relates to improving systems and the quality and accuracy of the information maintained and produced by them for decision makers .

during the past year , we focused on two high risk areas — customs financial management and irs financial management .

congress has shown significant interest in both areas in 1997 .

the issue area includes accounting and auditing standard setting in both the public and private sectors .

the issue area also includes audit work at largely independent government agencies referred to as government corporations and mandated assistance related to legislative entities .

long - standing , serious weaknesses in dod's financial operations continue not only to severely limit the reliability of its financial information , but also have resulted in wasted resources , and undermined the department's ability to carry out its stewardship responsibilities .

while dod prepared its first set of dod - wide financial statements for fiscal year 1996 , they were unauditable .

nonetheless , the effort to produce and attempt to audit these statements has generated increased pressure on dod to fix its serious financial problems .

as envisioned by the chief financial officers act of 1990 , and expanded by the government management reform act of 1994 , audited financial statement will provide an annual public scorecard to measure dod's other agencies' progress in resolving financial management deficiencies .

effectively addressing dod's widespread and severe financial management problems is critical to effectively managing the department's vast resources .

dod is responsible for over $1 trillion in assets , 3 million military and civilian personnel , and a budget of an estimated $250 billion for fiscal year 1997 .

we now have a multi - faceted audit approach that focuses on identifying ( 1 ) opportunities to improve dod's ability to comply with current and upcoming financial statement preparation and audit requirements and ( 2 ) actions needed to address the fundamental problems contributing to the department's inability to produce reliable financial information .

we are also continuing to work with the inspectors general at the department of state , aid , and nasa to ensure that financial audit work at these agencies is sufficient , reliable , and conducted in accordance with applicable standards .

this audit approach focuses on promoting more efficient and cost - effective program operations , as well as on strengthening accountability .

our efforts this past year have gone a long way in contributing to this objective .

many of our key recommendations , as outlined in the following section , are intended to help the congress , as well as top dod and other cognizant agencies' officials , to better understand the full extent and nature of the financial management challenges confronting them .

examples of our contributions this past year include: developing an approach for conducting the first world - wide verification of dod's estimated multi - billion dollar investment in mission assets ; improved controls over the dod system used to process payments to hundreds of thousands of dod civilian employees ; correction of errors and related improvements in the overall reliability of the system used to track the air force's billions of dollars invested in aircraft and missiles ; and improvements in nasa's ability to effectively carry out its cost accounting and property accountability responsibilities .

in february 1995 , we designated dod's financial management operations as a high - risk area .

the following are among our most important recommendations that have yet to be fully implemented .

this issue area focuses on four objectives: ( 1 ) improving the quality and use of single audits , ( 2 ) strengthening the inspector general concept , ( 3 ) improving the financial accountability of several federal activities , and ( 4 ) making the intergovernmental auditing process more useful .

we have worked with omb , federal program and ig offices , and state organizations to improve the quality and use of single audits .

the single audit act requires annual audits of federal financial assistance — over $200 billion annually received by state and local governments and nonprofit organizations .

we have worked closely with omb to revise and reissue circular a - 133 , audits of states , local governments , and non - profit organizations , dated june 1997 , and the related compliance supplement that assists non - federal entities and auditors in meeting their responsibilities under the single audit act .

we have met with representatives of ig organizations to determine their intended use of single audit results , and to stress the critical role that single audits often play in the agencywide financial statement audits required by the chief financial officers act .

we also frequently interact with representatives of program and ig offices and state and local organizations to respond to questions on the single audit act in such areas as the use of the recently developed risk - based audit approach and the interpretation of various provisions of circular a - 133 and the related compliance supplement .

federal igs have devoted considerable effort since passage of the ig act in 1978 to establishing controls to ensure compliance with professional standards and to measuring savings and other accomplishments from their work .

at the request of a congressional committee , we recently began a comprehensive review of the current ig concept , including key areas such as strategic planning , performance measures , quality assurance , reporting , expertise , and independence in order to identify and assess opportunities to strengthen igs' effectiveness .

we perform financial audits of several federal activities , such as independent counsels , commemorative coin recipients , and white house operations .

these audits , typically mandated by law , have resulted in numerous recommendations and suggestions that the audited organizations have implemented , including improvements in internal controls over financial operations .

we also review the results of mandated financial audits of federally chartered corporations to ensure that those audits are conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , as required by law .

the issue area provides guidance and support to the national intergovernmental audit forum and 10 regional intergovernmental audit forums .

the forums include federal , state , and local auditors as well as members of the public accounting profession .

the forums have provided the foundation for the development and recognition of professional auditing standards for audits of governmental entities and the means to ensure that those audits help ensure accountability over public funds .

in that regard , the forums have been an excellent resource in developing and implementing recommendations to make the single audit process more useful for program oversight and in preparing and auditing federal agency financial statements .

audits of employee benefit plans are a key safeguard for protecting assets held by plans .

as of 1988 , the most recent year for which we have data , an estimated 5.2 million plans covered by the employee retirement income security act of 1974 had assets of about $1.75 trillion .

the act currently allows plan administrators to exclude from the scope of those audits investments held by certain regulated institutions , such as banks and insurance companies .

the congress has not enacted legislation we recommended to eliminate this limited scope provision in the act .

 ( gao / afmd - 92-14 ) .

the federal government's dependence on computer systems , networks , and electronic records to carry out its work continues to accelerate .

information systems are now integral to virtually every aspect of over $1.5 trillion in annual government operations and spending — from national defense and air traffic control to revenue collection and benefit payments .

yet despite an annual investment of approximately $26 billion for information technology ( it ) products and services , agencies continue to face chronic problems in reducing operating costs , improving performance , supporting sound financial management , and providing quality service to the american public .

our work focuses on the most complex and difficult technology challenges facing the federal government today , including multi - billion dollar , high - risk efforts to modernize government information initiatives to improve mission performance by adopting the best public and private sector practices for strategic information management , the year 2000 problem which , for many agencies , will be the largest project ever managed and implemented by their information resource management organizations , the increasing need for agencies to provide adequate security over the integrity , privacy , and availability of the data they rely on , and the government's ability to use its telecommunications resources to improve service to the public and reduce the cost of operations .

examples of some of our accomplishments include the following .

the bureau of land management has saved millions on its automated land and mineral record system , identified system performance problems , and strengthened testing and evaluation .

the department of education is developing a departmentwide systems architecture to guide the development of its student financial aid systems .

we published a guide for evaluating federal agencies' it investment decision - making which provides agencies with detailed guidance on the best practices for selecting , controlling , and evaluating their information technology projects .

this approach was embodied in the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and in subsequent omb guidance on capital investments in technology .

the department of housing and urban development consolidated several grant management systems to save millions .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration revised its procurement plans for satellites in the geostationary operational environmental satellite program .

specifically , the procurement of follow - on satellites will use open competition .

dod is reengineering temporary duty travel processing , a traditionally wasteful and burdensome operation .

pilot results reported nearly a 100 percent increase in customer satisfaction , a 48 percent decrease in both average cycle time and travel process steps , a 63 percent decrease in average voucher processing time , and a 56 percent decrease in average processing costs .

the congress reduced dod's request for operations and maintenance funds for fiscal year 1996 by $128.5 million .

the u.s. department of agriculture has initiated a moratorium on it purchases and restructured its overall it program .

usda has deferred spending millions on major it investments for its field service centers until business processes are fully reengineered .

nasa has revised its telecommuncations network consolidation strategy with the expectation of achieving cost reductions .

for example , officials at the goddard space flight center estimated that the agency can save an additional $94.5 million , beyond the savings originally estimated for the consolidation effort .

the management of information as well as information technology continues to be a high - risk area for the government .

of particular concern across the government is the year 2000 conversion and information security .

two other multibillion dollar technology programs — dod's corporate information management initiative and the national weather service's modernization — are also designated as high - risk .

the following paragraphs discuss some of the key open recommendations in the areas of information technology , information security , and telecommunications management as well as agency - specific recommendations .

this electronic edition contains the details for gao's open recommendations using “asksam for windows” software .

the software is compatible with microsoft windows 3.1 or microsoft windows 95 and provides several search and retrieval options to find either summaries of key open recommendations or detailed information on products containing open recommendations .

three high - density 3.5 inch installation disks are provided containing all of the software and data for this electronic edition of the status of open recommendations report .

the installation program installs the files necessary to run this software on your hard drive and creates a windows icon that will allow you to run the program .

at least 8mb of ram and 8.3mb of hard disk space are required .

to load the software on your hard drive: 1 .

insert the installation disk labelled “disk 1” into your floppy drive .

2 .

select the file option from the windows menu bar , then select the run option from the drop - down menu .

3 .

in the command line window , type the drive designation of your floppy drive , a colon , a backslash , and the word “install.” for example type “a:\install.” 4 .

click once on the ok button , then follow the instructions that appear on the screen .

in windows , double - click on the open recommendations icon to start the program and display the main menu as shown in figure 1 .

the menu contains three options: report details , issue area summary , and background information .

this option accesses the database containing descriptive information about each gao product with open recommendations including the title , recommendations , an abstract , the gao contact person , addresses , requestors , and the product number .

1 .

select the report details option on the main menu .

the report details menu , shown in figure 2 , will be displayed .

2 .

to quickly select a commonly used word , code , or phrase: select and click on one of five look - up table options listed: committees of interest interested members of congress recommendation addressees gao issue area units subject terms follow the instructions to browse the table you selected , and to select and copy the name , term , or code for your search .

return to the report details menu .

 ( note: you may skip step 2 if you wish to search on a keyword. ) .

3 .

select and click on one of the three output formats for displaying or printing the results: brief list descriptive information full information 4 .

when prompted , depress shift - insert to paste the search term ( that you selected and copied in step 2 ) , enclosing the term in “,” or type in a keyword .

press ok .

this option presents the information contained in the printed copy of the status of open recommendations — the impact of gao's work and key open recommendations , organized by gao's programming units .

1 .

select the issue area summary on the main menu .

2 .

select and click on one of the options: table of contents search issue area by keyword how to print your search results there are two options for printing the results of a search: select file from the menu bar .

select print from the drop - down menu , or depress control / p .

exiting the program to exit the program , choose file from the menu bar , then choose the exit option from the drop - down menu .

detailed information on searching the report details and issue area summary databases may be obtained from the main menu's link to “background information” and the report detail menu's option: “for more information about using this program , click here.” information on formulating searches using the asksam query language is available by clicking on the help option appearing in the windows menu bar .

suggestions or comments about this electronic publication should be directed to: george e. breen , jr. assistant director gao , office of policy voice ( 202 ) 512-6100 fax ( 202 ) 512-4844 e - mailbreeng@gao.gov the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

