this is our annual report on the status of open recommendations resulting from the general accounting office's ( gao ) audits , evaluations , and other review work in federal departments and agencies .

to encourage prompt , responsive actions on our recommendations , we systematically followup on them and annually report on their status .

we are sending copies of this report to the office of management and budget and federal departments and agencies so that they may respond to inquiries about these issues during appropriations and oversight hearings .

we are also sending copies to chairs and ranking minority members of all house and senate committees and subcommittees to better inform them of gao's open recommendations .

in fiscal year 1993 , gao made over 1,600 recommendations .

this report includes summaries highlighting the impact of gao's work and information on the status of all gao recommendations that have not been fully implemented .

this information should help congressional and agency leaders prepare for upcoming appropriations and oversight activities and stimulate further actions to achieve the desired improvements in government operations .

several changes have been made to this year's report .

the printed volume summarizes the impact of gao's work and highlights the key open recommendations .

this volume also includes a set of computer diskettes with details on all open recommendations .

the diskettes have several menu options to help users find information easily .

for example , a user may search for an open recommendation by using product numbers , titles , dates , names of federal entities , congressional committees , or any other word or phrase that may appear in the report .

instructions for operating the electronic edition are at the end of this publication .

the name and telephone number of the gao manager to contact for information or assistance about a product is included on the diskettes .

information or questions not related to a specific product or recommendation should be referred to gao's office of congressional relations on 202 / 512-4400 .

copies of complete gao printed products may be ordered by calling 202 / 512-6000 .

please direct comments , questions , or suggestions for improving this report to lawson “rick” gist , assistant director , office of policy , on 202 / 512-4478 .

given the ongoing reductions in u.s. defense funding , a new relationship is evolving between the government and the defense industry .

our work focused on the major issues related to this changing relationship .

we addressed questions such as the following: ( 1 ) is the defense industrial base being restructured to best serve u.s. security interests ? .

 ( 2 ) is defense technology being effectively maintained and protected ? .

 ( 3 ) is the department of defense ( dod ) reforming its acquisition process to address long - standing problems ? .

 ( 4 ) do dod contracting policies and practices ensure that public funds are spent properly ? .

increased emphasis is being placed on ensuring that as defense downsizing takes place , there is an orderly , efficient , and effective restructuring of the defense industrial base .

we are examining key industrial base activities , as well as the effectiveness of plans to spend $20 billion over the next 5 years , on defense conversion .

we are also examining dod policies and practices to ensure that as efforts to enhance u.s. competitiveness are promoted , critical defense technologies are adequately protected .

dod and the congress continue to pursue proposals to reform the defense acquisition system .

we increased our efforts to evaluate these proposals to ensure that they achieve the benefits intended at reasonable costs .

we also continued our review of dod contracting practices to ensure that they adequately protect the taxpayer against fraud , waste , and abuse .

our reports and testimonies highlighted areas where dod and defense contractor controls were not adequate to protect against improper use of government funds .

for example , our work reviewing contractor overhead charges found examples of defense contractors' charging the taxpayers for costs that were not allowable under federal regulations .

our audit work related to contract overpricing also found that a small percentage of defense contractors were responsible for most contract overpricing .

in addition , we made several recommendations that , if effectively implemented , could save the taxpayers millions of dollars .

for example , in our report on dod operational test and evaluation , we pointed out that substantial savings were available by consolidating existing testing facilities , and we recommended actions to achieve this objective .

the federal acquisition regulation cost principles require defense contractors to identify and exclude unallowable costs from their overhead submissions .

at all six contractors we reviewed , contractors did not exclude all unallowable costs .

for example , in addition to identifying almost $1 million in costs questioned by the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) at these six contractors , we identified about $2 million more in overhead costs that were either expressly unallowable or questionable .

we concluded that the federal cost principles governing allowability for entertainment , employee morale and welfare , and business meetings costs lacked sufficient clarity to ensure consistent and appropriate application .

we also concluded that limited transaction testing by dcaa may have also contributed to the nearly $2 million undetected unallowable or questionable costs .

we recommended that , to address these problems , dod clarify the federal acquisition regulation in some cases and , in other cases , evaluate the cost principles to determine whether additional guidance was needed .

we further recommended that dcaa evaluate the extent to which its field offices needed to spend more time in transaction testing .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-79 ) with the defense industry downsizing , defense companies can make significant cost reductions by incorporating modern technologies and innovative management techniques .

of the 24 defense companies we surveyed , 3 had instituted more - efficient techniques and practices .

savings to dod from such cost reductions can be significant .

one of the defense companies reported reducing work - in - process costs by $80 million and passing the savings on to the government .

competitive market forces may not be sufficient to motivate many defense companies to significantly lower costs , however .

significant progress in this area will require dod efforts to stimulate contractor actions .

we recommended that dod , as part of its efforts to reform the defense acquisition system , identify and eliminate the factors that result in defense contractors not incorporating technologies and management techniques to reduce costs .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-125 ) .

significant challenges face the department of defense ( dod ) and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) in light of the end of the cold war , pressing domestic problems , and the spiraling budget deficit .

while dod has recognized the need to re - engineer and streamline its operations , it continues to have difficulty in implementing effective and efficient programs .

dod needs to change existing management practices , procedures , and culture to overcome long - standing problems .

in addition , as dod closes and realigns military bases as part of its efforts to downsize and restructure its forces and reduce defense spending , it will face increased spending in other areas , such as in environmental cleanup at bases being closed or designated for closure and the destruction of chemical weapons .

a key to managing these emerging , potentially high - cost areas will be in defining the overall costs , alternative management and technology strategies , and proactive steps to avoid similar problems .

nasa also faces major restructuring of its programs and activities .

the overcommitment of the agency's likely budget has created funding uncertainty and the need for major restructuring in some of its largest programs .

our major efforts throughout the year focused primarily on matters associated with affordability issues .

we reported that , agencywide , nasa's major space missions over the last 15 years had required substantially more funding than initially estimated and emphasized nasa's need for an independent cost - estimating capability .

we also continued to devote a significant amount of attention to nasa's attempts to reestablish control over its procurement activities .

in this area , we reported on the agency's efforts to revise its contract for the operation of the jet propulsion laboratory and on the need for nasa to change its policies , procedures , and practices in providing equipment to its contractors .

key areas we focused on in fiscal year 1992 include reducing the defense infrastructure and excess inventory ; identifying opportunities to save money and achieve management efficiencies through new processes ; quantifying the unfunded liabilities facing dod such as environmental cleanup ; and improving nasa management in the areas of program affordability and contracting .

dod and nasa actions are required to implement the following key recommendations that would result in management improvements , operational efficiencies , and dollar savings .

we recommended several actions to improve the implementation of future dod processes for selecting bases for closure and realignment , including taking advantage of cross - service opportunities that could result in a more efficient realignment of support facilities and additional cost savings .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-173 ) in continuing to monitor dod's progress in reducing its inventory , we made several recommendations to avoid unnecessary purchases of supplies and industrial plant equipment .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-124 and gao / nsiad - 93-8 ) we also recommended that , to improve dod's inventory management practices , dod use a quick response , commercial purchasing process that could maintain a constant flow of inventory without maintaining large inventories .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-112 ) we recommended pilot programs and projects to demonstrate the applicability of commercial practices in two areas — military industrial centers and food distribution .

such actions could improve management and reduce costs by eliminating unnecessary processes and functions .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-110 and gao / nsiad - 9-155 ) to improve dod's management of emerging high - cost issues , such as environmental cleanup , we recommended improving the operations of plants designed to destroy chemical munitions , upgrading of underground storage tanks to avoid costly cleanups , and obtaining better data on the amount of funds paid to dod contractors for cleanup .

 ( gao / nsiad - 92-117 , gao / nsiad - 93-50 , and gao / nsiad - 93-77 ) our principal concern in the nasa area has been the affordability of its total program .

clearly , the agency's funding expectations were set too high and it needed to bring the content and the pace of its efforts more reasonably in line with its likely future years' budgets .

in doing so , nasa has to also identify opportunities to function more efficiently and to prepare more - realistic estimates of the likely cost of projects .

our work also helped identify such opportunities and focus nasa's attention on the need for having an independent capability for developing more - realistic project cost estimates .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-73 , gao / nsiad - 93-178 , and gao / nsiad - 93-191 ) .

the collapse of the soviet bloc has shifted national priorities from defense to economic concerns .

economic performance will establish america's place in the world as it moves into the 21st century .

america's “competitiveness” — the nation's ability to sustain a rising standard of living for its citizens in a complex world economy — will determine how successful this nation will be in the new global economy .

international trade and finance policy will be important determinants of america's success .

trade regimes , access to and development of foreign resources and markets , and competitiveness of u.s. goods and services in the integrated world marketplace are key to the long - term health of the nation's economy .

we have reviewed and reported on a number of these issues over the past year to help gauge the impact of events and the need for policy and management changes .

our information helped the congress assess a large number of critical issues being considered , such as the north american free trade agreement debate , progress on agricultural trade , implementation of the u.s. - canada free trade agreement , issues affecting investment in the petroleum sector , intellectual property rights , developments in u.s. - chilean trade , prospects for east european energy , and the business environment in the united states , japan , and germany .

in january 1992 , we reported that federal export promotion programs lacked organizational and funding cohesiveness .

we concluded that , as a result , the u.s. government did not have reasonable assurances that its export promotion resources , which totaled $2.7 billion in fiscal year 1991 , were being used most effectively to emphasize sectors , regions , and programs with the highest potential return .

we recommended that , to correct this situation , the secretary of commerce , as chair of the 19-member interagency trade promotion coordinating committee , work with other member agencies and the director of the office of management and budget to ( 1 ) develop a governmentwide strategic plan for carrying out federal export promotion programs and ( 2 ) ensure that the budget requests for these programs were consistent with their relative strategic importance .

 ( gao / nsiad - 92-49 ) our february 1992 report about the international trade commission ( itc ) identified ambiguities in the agency's governing statute .

we found that these ambiguities had created disagreements between chairs and commissioners about who had ultimate responsibility for itc's administration and adversely affected its operations .

we suggested that , to improve management , the congress replace replacing the itc's current statutory administrative override authority with decisionmaking requirements like those found in other independent agencies .

also , we suggested that the congress clarify the statutory provisions concerning budget responsibilities .

 ( gao / nsiad - 92-45 ) our january 1992 report on agricultural trade offices showed that the department was not making the best use of its resources .

we recommended that the secretary of agriculture take a variety of actions to clearly define the role of the agricultural trade offices and evaluate their effectiveness .

 ( gao / nsiad - 92-65 ) in may 1993 , we recommended that the federal reserve require each federal reserve bank to begin charging foreign banks for the costs of examining their u.s. agencies , branches , and representative offices .

if the federal reserve continues to believe that the assessment of examination charges under foreign bank supervision enhancement act of 1991 creates a conflict with u.s. treaty and trade obligations , it should seek an amendment to the act .

 ( gao / ggd - 93-35r ) .

with the end of the cold war , u.s. national security and foreign affairs policies and objectives have come under increased scrutiny in recognition of the changing world order and the corresponding need to reassess u.s. security interests — military , political , and economic .

federal budget constraints have further reinforced the need to reexamine foreign policy objectives and program priorities .

policy and program shifts are under way to ( 1 ) downsize u.s. military forces , ( 2 ) place greater emphasis on strengthening our economic security , ( 3 ) promote democracy around the world , ( 4 ) address worldwide arms control and proliferation concerns , and ( 5 ) restructure our foreign assistance programs .

much of our work in 1993 has concentrated on what changes are needed to redirect and better manage foreign affairs programs and priorities , as well as on providing increased oversight of program expenditures .

our comprehensive analysis of the agency for international development's ( aid ) management of economic assistance resources and our recent testimony on the future direction of u.s. assistance have provided the new administration and the congress with specific recommendations on what needs to be done to restructure u.s. aid .

our assessment of the proposed consolidation of radio free europe / radio liberty and the voice of america — provided to both administration decisionmakers and congressional legislators for their use in considering the consolidation proposal — showed that estimated cost savings may not be as high as anticipated and highlighted other constraints that need to be addressed in making any final decision .

our work on international counternarcotics programs has contributed to the current effort to reassess the u.s. government's approach and strategy for dealing with the drug problem .

we have also assessed how well the u.s. government has , either bilaterally or through multilateral organizations , addressed such critical issues as peacekeeping in somalia and cambodia and the implementation of sanctions in serbia and haiti .

our testimony on the u.n. peacekeeping operation in cambodia disclosed significant difficulties in carrying out the operation and weaknesses in u.n. peacekeeping planning and support systems .

more generally , our work on u.s. participation in u.n. organizations continued to focus on the need for improved management — a key u.s. government objective vis - a - vis the united nations .

our examinations of various u.s. bilateral programs identified program management weaknesses and served as a basis for improved congressional oversight .

our review of the commercial foreign military sales program found serious problems that contributed to the program's termination .

our testimony on nunn - lugar funding for arms control efforts in the former soviet union focused on slow funds disbursement and corresponding limited progress in achieving the legislation's intent .

our work on the u.s. - israeli arrow antitactical ballistic missile program likewise pointed out problems with the u.s. government's limited control over program - related u.s. technology and funding and provided specific recommendations to the department of defense ( dod ) to strengthen program management .

on the basis of our recommendation that dod develop accurate baselines for the arrow program's cost , schedule , and technical performance and use them to assess alternatives , the senate appropriations committee has directed dod to conduct such a study and report the results to the committee .

in june 1993 , we reported on the need for aid to address management problems to ensure that aid is adequately meeting its foreign economic assistance responsibilities .

we made numerous recommendations dealing with specific problems and recommended that aid play a leadership role in developing a strategic direction for u.s. foreign economic assistance .

we further recommended that the aid administrator bring aid's management systems into balance with the agency's decentralized organizational structure and establish a “total work force” planning and management process .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-106 ) we found that dod did not have valid baseline information on the u.s. - israel arrow antitactical ballistic missile program necessary to assess its cost , schedule , and technical performance and to evaluate its cost - effectiveness relative to u.s. alternatives .

we further found that the u.s. government had exercised only limited control over u.s. technology and funds in the program .

we recommended that dod develop accurate baselines and use them to assess the cost - effectiveness of u.s. alternatives to arrow for meeting israel's ballistic missile defense needs .

we further recommended that dod ensure that no additional arrow or related contracts were signed until a series of steps are taken to improve oversight .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-254 ) in a series of reviews of the department of state's management of its overseas posts , we found that posts did not have sufficient management controls to ensure full compliance with applicable regulations and minimize their vulnerability to fraud , waste , and abuse .

we recommended that posts adopt a more proactive approach in identifying opportunities for management improvement and cost reductions .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-88 and gao / nsiad - 93-190 ) in july 1992 , we reported on the progress of the voice of america's ( voa ) $1.2 billion program to modernize its broadcast facilities .

we found that voa's facilities modernization program had been hampered by delays and changes in funding priorities .

we recommended that the director of the u.s. information agency require a fully documented cost - benefit analysis before approving further modernization project proposals .

 ( gao / nsiad - 92-150 ) we reviewed progress being made and problems being experienced by u.s. and colombian agencies in implementing u.s. counternarcotics programs in colombia .

we found that the u.s. government lacked data needed to evaluate program effectiveness and that numerous obstacles and budgetary constraints had impeded program implementation .

we recommended that the director of the office of national drug control policy reevaluate u.s. counternarcotics programs in colombia and throughout the andean region .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-158 ) .

during fiscal year 1992 , we continued to complete assignments involving operational issues pertaining to the persian gulf war .

although the war was of limited duration , it nonetheless highlighted several operational and support problems that required attention .

we identified improvements needed in the areas of deployment transportation systems , medical readiness and training , and chemical and biological defense capabilities .

we identified improvements needed in dealing with unanticipated hazards associated with u.s. weapons systems and munitions , such as depleted uranium and unexploded submunitions .

we also identified lessons learned , applicable to the future , in the areas of airlift capabilities , joint training , and use of reserve personnel .

aside from gulf war - related issues , our work during the past fiscal year identified improvements under way and still required to bring about better management and more effective use of computer simulation technology to enhance military training and to make improvements in other areas of training , such as the use of troop schools , and training involving national guard combat units .

we identified numerous opportunities to provide improved and more cost - effective logistical support to military operations , such as ( 1 ) improving navy management of backorders , ( 2 ) improving shipyard labor estimates , ( 3 ) reassessing war reserve requirements , ( 4 ) having national guard units use the army's supply system for direct supply operations and reducing the national guard's inventory investment , ( 5 ) focusing on the systemic causes of problem parts , and ( 6 ) examining whether additional land prepositioning of equipment could reduce afloat prepositioning requirements .

we also identified continuing equipment shortages facing army reserve support units and the need to overcoming these shortages a higher priority for reserve units facing deployment time frames comparable to active duty contingency forces .

our review of the operation and maintenance ( o&m ) budget requests for fiscal year 1994 identified potential reductions and rescissions of about $6.7 billion to the services' and the department of defense's ( dod ) activities .

these reductions and rescissions were due to excessive unobligated funds remaining from prior years' o&m appropriations , changed circumstances since the time the budget requests were submitted , and other factors .

in reviewing personnel issues , we ( 1 ) provided important objective data to the congress for use in its deliberations on the issue of homosexuals in the military and ( 2 ) identified force - shaping and skill imbalance problems confronting dod as it downsizes its civilian work force issues germane to congressional decisionmaking in authorizing the use of financial separation incentives .

we also identified significant differences in the cost of producing military officers between the three types of commissioning programs and needed management improvements to produce a more cost - effective mix of officer personnel .

prepositioning of equipment and support items is intended to enable the united states to respond to distant contingencies more rapidly than if they had to be deployed from the united states .

the gulf war highlighted the importance of afloat prepositioning ; its costs , however , are about four times that of land prepositioning .

while the u.s. transportation command continues to investigate additional afloat prepositioning , we have recommended that the secretary of defense determine whether additional land prepositioning could reduce afloat prepositioning requirements .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-39 ) the congress continues to have a high degree of interest in the afloat prepositioning issue , particularly as it affects the potential for army - marine corps joint operations .

dod has been delayed in responding to recommendations in our report on officer commissioning programs about the need for management improvements to produce a more cost - effective personnel mix from the commissioning sources .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-37 ) a part of the delay is attributable apparently to delays in the appointment process for relevant assistant secretaries .

the congress has supported increased use of simulation technology but has had some concerns about dod's management in this area .

a focal point for improved interservice coordination and management initiatives has been the defense modeling and simulation office , created in 1991 .

but , action to provide permanent staffing for this office is still incomplete , with only one permanent position currently provided .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-122 ) .

the department of defense ( dod ) faces many critical issues as the nation moves toward building and supporting a smaller yet effective fighting force that can respond to post - cold war national security needs .

our reports and testimonies have been used extensively by the congress in its oversight of force structure , active - reserve mix , forward presence , roles and missions , and intelligence issues .

we aided the congress in evaluating dod's downsizing plans by analyzing the assumptions underlying force structure decisions and assessing alternative ways to accomplish missions .

for example , our reviews of dod's mobility requirements study showed that other assumptions were as compelling as those used in the study and that changing the assumptions might reduce requirements for sealift capability .

we also reported to the congress that the air force's plans to build force projection composite wings in the united states were based on limited analysis of cost and other factors and would have significant limitations operating in peacetime and wartime .

our report on navy carrier battle groups increased congressional awareness of less costly options to satisfy many of the carrier battle groups' traditional roles without unreasonably increasing the risk that u.s. national security would be threatened .

for example , we found that a less expensive carrier force could be achieved by relying more heavily on increasingly capable surface combatants and amphibious assault ships to provide forward presence .

our reviews of army force structure issues contributed to congressional debate of several key aspects of the army's force reduction plans .

we reported that better coordination between the reserve components in the selection of units for inactivation might have provided more assurance that readiness of the army's total force was maximized and that individual states were not disproportionately affected by the combined national guard and army reserve inactivations .

our reviews of desert storm activities increased awareness of support force shortages , problems encountered in mobilizing reserve forces for the war , and the effect of the limitations of the president's selected reserve callup authority .

our testimony and report on problems encountered in managing the withdrawal of personnel and equipment from europe increased congressional awareness that the pace of the withdrawal was exceeding the army's ability to manage it .

we assisted in congressional efforts to reduce unnecessary overlap and duplication among the services through our work — examining service roles and functions .

in august 1993 , we reported that the depth of analysis of many functions included in the review by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff roles and functions was insufficient for proposing significant reductions in overlapping functions .

we also identified several opportunities for additional reductions and consolidations that would enhance the economy and the efficiency of dod operations , such as reassessing army and marine corps requirements for light forces , consolidating certain test capabilities , and reassessing the composition of nuclear forces .

with the emergence of dod as a major player in the war on drugs , we have assessed how well it uses its intelligence assets to support the drug law enforcement community .

this work has been used extensively by the house committee on government operations .

the chairs of the major authorizing and appropriating committees and the various special and select committees on drug issues have also requested our assistance .

we have issued several reports on this issue and have made recommendations affecting the defense intelligence agency , the office of national drug control policy , the drug law enforcement community , and the director of the central intelligence agency .

regarding army reserve forces , we recommended that the secretary of the army , in refining the army's reserve force reduction plans , formalize coordination procedures among the national guard bureau ; the office of the chief , army reserve ; the forces command ; and u.s. army reserve command officials and better document the reasons why specific units are selected for inactivation or reduction .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-145 ) regarding navy tactical aviation force structure , we recommended that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the navy to revalidate the need for another strike and fighter aircraft by demonstrating that there was or would be a military threat that it could not meet with the present weapons systems and force structure .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-144 ) .

the united states armed forces' technologically advanced weapons systems have been seen as a major factor in our military success in the persian gulf war .

this technological superiority has always been emphasized as the strength we needed to meet the numerically superior warsaw pact .

the need to maintain this edge , even after the collapse of the soviet union and the dissolution of the warsaw pact , has been a constant theme of the services and the department of defense ( dod ) .

but , the long - range cost of acquiring the advanced systems that the services see as needed is staggering — especially in a period of shrinking defense budgets .

dod is proposing to spend several hundred billion dollars through the 1990s on the development and procurement of weapon systems and related items .

in response to the planned system developments and congressional interest in reducing unneeded expenditures , we have continued several bodies of work , evaluating the requirements for and the economy , the efficiency and the effectiveness of planned acquisitions of major air ; sea ; ground ; space ; missile ; electronic warfare ; and command , control , communication , and intelligence systems .

in addition , to assist the appropriations and armed services committees , we have conducted specific budget analyses that identified over $2 billion in potential reductions in the fiscal year 1994 procurement and research , development , test , and evaluation budgets .

we supported congressional deliberations on the b - 2 and identified over $100 million in program savings that could be achieved by the air force because of changes to the production schedule .

on the basis of our suggestions , the air force took actions to achieve these savings .

our work on the c - 17 was instrumental in the congressional decision to limit fiscal year 1993 production to six rather than the requested eight aircraft because of cost increases , schedule slippage , and technical problems identified during testing .

that decision resulted in a $658 million reduction in the fiscal year 1993 c - 17 production budget .

our work on the airborne self - protection jammer resulted in the congress directing that the navy not obligate funds for procurement of the system .

the navy , in turn , terminated the program — a projected saving of $975.2 million over the next 10 years .

our work on military satellite communications pointed out opportunities for saving billions of dollars by taking advantage of modern technology and by using alternative satellite architectures based on common bus designs — standard satellite platforms capable of carrying various payloads .

we provided information to the congress on several ground systems , including the heavy equipment transporter and the family of medium tactical vehicles .

in both cases , we noted problems that could significantly affect the success of the programs .

as a result of our work , some members of the congress have called on the army to cease production of the heavy equipment transporter until the problems we found have been corrected .

we have also continued our work on missiles , providing information and recommending improvements in the management of the acquisition of a number of systems , including the tri - service standoff attack missile and the advanced cruise missile .

in february 1993 , we reported on the apache manufacturer's oversight of its subcontractors , noting that ineffective oversight by the manufacturer and the army contributed to past problems with parts for the apache .

we recommended that the secretary of defense not commit billions of dollars in production funds for the longbow apache program until the oversight of subcontractors was adequate to ensure satisfactory performance .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-108 ) in july 1993 , we reported that dod could save billions by adopting alternative satellite architectures based on common bus design and by inserting modern technology into its existing communication satellite systems .

we recommended that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) not make any decisions regarding replenishment of existing military satellite communications systems until a coordinated process was established to insert modern technology into the architecture and ( 2 ) reassess the dual common bus alternative as a means of inserting modern technology to preclude continuation of customized satellites .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-216 ) in july 1993 , we reported that the heavy equipment transporter had not shown that it could adequately accomplish its mission or that it was suitable for fielding .

we recommended that the secretary of defense require the army to stop conditionally accepting heavy equipment transporter tractors and trailers until the heavy equipment transporter showed that it could meet its intended mission and reliability and maintainability requirements .

 ( gao / nsiad - 93-228 ) in august 1993 , we reported on the army's procurement of medium tactical trucks — the 2.5-ton and 5-ton payload classes .

the original procurement plan called for replacing over 120,000 trucks over 15 years at a cost of over $17 billion .

we found that the current plan to stretch out the procurement over 30 years was not practical .

we recommended that the secretary of the army reassess the cost - effectiveness of the 30-year acquisition strategy and reconsider alternatives , especially the m939a2 alternative .

we also recommended that the secretary of the army not proceed to full - rate production of the medium tactical vehicles until the reassessment was complete .

dramatic events on both the international and national scene — the end of the cold war , worldwide concerns about nuclear proliferation , new mandates to clean up and restore rather than continuing to build a nuclear weapons complex , passage of the energy policy act of 1992 , and the advent of an administration focused on improving our economy through the application of science and technology initiatives — have shifted the mission , altered the landscape , and posed new and significant challenges for the department of energy ( doe ) .

our work in recent years has played a major role in both exposing and proposing actions to deal with these and related issues and has led to savings of over $5 billion .

beginning in the late 1980s , we issued a number of reports questioning various aspects of doe's new production reactor program .

initially , we focused on the lack of necessary information related to the cost , the benefits , and the schedule of building two multibillion dollar tritium production reactors .

by early 1991 , however , the need for additional nuclear weapons — and consequently tritium — was decreasing and we questioned the need and the strategy for building a new tritium production reactor .

in september 1992 , the secretary of energy informed the congress that , because of nuclear weapons stockpile levels and the resulting effects on the need for tritium , the new production reactor program would be deferred and reactor design and construction efforts would be brought to a prompt and orderly closure .

by not building a new reactor to produce tritium , doe will save at least $3.5 billion .

we have continued to review the broad range of technical and management issues critical to the successful and safe cleanup of the nuclear weapons complex .

our efforts resulted in recommendations to ( 1 ) improve the $50 billion vitrification program at the hanford site , ( 2 ) implement cost - effective improvements in well drilling and ground water monitoring that could lead to over $100 million in savings , and ( 3 ) improve doe's environmental restoration management contracting and cleanup contractor indemnification approaches .

we also continued to address the issue of improving the safety and the health of cleanup workers with a comprehensive report on doe's site resident program — its principal method for conducting independent oversight — and a review of the tiger team program .

finally , we identified $320 million in potential savings in doe's fiscal year 1994 cleanup program budget .

we have consistently made recommendations to improve doe's management and oversight of its contractors , which operate doe's nuclear weapons complex and other facilities at a cost of over $16 billion annually .

the recommendations have ranged from identifying better ways to administer the contractor performance award fee process to reducing the number of nonstandard contract clauses , which have allowed contractors to virtually ignore doe direction .

we have also recommended improved controls over funds obligated to major contractors , resulting in savings in fiscal year 1993 of $334 million .

additional savings totaling over $1.3 billion are expected by the end of fiscal year 1994 .

we have also recommended ways doe can improve its information resource management ( irm ) , and our ongoing management review is highlighting additional reform measures to improve overall contractor accountability .

we have recommended that the congress consider improvements that would lead to more comprehensive national energy planning .

we have also provided the congress with a comprehensive analysis of the factors that affect crude oil and petroleum product prices during shock and nonshock periods , and we pointed out other nations' policies for reducing oil and coal use in their industrial and transportation sectors .

in addition , our work was instrumental in the development of several key provisions of the energy policy act of 1992 , including ( 1 ) added requirements for octane labeling for alternative motor fuels , along with additional state authority to enforce such requirements , and ( 2 ) federal certification of training programs for mechanics converting gasoline vehicles to operate on alternative fuels .

on the broader science and technology front , our work on the small business innovation research program — in which 11 agencies , including doe , participate — was instrumental in congressional action leading to the re - authorization of the program but with more emphasis on commercialization in the private sector .

in addition , our work pointed up abuses in charges for indirect , or overhead , costs by universities for federally funded research activities and led to a number of significant changes in the process for negotiating indirect cost rates , with other changes still under consideration by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

we also alerted the congress about potential conflicts of interest at universities and other organizations carrying out federal research activities , and we pointed out that the superconducting supercollider was over budget , behind schedule , and would cost in excess of $11 billion .

over the last 20 years , our nation has spent about $1 trillion to comply with environmental protection mandates .

by the end of this decade , our nation will spend almost $160 billion annually to address environmental protection .

despite this investment and the resulting improvements , many environmental expectations remain unfulfilled .

as a result of the federal budget deficit , the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) operating budget has remained relatively flat .

yet , the agency must manage strengthened requirements to existing regulations and new mandates imposed on the regulated community .

despite increasing pressures to be accountable for solutions , epa's funding situation has caused it to rely heavily on states and local governments to implement and monitor environmental regulations .

but , these governments also face budget constraints that limit their ability to meet these responsibilities .

for example , states have not sufficiently funded enforcement of asbestos removal and disposal and localities have not been able to finance the billions of dollars needed to invest in the infrastructure to meet existing and new drinking water and wastewater treatment requirements .

our work has been in the forefront in highlighting our nation's recurring environmental problems and recommending ways in which the congress and epa can effectively address those concerns .

in an attempt to seek a more realistic balance between environmental expectations and available resources , we have continued to recommend that epa develop priorities among these competing demands based on risk to human health and the environment .

we recommended that , in testing both chemicals and pesticides , epa give priority to regulating the high - risk compounds first .

we also recommended that epa work with the congress to adequately fund those programs that it has acknowledged as high risks to the public .

to highlight possible new sources of funding , we reported that carefully designed pollution taxes — levied on pollution emissions or on harmful products or substances — in some cases could be an alternative to regulation that would reduce pollution and raise revenues to invest in further environmental protection .

with the third largest civilian agency budget in the federal government , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) affects the lives of all americans and millions of people around the world .

usda oversees a food and agriculture sector of major importance to the nation's economy , accounting for 17 percent of the gross national product , 20 million jobs , and 10 percent of export dollars .

to carry out its missions in 1992 , usda spent about $60 billion .

usda controlled assets of about $140 billion and employed or paid the salaries of about 124,000 full - time staff in about 15,000 locations worldwide .

in 1993 , congressional committees made extensive use of our work and , on the basis of our recommendations , usda has made a number of program changes resulting in more effective use of federal food and agriculture funds .

federal housing and community development efforts focus on two related goals: ( 1 ) providing safe , affordable , and decent housing to all americans and ( 2 ) supporting and revitalizing economically depressed communities .

while our nation is generally considered to have the best - housed people in the world , a host of economic and social problems have thus far denied full attainment of our national housing goals .

these problems are reflected in the widening gap between the demand for and the supply of affordable low - income housing ; declining rates of homeownership , particularly among younger families ; and continued problems with homelessness .

contributing to these problems is the spread of economically distressed communities and their attendant high unemployment rates and low family incomes .

to deal with these conditions , the federal government has established a broad array of programs , in several federal agencies , primarily the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) ( through its housing and homelessness programs ) , the department of agriculture ( through the farmers home administration [fmha] ) , the department of commerce ( through the economic development administration and the minority business development agency ) , the small business administration ( sba ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ( through its disaster assistance and homelessness programs ) .

together , these agencies had budget authority for over $30 billion in fiscal year 1993 .

because of the questions that surround whether industrial development bonds are achieving the public benefits attributed to them and in view of the tax revenue foregone , we suggested that the congress either not reauthorize the provision or , as part of a reauthorization , specify requirements to better direct these bonds toward achieving public benefits that would not otherwise result .

 ( gao / rced - 93-106 ) the federal response to hurricane andrew revealed weaknesses in the multiagency federal response plan .

improvements are needed regarding the explicit authority provided to federal agencies before areas are declared disaster areas ; fema's efforts to prepare state and local governments for disasters ; and the reliance placed on the department of defense to provide food , shelter , and other items on a massive scale .

 ( gao / t - rced - 93-4 , gao / t - rced - 93-13 , gao / t - rced - 93-20 , and gao / rced - 93-186 ) lead poisoning is one of the most common health problems for our nation's children , with potentially significant effects on intelligence and behavior .

lead - based paint is the most widespread source of exposure to lead for children .

although lead - based paint was not permitted to be used in residential housing after 1978 , such paint is still found in many units built earlier .

improvements are needed in federal efforts to protect children in two different circumstances .

first , when hud , va , and fmha sell single - family homes to the public ( totaling about 100,00 a year ) they need to do a better job of identifying and treating lead - based paint hazards .

 ( gao / rced - 93-38 ) second , about 400,000 children live in federally assisted public housing , and about 60 percent of all public housing units were built before 1978 and may be occupied by families with children .

hud needs to provide greater protection for these children .

also , we suggested that the congress establish a deadline for hud and public housing agencies to abate certain lead - paint hazards .

 ( gao / rced - 93-138 ) for its home loan guaranty program , va ( like other agencies that operate federal credit programs ) estimates the subsidy cost associated with the portfolio of new loans it guarantees each year .

to do so , it uses an economic model developed by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

we found that the costs to the federal government will probably be about $300 million lower than the administration estimated and that va , therefore , had unnecessarily increased the budget deficit .

we recommended that va and omb work together to improve their economic model and submit revised subsidy cost estimates .

 ( gao / rced - 93-173 ) .

natural resources on federal lands are second only to tax receipts in generating revenues for the federal government , totaling almost $7 billion in fiscal year 1992 .

but , fiscal year 1993 budget authorities for the three agencies primarily responsible for managing and protecting these resources — the department of the interior , the department of agriculture's forest service , and the u.s. army corps of engineers — were more than double the revenues generated the year before — about $16.6 billion .

each year , the federal government acquires additional lands to conserve natural resources and expands the infrastructure of facilities constructed to provide access to or make use of the natural resources on federal lands .

yet , our work over the last several years has shown that the condition of the federal lands continues to deteriorate and that the existing infrastructure on these lands — approaching $200 billion in value — is in a growing state of disrepair .

at the same time , agency staff are being asked to assume increasing responsibilities and to perform more duties .

as a result , existing maintenance and reconstruction standards are being compromised and tradeoffs are being made among important yet competing work priorities .

the congress and the administration now face a difficult choice .

they must find new sources of funding for the agencies responsible for managing natural resources or find ways for these agencies to operate more efficiently , or they must make further cutbacks in the agencies' services or standards for maintaining facilities and lands .

the u.s. transportation sector is being increasingly looked to as a key component in efforts to improve the economy ; maintain and enhance u.s. competitiveness in the global marketplace ; and serve the growing needs of businesses , industries , and the american public .

comprising diverse elements ranging from air , land , water , and mass transit to pipeline and marine safety ; employing about one - tenth of america's work force ; and involving , in one way or another , about $1 in every $6 of the nation's gross domestic product , the transportation sector provides facilities and services and carries out activities that touch everyone's life .

although the u.s. transportation system is the world's finest , the transportation sector faces many challenges .

among these are reducing the number of transportation - related fatalities and injuries ; restoring the obsolete and deteriorated portions of the transportation infrastructure ; and relieving the increasingly congested aviation , highway , and waterway systems .

in addition , transportation - related environmental effects and the need to strengthen u.s. transportation to remain competitive globally are of widespread concern .

and demands are increasing for more and better public transit and rail service .

at the same time , despite increased federal funding over the past several years for transportation activities , severe fiscal constraints require increased reliance on private resources and more efficient use of public resources to meet transportation needs .

as detailed below , this issue area's work , which has included an increasing emphasis on the transportation sector's international and intermodal aspects , has influenced the congress and the department of transportation ( dot ) and its agencies to take many actions to improve transportation safety and the efficiency and the effectiveness of transportation policies and programs .

despite the many actions and initiatives taken by the congress , dot , and its agencies in response to our recommendations , some important recommendations remain open and warrant priority attention .

in the post - cold war period , a nation's security will be increasingly tied to its ability to achieve overall levels of productivity that can sustain a rising standard of living for its people in a complex world economy .

we have responsibility for the two cabinet departments — education and labor — charged with providing america a future and current work force that maintains its status as “a preeminent economic superpower.” with an increasingly competitive global marketplace serving as the backdrop , the clinton administration faces great challenges in the education and employment training arenas .

our educational system has not kept pace with the demands of a changing economy .

international competition , rapid technological innovations , and workplace restructuring are creating worker dislocation and major shifts in the skill demands for workers .

there are longstanding education department managerial problems and a myriad of uncoordinated labor programs .

to produce high - quality products and services that are competitive in a global economy , the nation must have a highly skilled work force .

our work , therefore , has focused on the quality and the financing of the education and the training of the nation's population , beginning with preschool through the secondary grades and continuing through college , including basic and remedial education , vocational and occupational skills training , and education for the handicapped .

it also focuses on employment - related programs and policies affecting the nation's work force , such as improving transitions to employment by labor force entrants and workers dislocated from their previous jobs ; enforcing regulations intended to provide safe and healthful workplaces , fair compensation for work performed , and protection against employment discrimination ; and providing leadership in encouraging productive labor - management relations .

during the last few years , our work has contributed significantly to legislation and congressional debate .

it has also resulted in significant monetary benefits and improvements of operations and programs in key education and labor department areas , such as education reform , higher education , work force competitiveness , and program management .

examples follow .

the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) operate two of the largest centrally managed health care systems in the world , spending more than $25 billion annually through 500 facilities and a network of private providers .

in addition , the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) is administering the multibillion dollar medicare and medicaid programs that finance health care provided to the nations's elderly , disabled , and economically disadvantaged .

rising health care costs and substantial budget deficits have prompted increased congressional concerns about whether these agencies are delivering quality health care to their beneficiaries as efficiently and cost effectively as possible .

the downsizing of military forces and the potential transfer of beneficiaries from dod systems to va systems has also prompted a concern about the structure of dod and va health delivery systems .

our objectives in this issue area are to ( 1 ) identify ways that va and dod health care systems can operate more effectively and efficiently ; ( 2 ) identify and assess opportunities for restructuring va and dod health care delivery systems to enhance universal access to health care ; and ( 3 ) improve the quality of health care processes in va , dod , medicare / medicaid , and public health service programs .

as we recommended in our report on va's verification of a veteran's reported income , the congress extended va's authority to use tax records in determining veteran's copayment liability .

we also recommended that va implement an income - verification system as soon as possible after such authority was extended .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-159 ) in another report , we recommended that va should only use private health care when the needed services are not available at va facilities or a veteran's geographic inaccessibility makes it more economical to use private care .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-109 ) we recommended that va's plans to consolidate and automate mail - service pharmacies ( 1 ) assume maximum use of 90-day supplies when dispensing maintenance drugs prescribed at a stabilized dose , ( 2 ) select the most cost - efficient locations for the mail - service pharmacies , and ( 3 ) ensure compatibility of prescription handling and automatic data processing equipment throughout va facilities to maximize efficiency .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-30 ) in our report on federal ethics requirements at va medical centers , we recommended that va revise policies governing types of employment activities that medical center managers may engage in and establish stronger procedures for enforcing federal ethics requirements .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-39 ) in our report on variabilities in va's outpatient care eligibility and rationing decisions , we recommended that va develop better guidance to medical centers so that clinicians may achieve more consistent application of statutory eligibility requirements or propose to the congress alternative eligibility criteria that produce greater consistency of eligibility determinations .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-106 ) in our report on the establishment of the hawaii medical center , we recommended that va reconsider its decision to build additional acute care beds at tripler army medical center's e - wing and that va and dod develop a joint venture agreement to give va autonomy over care provided to veterans at tripler .

we also recommended that va use tripler's e - wing to accommodate its planned nursing home .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-41 ) in our report on the quality - of - care provided by some va psychiatric hospitals , we recommended that each hospital director be held responsible for making certain that quality - of - care problems are identified and resolved .

 ( gao / hrd - 92-17 ) we recommended that va regional directors be required to have inspection teams ensure that every medical center in their region is complying with quality assurance requirements and that problems gao and the inspector general identified have been corrected .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-20 ) in our report on the salem va medical center , we recommended that psychiatric care provided at the medical center be reviewed and necessary actions be taken to ensure that care meets medical center bylaws .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-108 ) in our report on healthpass , we recommended that the secretary of health and human services ( 1 ) require the pennsylvania department of public welfare to make necessary arrangements to share the names of healthpass members with the women , infants , and children program and ( 2 ) direct the state of pennsylvania to include in its contract with healthcare management alternatives , inc. , a requirement to query nationwide information banks to improve the identification of potentially problematic physicians in the healthpass program .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-67 ) in our report on the management of champus mental health benefits , we recommended that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) establish a cost - based reimbursement system similar to medicare and ( 2 ) adopt the hospital annual index used in the medicare and champus prospective payment system to reimburse psychiatric residential treatment centers .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-34 ) in our report on fraud and abuse in psychiatric hospitals , we recommended that dod adopt procedures for visiting and inspecting psychiatric hospitals to determine whether problems involving unnecessary hospitals stays and quality of care have been corrected and to ensure that dod contractors improve their claims payment systems to minimize payments for unauthorized hospital stays and to avoid duplicate payments .

 ( gao / hrd - 93-92 ) in our testimony on dod's managed health care initiatives , we recommended that , as dod continues to contract for health care services , it ( 1 ) carefully determine when contracting will and will not be appropriate ; ( 2 ) carefully determine the size of its procurements to ensure sufficient competition ; and ( 3 ) take appropriate safeguards to ensure high quality and accessible care that protects beneficiaries and the government against poor contractor performance .

 ( gao / t - hrd - 93-21 ) .

income security programs affect all americans at some time .

their purpose , in part , is to help people become self - sufficient and to support those unable to support themselves .

the programs provide cash aid to the elderly , the disabled , the poor , and veterans ; a conduit for funding in - kind assistance for such needy populations as the homeless , refugees , runaway youth , and abused children ; and oversight for the private pension system .

income security expenditures make up about 35 percent of all federal spending .

our work provided information and recommendations directed at ( 1 ) improving the planning and the management of retirement programs ; ( 2 ) ensuring the protection of worker benefits ; ( 3 ) helping the government meet the needs of the poor by getting them on the path toward self - sufficiency ; ( 4 ) seeing that vulnerable groups , including the disabled , were well served and protected by income security programs ; ( 5 ) improving the quality of services provided to the public ; and ( 6 ) ensuring the efficient administration of income security programs .

for example , because of gao's review , the pension benefit guaranty corporation developed and implemented new procedures for collecting insurance premiums , penalties , and interest , resulting in the collection of an additional $20 million .

also , on the basis of our recommendations , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) established procedures for verifying the accuracy of medical expenses claimed by pension beneficiaries and used by va in computing benefit amounts .

these procedures should save va an estimated $91 million annually .

on the basis of our recommendations , legislation was enacted authorizing the social security administration ( ssa ) to recover debts owed by former ssa beneficiaries by requesting treasury to withhold any tax refunds .

ssa estimated that it would collect $213 million during the first 3 years of implementation of this legislation .

further , on the basis of our recommendations , legislation was enacted allowing va access to tax data to verify income information provided by va pension program beneficiaries and persons receiving va unemployability benefits .

when enacted , this legislation had a september 1992 expiration date .

our work in this area , which indicated that millions of dollars could be saved by matching records , led to an extension of va's authority until september 1997 .

finally , on the basis of our recommendations related to ensuring that subsidized housing units were occupied by needy families , the congress enacted legislation allowing the department of housing and urban development access to federal tax data to verify program eligibility .

as a result of our continuing work in the use of ssa's death information to reduce payments to deceased persons , legislation was enacted that will cause states to share previously restricted information .

this will result in yearly savings of $5.5 million with first - year savings of $14 million .

in addition , pursuant to our recommendations , va and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) entered into an agreement to match va compensation and pension files and ssa death files to identify and end erroneous payments .

finally , savings of $127 million annually resulted from legislation enacted upon our recommendation to reduce pension payments to veterans' surviving spouses without dependents who receive medicaid - supported nursing home care .

as health care financier and insurer , the federal government serves over 35 million elderly and disabled under medicare , an estimated 33 million poor under medicaid , and 9 million active and retired federal employees and their families under the federal employees health benefits program .

the government's primary programs for financing health care , medicare and medicaid , have a federal spending total estimated at over $260 billion in fiscal year 1994 ; an additional $70 billion in state and local funds is expected to be spent on medicaid .

our primary objective in reviewing these programs is to find ways to reduce costs without adversely affecting beneficiary access to quality care .

other important objectives are to ( 1 ) assess the processes used to control and identify fraud , abuse , and mismanagement in the programs ; ( 2 ) evaluate quality - of - care assurance systems ; and ( 3 ) review issues related to beneficiary access to care .

throughout the 1980s , the congress looked to medicare for deficit reduction opportunities , and billions of dollars in monetary savings were achieved .

medicaid became a means of expanding health care services for those too poor to obtain them , particularly pregnant women and children .

but , the 1990s are presenting new challenges to these programs and health care in general .

health care costs have skyrocketed , and the nation's uninsured - underinsured population continues to grow .

new approaches for delivering health care services to millions of americans are being tried .

our work continues to support many of the medicare and medicaid program initiatives and legislative changes undertaken by the congress .

the federal government is the guardian of the public health .

among its functions in this role are providing research funds , support for educating and training health professionals , and surveillance of contagious diseases ; overseeing food and drugs ; providing block grants to states for mental health services , drug and alcohol programs , and maternal and child health services ; and providing health care services to underserved areas and population groups .

the public health service , through its numerous administrations and agencies , carries out most of these tasks .

the administration of justice issue area encompasses a wide range of federal activities , including all ( 1 ) civil and criminal law enforcement , such as antitrust , firearms licensing , and drug abuse ; ( 2 ) litigative and judicial activities , such as sentencing reform ; ( 3 ) correctional activities ; and ( 4 ) immigration control and criminal justice assistance .

in 1993 , the federal government spent about $150 billion in pay and benefits for over 3 million civilian employees .

the effectiveness of federal agencies in achieving their missions depends largely on the quality , the motivation , and the performance of these employees .

recruiting , hiring , training , and managing a quality work force is the foundation of effective governance .

in recent years , several significant actions have been taken on the basis of our recommendations .

if the american people are to receive the high - quality government services they deserve , continuing attention needs to be given to the manner in which federal employees are managed .

improvements in the management of federal human resources can yield substantial improvements to government programs .

we have made numerous recommendations to opm and other agencies to improve the quality of the federal work force .

the following are areas in which we believe further action or monitoring is needed to adequately respond to our recommendations .

a public and political consensus recently has emerged that fundamental changes are needed in the way the federal government manages .

both the september 1993 report of the vice president's national performance review and the government performance and results act of 1993 drew heavily on our work in analyzing federal management and the need for change .

our management work consistently has found that the long - standing management problems confronting the federal government will require long - term and concerted attention by the senior leadership in the agencies .

the following key open recommendations are from our most recently completed general management reviews .

these recommendations deserve priority consideration and are described both in the section below and in the appropriate substantive issue area section .

our work provided information , analyses , and recommendations to the congress and regulator agencies on financial services industry reform , regulation , and oversight .

we analyzed ( 1 ) emerging issues , financial health of various segments of the financial services sector , and gaps in regulatory coverage ; ( 2 ) existing regulatory practices to see if they worked as intended ; and ( 3 ) the continued appropriateness of federal policies governing financial institutions and markets .

we continued to advise congressional leadership — through reports , testimonies , and briefings — on the implementation of key provisions of banking reform legislation that were intended to strengthen the banking system and reduce taxpayers' exposure to losses .

our work has also helped enhance understanding and congressional oversight of the regulatory burden issue and the regulators' efforts to address it .

through reports and recommendations on financial markets issues , we have improved the disclosure of information on government and private securities transactions and further upgraded the protection afforded investors .

this work and other work designed to improve capital requirements and strengthen regulation of financial services industries have resulted in a stronger financial system and a strengthened regulatory structure to protect the american public .

our work in this area focuses on three of the government's largest business entities: the general services administration ( gsa ) , the resolution trust corporation ( rtc ) , and the u.s .

postal service .

this area also encompasses responsibilities for many other federal entities , such as the smithsonian institution , the national archives , parts of the department of the treasury , and the d.c. government .

ultimately , the policies , operations , and employees of the three large entities have an impact not only on meeting their own mission goals but on the capability of other federal agencies to meet theirs .

our work has directly influenced gsa and the congressional leadership to rethink and change gsa's role as a central management agency and a monopoly provider of services to federal agencies .

numerous reports and testimonies , which culminated in our transition series report , highlighted the need for gsa to manage in a more businesslike manner its public buildings and supply distribution operations and called for improved congressional oversight .

two recently issued reports drove this point home in that they showed how millions of dollars could be saved if gsa had more orders shipped directly to the customer agencies from suppliers rather than from its depots and eliminated repeat poor - performing vendors from the supply system .

because of high congressional interest , we have given special attention to federal asset management and disposition activities of rtc in liquidating assets from failed savings and loan institutions .

we have focused our efforts on rtc's sales strategies , contracting activities , and the affordable housing and minority - and women - owned business programs .

through reports and frequent testimony , we have fostered considerable positive change in the organization and management of these activities .

we will continue to try to improve the way rtc carries out its asset management responsibilities — specifically , we believe that it should consolidate individual agency activities .

during the coming year , we will also begin to focus on the asset management and disposition activities of the federal deposit insurance corporation .

key efforts at the u.s .

postal service have focused on the need for an appropriate response to rapidly changing electronic communication technology and an increasingly competitive market for postal services .

in reports and testimony in 1992 , we directed congressional and postal service attention to the limited progress in controlling labor costs through the automation of mail processes and the factors such as outmoded pricing policies hindering postal service efforts to compete effectively .

we will continue to focus on the competitive challenges the postal service faces and the success of its efforts to improve the quality of its services , motivate employees , improve labor and management relations , and generate and protect revenue .

our work in this area has provided information and analyses directed at ( 1 ) enhancing efforts to ensure compliance with the country's tax laws , ( 2 ) assessing the progress of the internal revenue service ( irs ) in modernizing its tax - processing system , ( 3 ) increasing collection of irs' accounts receivable , ( 4 ) revising the tax laws to ease taxpayer burden and promote more effective and equitable tax subsidies , and ( 5 ) improving the ability of irs to effectively manage its tax administration activities .

we suggested ways that irs could reduce individual taxpayers' overstatement of real estate tax deductions and improve voluntary compliance .

we also recommended that irs not abandon a long - used compliance measurement program until a suitable substitute could be developed .

we recommended , and irs agreed , that irs start requiring corporations to report their accumulated net operating losses from past tax years to offset taxable income in other tax years .

having this information will improve revenue estimates as well as irs' compliance programs .

we recommended that , to reduce the growing irs accounts receivable , irs examine collection methods of private companies and local governments and develop a plan to deploy its collection staff to maximize the assessment and the collection of taxes .

in monitoring irs' tax systems modernization project , we concluded generally that irs had progressed more slowly than expected in completing steps basic to successful modernization , such as planning for its business reorganization , developing detailed security and telecommunications requirements , and addressing related human resource implications .

we also recommended that , because of significant slippage in implementation schedules , irs reevaluate the utility of certain short - term computer projects .

we also reported that the irs' electronic filing program benefited both irs and taxpayers and recommended that to broaden its use , irs redirect its marketing focus .

in addition , we recommended that irs institute additional controls to reduce the program's vulnerability to fraud .

our study of a federal value - added tax provided the congress with basic information related to issues and costs that would be involved in its administration .

we also provided analysis and data to the congress that was used in changing the section 936 tax credit to reduce federal revenue losses while maintaining incentives for investment in puerto rico .

additionally , we supplied information used by the congress in its analysis of taxes paid by foreign - controlled corporations as opposed to those paid by u.s. - controlled corporations .

the size and the persistence of the budget deficit is central to the nation's economic future .

the budget has become a focal point for many of the current policy debates .

as a result , the budget and the budget process are expected to meet many demands .

they are expected to provide a mechanism to reduce the deficit , to promote greater long - term economic growth , to provide policymakers with information and choices needed to make short - term and long - term spending decisions , and to enable managers to use funds in the most efficient manner consistent with congressional priorities .

our work provides information and analysis directed at each of these challenges .

specifically , our work ( 1 ) provides the congress with deficit reduction analysis and reduction options and strategies , ( 2 ) recommends improvements in the budget presentation and choices provided by the budget and budget process , ( 3 ) highlights for decisionmakers the choices between consumption and investment spending and provides criteria and analysis to decisionmakers to help in the selection of effective investments , and ( 4 ) assesses the impacts of budget rules and incentives on management and examines the potential impacts of proposed budget changes on both managerial efficiency and congressional oversight .

we are required by law to submit an annual compliance report that addresses compliance by omb and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) with the budget enforcement act of 1990 .

when we reviewed the reports and presidential orders for the session of the congress ended january 3 , 1992 , we reported that omb and cbo had substantially complied with the act , but we found several minor instances in which either omb or cbo , or both , had not implemented certain provisions .

we discussed several matters for congressional consideration for making technical corrections to the act to clarify certain areas and allow more precise implementation .

the congress considered changes to the budget enforcement act of 1990 for inclusion in the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 .

while no changes were enacted in the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 , the conference report on the budget reconciliation act of 1993 indicated that the house intended to pursue changes to the budget enforcement act of 1990 at a later date .

 ( gao / afmd - 92-43 ) .

our civil agency audits have illustrated the importance of reliable financial statements and effective systems in strengthening accountability and improving control over the federal government's financial resources and affairs .

the preparation and the audit of accurate and useful financial statements depends upon the quality and the availability of the financial information on which they are based and ultimately the adequacy of the underlying systems and related internal controls .

the government's financial systems and internal controls are woefully inadequate .

but , even though agencies have spent billions of dollars to upgrade their financial systems , these efforts have had limited success .

many federal financial systems are weak , outdated , and inefficient and cannot routinely produce relevant , timely , and accurate data on the results and the costs of operations .

across government , effective financial management operations and information are hampered by financial systems that are incompatible ; have been allowed to deteriorate ; are out of date ; and cannot meet managers' cost , performance measurement , and other financial information needs .

agencies face a great challenge in providing strong financial management , effective internal controls , and sound fiscal accountability , but the investment will pay for itself many times over in improved operations and useful information for decisionmaking .

government corporations provide trillions of dollars in guarantees and insurance in support of the nation's major financial industries , including banks , savings and loan institutions , credit unions , and pension plans .

past severe problems in the savings and loan and banking industries and the termination of large underfunded pension plans have focused the attention of policymakers and the public on the taxpayers' significant exposure to loss through the government's credit and insurance activities .

although the condition and the performance of both banks and thrifts have recently improved , segments of the industry remain troubled and the insurance funds need to be rebuilt to statutorily required levels .

in addition , the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) faces a large and growing deficit that threatens the insurance program's long - term viability .

to take prompt action and minimize the taxpayers' exposure and costs , the congress and regulators need reliable and informative financial reporting that provides early warning on emerging problems .

to provide the necessary information , we have focused our work on ensuring that corporate entities accurately report their financial condition and performance , maintain internal control structures that provide accountability and safeguard assets , and effectively implement the requirements of the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 .

we have also begun evaluating whether generally accepted accounting principles and auditing standards provide an adequate basis for assessing financial condition and operating performance .

our work has concentrated on the systems and internal controls the department of defense ( dod ) used both as a basis for its financial reporting and in accounting for and controlling its extensive inventories , weapon systems , equipment , and other assets .

in particular , our audits illustrated the importance of reliable financial information and effective systems in strengthening accountability and improving controls over dod's multibillion - dollar investment in equipment and inventories .

many dod systems are weak , outdated , and inefficient and cannot routinely produce relevant , timely , and accurate information on the results and the costs of dod's operations .

as demonstrated by dod's recent “bottom - up” review and the administration's national performance review , as well as decisions made through the base realignment and closure process , dod is under increasing pressure to work better and reduce costs .

specifically , dod's bottom - up review identified about $91 billion in programmatic reductions , including reductions of over 300,000 military and civilian personnel , 2 army divisions , 3 active air force fighter wings , and 55 navy surface ships and submarines .

at the same time , the secretary of defense set an overriding goal of accomplishing such downsizing while maintaining the ability to meet our worldwide defense commitments and sustain our high level of military capability , thus avoiding the “hollow armies” resulting from past drawdown initiatives .

as a result , more reliable and relevant financial information on the resources for which it is responsible and on the costs of operations will be increasingly important if dod is to make well - informed tradeoff decisions on how to structure and base remaining forces and how best to administratively operate and support this new structure .

although dod has increased its ability to accurately account for and report on its financial operations and the financial status of its resources , much more remains to be done .

the following are among the most important recommendations that have not yet been fully implemented .

how information resources — hardware , software , data , and people — are acquired and managed is critical to nearly every government program's mission — from exploring space , to collecting taxes , to providing social security benefits .

the government spends about $20 billion annually acquiring the thousands of telecommunications and computer systems that support these missions .

responsibility for information management and technology is shared by the central and individual executive agencies .

the central agencies — the office of management and budget , the general services administration , and the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology — formulate policies , procedures , and standards and monitor individual agency information resource management activities .

individual agencies are responsible for acquiring , managing , and using their information resources effectively and efficiently .

we addressed information management and technology issues both governmentwide and as they affect specific agencies .

governmentwide , our recommendations dealing with the purchase of new computers and information systems have had particular impact .

we disclosed that civilian agency modernization projects were being implemented before agencies reassessed , simplified , and streamlined their business practices .

on the basis of our recommendations , agencies are starting to focus their modernization efforts on the strategic uses of technology for achieving their mission .

the central agencies also are taking a more active role in helping individual agencies to develop business plans based on mission goals , analysis of business practices , and long - range information technology planning .

in our agency - specific work , we reviewed issues related to the acquisition and the management of computer and telecommunications resources , including development of information systems .

our reviews covered such areas as asset management , child support enforcement , pension benefits , welfare programs , internal revenue , health care management , pesticide registration , weather forecasting , and crop insurance .

we also evaluated agency management of information for increased program effectiveness .

presently , all key open governmentwide recommendations are being addressed .

the following key open agency - specific recommendation relates to the department of defense's corporate information management strategy .

our agency - specific reports fall into substantive areas that concern other issue areas .

for example , a report on the federal deposit insurance corporation's ( fdic ) automatic data processing programs supplements and complements the work of the financial institutions and markets issue area .

because our reports address specific programs , they are included in the appropriate issue area sections of this report .

for example , our report on fdic's asset management system is found in the section on “financial institutions and markets. .

auditing is an important control to help ensure that federal programs and operations are properly carried out and potential problems are identified and resolved promptly and effectively .

auditing also helps to ensure a strong system of governance and accountability in american corporations and institutions and helps to protect federal deposit insurance funds , stockholders and creditors , and taxpayers from exposure to unanticipated risks and losses .

with the growing complexity of the federal government and the problems it faces , including severe fiscal strains , an independent and reliable structure must be in place to ensure adequate audit coverage of federal programs and operations , as well as public sector activities of interest to the government .

our work has focused on improving the quality and the effectiveness of audits of federal expenditures , ensuring the quality of audits performed by nonfederal auditors , strengthening corporate governance and accountability , and improving the financial management of legislative branch operations through regular financial statement audits .

in our oversight of the inspectors general ( ig ) and other audit organizations , our reviews resulted in improved audit coverage , resource usage , and quality of work , as well as the removal of impairments to ig independence and authority .

in addition , our audit resolution work prompted the office of management and budget ( omb ) to begin revising its audit followup guidance to ensure that agencies take action on ig audit recommendations .

in helping to strengthen corporate governance and accountability , our work on bank audit committees contributed to the passage of legislation requiring independent audit committees for all federally insured depository institutions .

in recent years , many changes have taken place in the public accounting profession , and our reports on the quality of audits by certified public accountants contributed to the impetus for the changes .

as a result of our work on the audits of private employee benefit plans , legislation was introduced in january 1993 that will enhance the value of plan audits .

additional legislation is being drafted by the department of labor to encourage better plan management and to better protect the interests of plan participants and the government .

regarding our legislative branch work , our financial statement audits of several legislative entities ( such as the house and senate sergeants at arms ) and other legislative programs and operations ( such as the congressional award program and the library of congress ) resulted in a number of improvements in their internal controls and accounting systems .

congressional committees require evaluative information on federal government programs and issues , and they look to the congressional agencies , including gao , to provide it .

sound program evaluations are also valuable tools for better management in government .

to help improve the quality of evaluative information available to the congress and to federal agencies , we evaluate various executive agencies' programs , usually at the request of congressional committees .

these studies generally fall into one of four areas: ( 1 ) determining the intended and unintended effects of an existing program , ( 2 ) identifying the potential effects of a proposed program , ( 3 ) assessing the quality of information available in a program area for use in congressional decisionmaking , or ( 4 ) reviewing executive branch evaluation functions and studies .

in many evaluation reports , we make recommendations to agency officials to ( 1 ) correct problems identified in existing programs , ( 2 ) increase their awareness of potential effects of proposed programs , ( 3 ) improve the quality of information they are collecting and analyzing , and ( 4 ) develop more fully their own capability to perform high - quality program evaluation .

thus , while these studies are often used initially by the congress in its deliberations on specific programs , they are also intended to bring about agency improvements .

in some cases , our program evaluations have provided demonstrations of novel or substantially improved designs and methodologies for measuring the extent of program effectiveness or answering evaluation questions of general interest .

thus , the results of our work have frequently helped others in the evaluation field perform their work .

because our program evaluation and methodology studies concern other issue areas , the studies are also discussed in the appropriate issue area sections of this publication .

for example , our report on student achievement standards is also discussed in the section entitled “education and employment. .

this electronic edition contains the details for gao's open recommendations .

this pc - based software lets you use several text search and retrieval options to find either summaries of key open recommendations or the details of open recommendations .

to load the software on your hard drive ( 7.5mb required ) : 1 .

place program disk 1 in your floppy disk drive .

2 .

type the drive designation of your floppy drive and the word “install” .

for example , type “b:install” .

press < enter > .

3 .

follow the instructions on the screen .

4 .

if you are updating a previous version , the install program will replace the old files with new ones .

2 .

disk 2 of 2 is the “last” disk .

to run the program: 1 .

change to the drive and subdirectory where the software has been loaded .

type “c:” .

press < enter > .

type “cd\openrec” .

press < enter > .

type “or” .

press < enter > .

2 .

when the introductory menu is displayed , highlight an option to learn more about this program .

press < enter > .

you may search for open recommendations by using report number , title , date , name of a federal entity , congressional committee , name of gao's point of contact , or any other word or phrase that may appear in the report .

to perform this search , use the numerous options provided on several search menus .

most menus have similar options and require the following general steps: 1 .

start at the introductory menu , highlight “main” .

press < enter > .

2 .

at the main search menu , highlight the option to locate the information you want .

 ( see search options. ) .

press < enter > .

3 .

at the next menu , indicate how much information you want to extract and where you want the output to go .

 ( figure 1 shows the menu screen. ) .

press < enter > .

4 .

to perform the search , type a word or phrase .

press < enter > .

the most recent report is listed first .

5 .

to review the open recommendations for a specific report shown on the list of titles , highlight the “report number” .

press < enter > .

6 .

use the < pgdn > and arrow keys to scroll through the open recommendations and related information .

7 .

when using special lists to narrow a search ( see search options ) , you perform the search ( in step 4 above ) by first displaying the special list .

type a word or phrase to get a subset of relevant terms or type “all” to get the entire list of terms .

press < enter > .

second , highlight your desired term on the list .

press < enter > .

8 .

to rerun your last search after selecting another output option , press < enter > without entering new search words .

1 .

menu option 2 takes longer but will give you a count of the reports meeting your search criteria .

2 .

menu option 4 directly provides the open recommendations and related information for the most recent report that meets your search criteria .

additional reports will follow in the order they were issued .

3 .

if chosen , output can be sent to the printer at lpt1 .

4 .

if chosen , output can be sent as ascii text to the disk file that you designate .

the main search menu includes six options to help you narrow or expedite your search .

allows you to locate open recommendations using a report number , title , date , job code , or any other word or phrase that may appear in the report .

this includes “ ! options” that provides a way to obtain custom asksam queries and reports ( for those who know the asksam programming language ) .

allows you to identify the impact of gao's work and key open recommendations that deserve priority .

you may search using key words or a table of contents .

allows you to locate open recommendations using terms indexed to major subjects in gao reports .

allows you to locate open recommendations by the congressional committee or subcommittee having primary interest in or jurisdiction over subjects discussed in gao reports .

allows you to locate open recommendations that were addressed to a specific executive department , agency , or congressional committee .

allows you to locate open recommendations by the gao executive who is the point of contact for questions about reports and recommendations .

to refine a search , you can use the following: 1 .

to look for a phrase in the exact order , enclose your search words in “” .

2 .

you can use wildcards characters to substitute for a single character or a group of characters .

“*” can represent a group of characters .

for example , use “account*” to get accounting , accountant , and accounts .

“ ? ” can represent a single character .

for example , use “f - 1 ? ” to get f - 15 , f - 16 , and f - 18 .

3 .

combine search words or phrases with connectors — “{and}” ; “{or}” ; “{not}” — to narrow or broaden a search .

1 .

the escape key ( i.e. , “esc” ) may be used at any time to cancel a search or backup to a previous menu .

2 .

to quit this program and return to the dos prompt ( at any menu option ) , highlight “quit” .

press < enter > .

1 .

at the introductory menu , highlight “how to use this software” .

press < enter > .

2 .

on any menu screen , highlight “ ! help” .

press < enter > .

3 .

technical support is available from: lawson “rick” gist , jr. assistant director gao , office of policy voice ( 202 ) 512-4478 fax ( 202 ) 512-4844 the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1000 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 .

