the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , known as the welfare reform act , made significant changes to the nation's welfare system , including the food stamp program .

in particular , the act limits food stamp program participants who are able - bodied adults between the ages of 18 and 50 and without dependents to 3 months of food stamp benefits within a 3-year period unless they ( 1 ) meet work requirements or ( 2 ) are exempted from these requirements because they live in areas with high unemployment or an insufficient number of jobs .

these able - bodied adults can meet the work requirements by ( 1 ) working a minimum of 80 hours a month ; ( 2 ) participating in qualifying state employment and training programs for 20 hours a week ; or ( 3 ) participating in workfare , which provides work in a public service capacity in exchange for public benefits , such as food stamps .

concerns were raised that some of the able - bodied adults without dependents who were willing to work were not able to find opportunities to meet the welfare reform act's work requirements .

in response , in the balanced budget act of 1997 , the congress increased funding for the food stamp employment and training program to a total of $212 million for fiscal year 1998 and specified that 80 percent of the total had to be spent to help able - bodied adults without dependents meet the work requirements .

the balanced budget act also gave the states the option of exempting up to 15 percent of all able - bodied adults without dependents not otherwise exempted from the work requirements .

this report responds to your request for information on ( 1 ) the number of able - bodied adults without dependents who are receiving food stamp benefits , the number who are required to meet the work requirements , and the number who are exempted from the requirements ; ( 2 ) the number of able - bodied adults without dependents participating in qualifying employment and training or workfare programs ; and ( 3 ) the amounts of federal grant funds that states spent through the first three quarters of fiscal year 1998 for employment and training or workfare programs for food stamp recipients .

the information we developed in response to your request is based in part on our september 1998 survey of state officials administering food stamp employment and training programs .

officials in all the states and the district of columbia responded to our survey covering participation in the food stamp program by able - bodied adults without dependents for the months of april , may , and june 1998 .

most states provided estimates of participation , while a few were able to provide data from their records .

forty - two state agencies — which served just over 90 percent of food stamp participants nationwide — provided sufficient data for reporting on the number of able - bodied adults without dependents who were receiving food stamps and were required to meet the work requirements or who were waived or exempted from those requirements .

only 24 states — which served about half of food stamp participants nationwide — were able to provide sufficient data for reporting on the numbers of able - bodied adults without dependents who were participating in employment and training and / or workfare .

the food stamp program helps low - income individuals and families obtain a more nutritious diet by supplementing their income with food stamp benefits .

the average monthly food stamp benefit was about $70 per person during fiscal year 1997 .

the program is a federal - state partnership in which the federal government pays the cost of the food stamp benefits and 50 percent of the states' administrative costs .

the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( fns ) administers the program at the federal level .

the states' responsibilities include certifying eligible households and calculating and issuing benefits to those who qualify .

the food stamp employment and training program , which existed prior to the welfare reform act , was established to ensure that all able - bodied recipients registered for employment services as a condition of food stamp eligibility .

the program's role is to provide food stamp recipients with opportunities that will lead to paid employment and decrease dependency on assistance programs .

in fiscal year 1997 , the states were granted $79 million in federal employment and training funding and spent $73.9 million , or 94 percent of the grant .

in the balanced budget act of 1997 , the congress increased grant funding for the food stamp employment and training program to a total of $212 million for fiscal year 1998 and specified that 80 percent of the total had to be spent to help able - bodied adults without dependents meet the work requirements .

for fiscal year 1999 , the congress provided $115 million in employment and training funding .

these funds remain available until expended .

employment programs that the states choose to offer may involve the public and private sectors .

for example , workfare , which qualifies as an employment program under the welfare reform act , requires individuals to work in a public service capacity in exchange for public benefits such as food stamps .

some states also allow participants to meet the work requirements by volunteering at nonprofit organizations .

however , under the welfare reform act , job search and job readiness training are specifically excluded as qualifying activities for meeting the act's work requirements .

during april , may , and june 1998 , a monthly average of about 514,200 able - bodied adults without dependents received food stamp benefits , according to information from the 42 states providing sufficient data for analysis .

these adults represented about 3 percent of the monthly average of 17.5 million food stamp participants in the 42 states during that period .

of the 514,200 individuals , about 58 percent , or 296,400 of the able - bodied adults without dependents were required to meet the work requirements ; 40 percent , or 208,200 , were exempted from these requirements because they lived in geographic areas that had received waivers ; and 2 percent , or 9,600 , had been exempted by the states from the work requirements .

 ( see app .

i for state - by - state information. ) .

the number of able - bodied adults without dependents receiving food stamp benefits has apparently declined in recent years , as has their share of participation in the program .

for example , in 1995 , a monthly average of 1.2 million able - bodied adults without dependents in 42 states participated in the food stamp program , compared with the 514,200 individuals who participated in the period we reviewed .

in addition , in 1995 , 5 percent of food stamp participants were estimated to be able - bodied adults without dependents , compared with the 3 percent we identified through our survey of the states .

fns and state officials accounted for these differences by pointing out that ( 1 ) food stamp participation has decreased overall — from about 27 million per month nationwide in 1995 to about 19.5 million in april , may , and june 1998 ; ( 2 ) some able - bodied adults without dependents may have obtained employment and no longer needed food stamps ; and ( 3 ) others who were terminated from the program may not have realized that they could regain eligibility for food stamp benefits through participation in state - sponsored employment and training programs or workfare .

also , the states vary in the criteria they use for identifying able - bodied adults subject to the work requirements .

during april , may , and june 1998 , a monthly average of 23,600 able - bodied adults without dependents filled employment and training and / or workfare positions in the 24 states that provided sufficient data for analysis .

fifteen of these states offered workfare positions , 20 offered employment and training positions , and 11 offered both workfare and employment and training positions .

the 23,600 individuals accounted for about half of the 47,000 able - bodied adults without dependents who were offered state - sponsored employment and training assistance and / or workfare positions .

more specifically: able - bodied adults without dependents filled about 8,000 workfare positions per month , or 34 percent of the 23,700 workfare positions offered by the 15 states with workfare positions ; able - bodied adults without dependents filled about 15,600 employment and training positions per month , or 67 percent of the 23,300 employment and training positions offered by the 20 states .

 ( see app .

i for state - by - state information. ) .

these 23,600 individuals accounted for about 17 percent of the 137,200 able - bodied adults without dependents who were subject to the work requirements in those states .

of the remaining 113,600 , some may have been within the 3-month time frame for receiving food stamp benefits while not working , others may have met these requirements by finding jobs or workfare positions on their own , and some may not have met the work requirements , thereby forfeiting their food stamp benefits .

fns and state officials said they could not yet explain the limited participation in employment and training and workfare programs , but fns officials and some states are trying to develop information on the reasons for low participation .

in addition , some suggested that able - bodied adults without dependents participated to a limited extent in employment and training programs and workfare because they ( 1 ) participate sporadically in the food stamp program , ( 2 ) prefer not to work , or ( 3 ) believe that the relatively low value of food stamp benefits is not enough of an incentive to meet the work requirements .

with only 3 months remaining in fiscal year 1998 , the states were spending at a rate that would result in the use of significantly less grant funds for food stamp employment and training recipients than authorized .

for the first three quarters of the fiscal year , through june 30 , 1998 , the states spent only 28.4 percent , or $60.2 million , of the $212 million in grants , according to fns data .

the rate of spending varied widely by state , ranging from 75 percent , or about $230,000 of the $307,000 authorized for south dakota , to less than 1 percent , or $109,000 of the $13.4 million authorized for michigan .

twenty - five of the states spent less than 20 percent of their grant funds , 17 spent between 20 and 49 percent , and 9 spent 50 percent or more .

also , according to preliminary fourth - quarter financial data reported to fns , 43 states spent about $72 million , or 41 percent of the grant funds available to them for fiscal year 1998 .

 ( see app .

ii. ) .

to better understand why the states were spending less of their grant funds than authorized , we interviewed food stamp directors and employment and training officials in 10 geographically dispersed states.in general , according to these officials , grant spending has been significantly less than authorized because ( 1 ) some states had a limited number of able - bodied adults without dependents who were required to work , ( 2 ) some states needed time to refocus their programs on able - bodied adults without dependents , and ( 3 ) some states reported that it was difficult to serve clients in sparsely populated areas because of transportation problems or the lack of appropriate jobs .

when asked whether spending would change in fiscal year 1999 , state officials had differing expectations .

officials from 4 of the 10 states — georgia , iowa , ohio , and west virginia — said that they anticipate spending about the same or less , and pennsylvania officials were unsure whether spending would change .

in contrast , officials from five states — illinois , michigan , rhode island , texas , and washington — anticipate increases in spending , mostly because of the improvements they have made to their employment and training programs .

in discussing the rate of grant spending , officials of five states — georgia , pennsylvania , washington , texas , and west virginia — said that the requirement to spend 80 percent of funds on able - bodied adults without dependents had caused them to decrease employment and training services to other food stamp participants .

for fiscal year 1998 , a maximum of 20 percent of the available grant funds — $42 million — was available for employment and training activities for other food stamp recipients , while $79 million had been provided for employment and training activities for all food stamp recipients in fiscal year 1997 .

state officials explained that prior to fiscal year 1998 , most employment and training funds had been spent for food stamp participants who were not able - bodied adults without dependents .

with the shift in funds to able - bodied adults without dependents , less has remained for the other food stamp recipients , who typically had constituted the majority of the employment and training participants in the past .

nevertheless , some of those not served by food stamp employment and training programs may be eligible to receive employment and training through other federal and state programs .

we provided usda's food and nutrition service with a copy of a draft of this report for review and comment .

we met with food and nutrition service officials , who provided comments from the food and nutrition service's office of general counsel and the director , program analysis division , office of food stamp programs .

the food and nutrition service generally agreed with the contents of the report and provided technical and clarifying comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate .

to obtain information on the numbers of able - bodied adults without dependents who are receiving food stamps benefits , are required to meet work requirements , are exempted from the work requirements , and are participating in qualifying employment and training and / or workfare programs , we surveyed the states and the district of columbia .

the survey data covered the months of april , may , and june 1998 .

we used the participation data for these months to estimate average monthly participation in the program .

all states and the district of columbia responded to our faxed questionnaire , and we contacted state officials as needed to verify their responses .

eighty - eight percent of the responses provided by 41 states and the district of columbia were based on estimates and the remaining on data in state records .

according to the state officials who provided estimates , their information systems were in the process of being revised and they plan to have actual data for fiscal year 1999 .

to obtain information on state spending of federal grants for employment and training programs , we obtained fns' grant funding data reported by the states and the district of columbia for the first three quarters of fiscal 1998 , the latest data that were available as of november 1998 .

we subsequently obtained preliminary financial data for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 1998 , which are subject to change after financial reconciliation .

to supplement these data , we interviewed state food stamp directors or employment and training officials in 10 geographically dispersed states , including georgia , illinois , iowa , michigan , ohio , pennsylvania , rhode island , texas , washington , and west virginia .

we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from july through november 1998 .

as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter .

at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate senate and house committees ; interested members of congress ; the secretary of agriculture ; the administrator of fns ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties .

we will also make copies available to others upon request .

please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5138 if you or your staff have any questions about this report .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

 ( continued ) average number of food stamp participants ( by individual ) in april , may , and june 1998 per food and nutrition service's ( fns ) data .

this option in the food stamp program not exercised by the state .

data insufficient for analysis .

percent of fiscal year 1998 grant funds expended ( continued ) numbers may not add due to rounding .

charles m. adams , assistant director patricia a. yorkman , project leader alice g. feldesman erin k. barlow nancy bowser carol herrnstadt shulman the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

