the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service authorizes , through special use permits , a variety of rights - of - way on national forest lands .

these rights - of - way include such commercial uses as oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and telephone and fiber - optic lines as well as such public and private uses as state roads and private driveways .

concerned about whether the forest service is receiving fair market value for the lands being used for rights - of - way , as required by the federal land policy and management act of 1976 , the mineral leasing act , and the office of management and budget's circular a - 25 , you asked us to review several issues in connection with how the forest service is administering these lands .

specifically , you asked ( 1 ) whether the fees currently charged to users of forest service - authorized rights - of - way for oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines ( such as telephone and fiber - optic lines ) reflect fair market value ; ( 2 ) how the forest service's fees compare with the fees charged by nonfederal landowners ; and ( 3 ) what , if any , changes are needed to the forest service's fee system to ensure that the fees reflect fair market value .

through special use permits , the forest service authorizes a variety of rights - of - way across the lands it administers .

these include commercial uses such as pipelines and power lines and noncommercial uses such as driveways , roads , and trails .

in total , there are about 13,000 permits for all rights - of - way .

this report focuses on three commercial uses — oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines .

in 1995 , there were about 5,600 permits for these uses , which generated about $2.2 million in fees to the government .

according to federal law , 25 percent of the fees generated from these permits is returned to the states where they were generated .

the remaining 75 percent goes to the u.s. treasury .

the forest service administers about 191.6 million acres of land — roughly the size of california , oregon , and washington combined .

the networks of oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines that cross the nation frequently go through national forest lands .

where these lands are located near population centers , the demand for land is higher , which thereby increases the value of a right - of - way .

in order to best serve their customers , businesses that operate oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines frequently need to gain access to many miles of land in strips usually 20 to 50 feet wide .

these companies negotiate with numerous landowners — both public and private — to gain rights - of - way across their lands .

the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) of 1976 and the mineral leasing act ( mla ) generally require federal agencies to obtain fair market value for the use of federal lands for rights - of - way .

in addition , title v of the independent offices appropriation act of 1952 , as amended in 1982 , requires the federal government to levy fair fees for the use of its services or things of value .

under the office of management and budget's ( omb ) circular a - 25 , which implements the act , the agencies are normally to establish user fees on the basis of market prices .

while there are exceptions to this practice , they are generally reserved for federal , state , and local government agencies and nonprofit organizations .

the forest service's current fees for commercial rights - of - way for oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines frequently do not reflect fair market value .

before 1986 , the forest service used a variety of techniques to establish fees for rights - of - way .

these fees were based on appraisals , negotiations , a small percentage of the permittees' investment in the land , or a small percentage of the estimated value of the land .

however , in 1986 the forest service implemented a fee schedule to address the problems that the agency was having in administering the fees for rights - of - way .

agency officials told us that the 1986 fee schedule reflected land values representing the low end of the market .

as a result , when the fee schedule was implemented , the fees for rights - of - way near some urban areas were significantly reduced from pre - 1986 levels .

before 1986 , the forest service did not have a consistent system to establish fees for oil and gas pipelines , power lines , or communications lines .

the agency's field staff used different methods for developing the fees for rights - of - way .

some used a percentage of the estimated value of the land or a percentage of the permittees' investment in the land , while others used appraisals and negotiations with the permittees to set the fees .

however , in addition to being inconsistent , these practices resulted in unpredictable fees and appraisals that were subject to an appeals process .

at that time , agency officials thought that moving to a fee schedule based on fair market value would resolve these problems .

to develop a fee schedule based on fair market value , forest service officials , as well as officials from the department of the interior's bureau of land management ( blm ) , collected market data on raw land values throughout the country .

on the basis of these data , the forest service and blm produced a fee schedule in 1986 which charged annual per acre fees that were based on the location and type of the right - of - way .

the rates in the fee schedule were indexed to the implicit price deflator to account for future inflation .

however , according to forest service officials , the agency's management and the industry viewed the rates as being too high .

as a result , the fees in the 1986 schedule were reduced by 20 percent for oil and gas pipelines and 30 percent for power lines and communications lines .

before the reductions , the fees represented average raw land values for federal lands .

these values did not consider several factors that are critical to establishing land values that reflect fair market value .

specifically , they did not reflect what the land was being used for , the “highest and best” use of the land , or the values of any urban uses .

for example , if these factors are not considered , land located near a large metropolitan area , which might otherwise be used for a residential housing development , would be valued as if it were being used for livestock grazing — a use that would result in a considerably lesser value .

as such , according to forest service officials , the data used to generate the land values used in the fee system represented the “bottom of the market” and did not reflect fair market value .

nonetheless , the fee schedule established in 1986 is the basis for current fees .

the forest service officials in the agency's lands division , which is responsible for the rights - of - way program at a national level , estimated that many of the current fees for rights - of - way may be only about 10 percent of the fair market value — particularly for lands near large urban areas .

however , agency officials acknowledged that this estimate is based on their professional judgment and program experience and that there are no national data to support it .

because the fee schedule did not reflect several critical factors for determining fair market value , the fees for many rights - of - way , especially in forests near urban areas , were reduced when the fee schedule was implemented in 1986 .

for example , in the san bernardino national forest near los angeles , the annual fee for a fiber - optic cable was $465.40 per acre before the fee schedule was implemented and $11.16 afterwards .

in the same forest , the annual fee for a power line was $72.51 per acre before the fee schedule and $8.97 afterwards .

while these examples are among the most notable , the fees at forests that were not near urban areas frequently were also reduced .

for example , in the lolo national forest in montana , the fees for a communications line right - of - way went from $19.88 per acre to $17.23 per acre .

overall , at four of the six national forests where we collected detailed information , we found examples of fees that were reduced when the agency moved to a fee schedule in 1986 .

the forest service and blm use the same fee schedule for rights - of - way .

in march 1995 , the department of the interior's inspector general issued a report which found that blm's fee system did not collect fair market value for rights - of - way .

in the report , the inspector general estimated that blm could be losing as much as $49 million ( net present value ) during the terms of the current rights - of - way by charging less than fair market value .

at the time of the report , the agency had authorized 30,600 rights - of - way subject to rental payments .

to determine how the forest service's fees compare with those charged by nonfederal landowners , we collected and analyzed information on charges for rights - of - way by states and private landowners .

we found that state and private landowners frequently charge higher fees than the forest service .

however , because our analysis is based on a judgmental sample of forests , it is important to note that our findings may not be representative of the situation for the nation as a whole .

to compare the forest service's fees with those charged by nonfederal landowners , we collected available data on fees charged by nonfederal landowners in the same states as the forests that we visited .

these forests included the san bernardino national forest and angeles national forest in california , the arapaho / roosevelt national forest in colorado , the lolo national forest in montana , the washington / jefferson national forest in virginia , and the mount baker / snoqualmie national forest in washington .

our objective was to include forests from different parts of the country , some of which are near urban areas and some of which are in rural areas .

since most nonfederal landowners charge a one - time fee either in perpetuity or for an extended term , such as 30 years , we used a net present value analysis to convert the forest service's annual fees to an equivalent one - time fee , which could then be compared with the one - time fee charged by nonfederal landowners .

table 1 compares the forest service's fees at the six forests we sampled with those charged by nonfederal landowners in the general vicinity of that forest .

as table 1 shows , the forest service's fees are frequently less than fees charged by nonfederal landowners for similar rights - of - way .

this was the case in 16 of the 17 examples we found during our review .

in over half ( 10 ) of the examples , the forest service's fees were over $500 per acre less than the fees charged by nonfederal landowners .

for example , in 1993 a power company negotiated with a private landowner in virginia to obtain a right - of - way to run a power line .

the power company agreed to pay a one - time fee of $42,280 for 30.2 acres of land , or $1,400 per acre .

the forest service's annual fee in 1993 for that part of virginia was $22.01 per acre .

our use of net present value techniques showed that the right - of - way operator's annual payment to the forest service of $22.01 per acre was equivalent to a one - time payment of $546 per acre .

thus , the forest service's one - time fee was $854 per acre less than the fee charged by the private landowner .

another example from the table shows that in 1995 , a natural gas pipeline in california paid a one - time fee of $130,726 per acre for a right - of - way on state land .

as the table shows , the forest service's comparable fee is over $129,000 less than the state of california's fee .

while this difference is atypical of other examples we found , it nonetheless demonstrates how a unique parcel of land can have a considerable value .

furthermore , it is an example of how difficult it is to design a fee schedule that can reflect the fair market value of all lands managed by the forest service .

in addition to collecting comparable data on fees in the same states as the six national forests we visited , we also gathered examples of the rates paid to state and private landowners by the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) — an electric utility operating in the northwestern united states .

bpa runs power lines across hundreds of miles of land owned by the federal government , states , and private entities .

we included bpa in our review because during the course of our work , we learned that this utility had extensive data on the rates it was paying for rights - of - way .

therefore , it was a good source of data on fees .

the data in table 2 are based on a sample from a database of fees that bpa paid to state and private landowners .

the table compares the rates bpa paid to state and private owners with the rates charged by the forest service in that area .

as table 2 shows , in 12 out of 14 examples , the fees charged by nonfederal landowners were higher than those charged by the forest service and in most cases were significantly higher — $100 or more per acre .

in 6 of the 14 examples , the fees charged by nonfederal landowners were over $1,000 per acre higher than the fees charged by the forest service in the area .

for example , in 1990 bpa negotiated with a private landowner in montana to gain a right - of - way for a power line .

bpa and the landowner agreed to a one - time payment of $11,106 for 5.03 acres of land , or about $2,208 per acre .

in comparison , in 1990 the forest service's fee schedule produced an annual fee of $14.88 per acre for land located in the same county as the private land .

our use of net present value techniques showed that the annual payment received by the forest service of $14.88 per acre was equivalent to a one - time payment of $369 per acre .

thus , the forest service's one - time fee was $1,839 per acre less than the fee charged by the private landowner .

in order to meet the requirements of flpma , mla , and omb circular a - 25 , the forest service needs to revise and update its current fee system to establish fees that more closely reflect fair market value .

the way to accomplish this task is to develop a system that is based on data that reflect current land values .

however , each of the several available options for developing such a system has costs and benefits that need to be considered .

many of the industry representatives we spoke with acknowledged that nonfederal landowners generally charge higher fees than the forest service .

furthermore , these representatives indicated that they would be willing to pay higher market - based fees if the forest service improves its administration of the program by using more market - like business practices .

both the industry representatives and forest service officials suggested several changes that , if implemented , could improve the efficiency of the program for both the forest service and the industry .

the forest service has several options available to revise its fee system for rights - of - way to reflect fair market value .

among them are three basic options: ( 1 ) develop a new fee schedule based on recent appraisals and local market data ; ( 2 ) develop a new fee schedule , as noted above , but allow agency staff the alternative of obtaining site - specific appraisals when the fee schedule results in fees that do not adequately reflect the fair market value of a right - of - way ; or ( 3 ) eliminate the fee schedule and establish fees for each individual right - of - way based on a site - specific appraisal or local market data .

the first option involves developing a new fee schedule based on recent appraisals and local market data .

this option would include performing some site - specific appraisals of forest service rights - of - way and developing an inventory of the rates charged by nonfederal landowners for various types of rights - of - way in the area .

these data would be used to formulate a new , more up - to - date fee schedule that would set annual fees for identified areas within a forest .

the fee schedule would be used in the same way that the current schedule is used .

in this way , the forest service could , for the most part , charge annual fees that broadly reflect the fair market value of a right - of - way for an area .

the advantage of having a fee schedule , and one of the reasons the agency originally decided to use a fee schedule , is that it is both easy to use and generates fees that are consistent and predictable for the industry .

the disadvantage of a fee schedule is that it does not take into account the unique characteristics that may affect the value of a particular parcel of land .

therefore , instances may arise when a fee schedule will charge fees that are significantly different from fair market value — as our analysis has shown .

furthermore , performing appraisals and collecting market data to develop a new fee schedule will cost the agency time and money .

however , these additional costs may be offset by the additional revenue that would be generated from the increased fees .

another disadvantage of using a fee schedule is that it carries the administrative burden and cost of having to bill and collect fees every year .

a second option available to the forest service is a variation of the first option .

it too would involve developing a new fee schedule based on recent appraisals and market data .

however , under this approach , the fees in the schedule would be used as minimum fees .

when it appears that the fees from this schedule do not properly value a right - of - way , the agency would be permitted to obtain an individual site appraisal to determine the fair market value of the site .

the fee would then be based on the appraisal instead of the fee in the schedule .

this option would offer the ease of use provided by a fee schedule combined with an accounting of the unique characteristics of individual parcels of land as provided for in appraisals .

if the agency decided to use this option in developing a new fee system , it would have to develop meaningful criteria for when field staff should seek an appraisal .

otherwise , agency field staff may not seek to obtain appraisals when they are justified .

for example , the forest service's current fee schedule contains a provision that permits forest service field staff to obtain appraisals .

however , basing a fee on an appraisal can only occur when fair market value is 10 times greater than the fee from the fee schedule .

this “10-times” rule is viewed by forest service officials in headquarters and in the field as being too high and , as a result , serves as a disincentive to obtaining appraisals .

in fact , forest service headquarters and field staff could recall only one occasion in the past 10 years when this 10-times rule was used .

a third option available to the forest service is to eliminate the fee schedule and establish fees for each individual right - of - way based on a site - specific appraisal or local market data .

appraisals are a technique commonly used in the marketplace for determining fair market value .

by performing site - specific appraisals , the forest service could charge fees reflective of the fair market value for each individual permit .

the fees could also be based on local market data .

this method would be the most appropriate when agency staff are familiar with the fees being charged for nonfederal lands or when recent appraisal data are available from nearby lands .

the obvious advantage of obtaining site - specific appraisals is that the practice would result in fees that would accurately reflect the fair market value for each individual permit throughout the forest service .

as such , it would meet the requirements of flpma , mla , and omb circular a - 25 .

like the other options , the downside of using appraisals is that they could be costly and / or time - consuming and could likely be subject to appeals because of their inherent subjectivity .

in addition , this approach could be more difficult to administer than a fee schedule because of the need to perform appraisals on thousands of right - of - way permits across the nation .

however , to mitigate this burden , the agency could require the users of rights - of - way to pay for any needed appraisals — something the industry representatives we spoke to agreed with .

industry officials we talked to representing a large segment of the users of rights - of - way indicated that , from their perspective , the value of rights - of - way on forest service lands is generally less than the value of similar nonfederal lands because of the administrative problems the prospective permittees may encounter in obtaining forest service permits .

however , most of the industry representatives we spoke with told us that if the forest service improves its administration of the rights - of - way program by using more market - like administrative practices , they would be willing to pay fair market value for rights - of - way on forest service lands .

while revising its fee system , the forest service can do several things to improve the administration of permits for rights - of - way .

these include ( 1 ) using a more market - like instrument , such as an easement instead of a permit , to authorize rights - of - way ; ( 2 ) billing less frequently or one time over the term of an authorization instead of annually ; ( 3 ) providing consolidated billing for operators that have more than one right - of - way permit in a forest or region ; and ( 4 ) making more timely decisions when processing new authorizations .

these improvements would both reduce the agency's cost of administering rights - of - way and bring about the use of industry practices commonly found in the market .

the forest service has the authority to make most of these changes .

however , mla requires annual payments for rights - of - way for oil and gas pipelines .

thus , changing fee collection from an annual payment to a one - time payment would require legislative action from the congress .

instead of employing special use permits to grant right - of - way authorizations , one improvement the forest service could make is to grant authorizations using an instrument , such as an easement , that is more commonly found in the market .

special use permits convey rights that are similar to those of easements but not equal to them .

special use permits are revocable .

in other words , during the term of a permit , if the agency decides that a right - of - way is no longer consistent with management's goals for an area of a forest , the agency can revoke the permit and require the operator to remove his investment in the land and leave .

because of this situation , banks do not recognize a permit as granting a value in the land equivalent to that granted by an easement , which is not revocable but can be terminated if the operator breaches the terms and conditions of the easement .

the constraint on special use permits affects the users of rights - of - way when they are trying to obtain financing for a project .

with a permit , the permittee is also at risk if the forest service decides to trade or exchange the land that the right - of - way crosses .

in such instances , the permittee must renegotiate a right - of - way with the new landowner .

if the forest service is going to revise its fee system to reflect fair market value , then the agency also needs a comparable instrument that conveys rights similar to those commonly found in the marketplace .

this comparability could best be achieved by issuing easements instead of permits .

permits have been viewed by agency officials as giving the forest service more flexibility because it can terminate them if the use is no longer consistent with management's objectives in a forest .

in practice , agency officials indicated that rarely has this flexibility been used to revoke a permit .

another improvement available to the agency in administering rights - of - way is to revise its billing system to eliminate the annual billing of permit fees .

instead , the agency could bill only once for the 20- or 30-year term of an authorization , or perhaps reduce billing to every 5 or 10 years .

the agency has the authority to make this change for power lines and communications lines , but it would need to seek authority to do so for oil and gas pipelines .

in addition , the agency can consolidate billing for operators that have multiple permits within the same forest or region .

one - time billing and consolidated billing would reduce costs to both the agency and the permittee .

for example , the forest service estimates that it costs the agency an average of about $40 to mail a bill and collect payment for a permit .

over the life of a 30-year permit , the agency's costs would be $1,200 .

with 5,600 rights - of - way permits for oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines , the potential savings for the program could be substantial — roughly $6.7 million ( $1,200 x 5,600 permits ) over a 30-year term .

 ( the potential savings of $6.7 million has a net present value of about $3.9 million. ) .

if the agency moved to a one - time payment , it would substantially reduce the costs of processing bills in the future .

these costs can be further reduced by consolidating billing for multiple permits issued to the same operator within a forest or region .

while the agency has made progress in consolidating some bills into “master permits,” industry officials indicated that there remain more opportunities for consolidation .

both one - time billing and consolidated billing are commonly found in the marketplace , and both are supported by industry representatives .

furthermore , moving to a one - time billing process has significant cost - savings implications if and when the forest service attempts to increase its fees to reflect fair market value .

specifically , if the forest service decides to move to site - specific appraisals to establish fees , as described in the third option , the agency would have to do thousands of appraisals to determine the fees for the current permits .

as we noted , under current conditions , this additional workload could be both costly and time - consuming .

however , if the agency moved to a one - time billing process and based its fees on site - specific appraisals , then the agency would need to perform an appraisal on each permit only once over a 20- to 30-year authorization period .

while the agency would spend more of its resources on appraisals , agency officials indicated that the cost savings of moving to one - time billing would more than cover the additional appraisal costs .

furthermore , the agency can largely negate these costs by requiring the users to pay for any needed appraisals .

the industry representatives that we spoke to had no problem with paying for the necessary appraisals as long as the agency also moved to easements and one - time billing .

another improvement to the agency's administration of rights - of - way is to reduce the time the agency takes to reach a decision on whether to approve a new right - of - way .

industry representatives indicated that it frequently takes months and occasionally years for the forest service to reach a decision on whether to approve an application for a new right - of - way permit .

generally , delays in approving applications are the result of a lack of agency staff to perform environmental studies and inconsistent requirements among forest service units .

forest service headquarters officials acknowledged that applications for permits are not processed in a timely manner , and they are now trying to identify opportunities for streamlining the agency's practices to help address this issue .

it is their view that the industry should assume a greater share of the costs of both processing applications for new rights - of - way and administering existing rights - of - way .

industry representatives we spoke with indicated a willingness to pay for application and administration costs .

both agency and industry representatives have been working together to implement and resolve this issue .

the forest service needs to update its current fees to fair market value for rights - of - way used by operators of oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines .

in most cases , nonfederal landowners charge higher fees for similar rights - of - way .

in attempting to arrive at fees based on fair market value , the agency has several options .

each of these options has a number of advantages and disadvantages .

the initial costs of developing a new fee system could be substantial because of the need to perform appraisals and collect the market data needed to establish fair market value .

these costs could be mitigated , and in some cases negated , with some administrative improvements to the program .

given the tight budgets and resource constraints that all federal land management agencies are experiencing , one option appears to be the most advantageous — obtaining site - specific appraisals that are paid for by the users of rights - of - way .

however , to implement this option , a number of other changes would have to be made to the program to make it more market - like and more efficient to administer .

to meet the requirements of flpma , mla , and omb circular a - 25 , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of the forest service to develop a fee system that ensures that fair market value is obtained from companies that have rights - of - way to operate oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines across forest service lands .

while there are a number of options available to accomplish this goal , the option of establishing fees based on local market data or site - specific appraisals paid for by the users of rights - of - way appears to be the most attractive because it collects fair market value for each right - of - way and also reduces the agency's administrative costs .

we also recommend that the secretary improve the administration of the program by ( 1 ) authorizing rights - of - way with a more market - like instrument — specifically , easements ; ( 2 ) billing once during the term of an authorization or , at a minimum , reducing the frequency of the billing cycle ; and ( 3 ) consolidating the billing of multiple permits issued to the same operator in a forest or region .

to the extent that the agency needs additional authority to charge one - time fees , we recommend that the secretary seek that authority from the congress .

in addition , we also recommend that the forest service continue its efforts to streamline its practices for processing applications for right - of - way authorizations .

we provided a draft of this report to the forest service and the western utility group — an industry group representing a large number of users of rights - of - way — for their review and comment .

we met with officials from the forest service — including the acting director of the division of lands — and with officials from the western utility group , including its chairman .

both the agency and the western utility group agreed with the factual content , conclusions , and recommendations in the report .

while the forest service officials agreed with the report's recommendations , they noted that the recommendations should also include having the forest service ( 1 ) look for ways to operate more efficiently and ( 2 ) manage the rights - of - way program in a more business - like manner .

we are not including these points because we believe they are already inherent in our recommendations .

the forest service officials also stated that the industry should assume a greater share of the costs of both processing applications for new rights - of - way and administering existing rights - of - way .

we have revised the report to reflect this comment .

officials from the western utility group provided us with some clarifications on technical issues , which have been included in the report as appropriate .

they also noted that while they currently pay nonfederal landowners higher fees for rights - of - way , it is their view that they get more from these landowners than they do from the forest service because nonfederal landowners ( 1 ) generally use easements , instead of permits , to authorize rights - of - way and ( 2 ) are more timely than the forest service in responding to requests for rights - of - way .

we conducted our review from april 1995 through march 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

we performed our work at forest service headquarters and field offices .

we also contacted nonfederal landowners and representatives of companies that operate oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines on federal lands .

appendix ii contains further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology .

as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter .

at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of agriculture , the chief of the u.s. forest service , and the director of the office of management and budget .

we will also make copies available to others on request .

should you have questions about this report or need more information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 .

major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .

we were asked by the chairman , subcommittee on oversight of government management and the district of columbia , senate committee on governmental affairs , to determine ( 1 ) whether the fees currently charged to users of forest service rights - of - way that operate oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines reflect fair market value , ( 2 ) how the forest service's fees compare with fees charged by nonfederal landowners , and ( 3 ) what , if any , changes are needed to the forest service's fee system to ensure that fees reflect fair market value .

our review included rights - of - way managed by the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service .

our work addressed the major commercial users of rights - of - way: oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines .

to determine how the forest service establishes fees for rights - of - way , we reviewed the laws and implementing regulations governing rights - of - way .

because the forest service and the bureau of land management ( blm ) worked together to develop the joint 1986 fee schedule for rights - of - way , we reviewed the methods these agencies used to develop the schedule .

however , we did not verify the accuracy of the data or the computations used by the agencies in developing this fee schedule .

to determine whether the current federal fees reflect fair market value , we reviewed applicable laws and regulations , along with the department of agriculture's requirements for obtaining fair market value on lands it administers .

we interviewed representatives of nonfederal entities ( states , counties , private companies , and private landowners ) to obtain information on commonly accepted techniques for determining fair market value .

we also interviewed officials at forest service headquarters and field locations .

we reviewed rights - of - way in six national forests: the angeles national forest and the san bernardino national forest in california , the arapaho / roosevelt national forest in colorado , the lolo national forest in montana , the washington / jefferson national forest in virginia , and the mount baker / snoqualmie national forest in washington .

we selected these sites to obtain broad geographical representation and to encompass a high volume of commercial rights - of - way .

to determine how federal fees compare with fees charged on nonfederal land , we compared the fee determination methods used by the forest service and blm to those used by states , counties , private companies , and private landowners .

for example , we interviewed state and county officials responsible for rights - of - way agreements in california , colorado , montana , virginia , and washington .

we also interviewed commercial land managers who manage private lands in montana and virginia .

furthermore , we reviewed the bonneville power administration's ( bpa ) settlement records for rights - of - way in montana and washington states .

in addition , state and county officials , private land managers , and bpa administrators told us what they charged and / or were charged for various types of rights - of - way agreements .

using net present value techniques , we compared these fees with those charged by the federal government .

in order to compute the net present value of future payments to the forest service , we deflated future payments by 4.2 percent per year .

we obtained this number by subtracting expected inflation from the 30-year government bond rate .

as of march 21 , 1996 , the 30-year government bond rate was 6.65 percent , and the wefa group's forecast for inflation was 2.45 percent .

 ( the wefa group is a commonly cited , private economic forecasting organization that produces estimates of the long - term economic outlook , including expected inflation. ) .

to obtain views on potential changes to the forest service's fee schedule , we met with officials of the western utility group .

this organization represents over 25 major companies that operate oil and gas pipelines , power lines , and communications lines .

these companies represent about 75 percent of the energy and communications business in 11 western states .

about 74 percent of all the land in the forest service is within these 11 western states .

 ( for a list of member organizations of the western utility group , see app .

i. ) .

in addition , we interviewed private landowners and forest service personnel in each of the states we visited .

finally , we interviewed several blm field staff to obtain their viewpoints on the fee schedule .

joseph d. kile the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

