we are pleased to participate in this joint subcommittee hearing today to discuss our ongoing review of the health care financing administration's ( hcfa ) efforts to design , develop , and implement a critical new claims - processing system , the medicare transaction system ( mts ) .

at the request of chairman shays , we have been evaluating hcfa's progress ; specifically , we were asked to focus on the process for defining mts requirements , and the reliability of the development schedule and project cost estimates .

in connection with our ongoing work to identify recognized best practices for large systems - development efforts , we are also providing observations on hcfa's overall approach to managing mts .

we are finding , mr .

chairmen , that hcfa's approach has several strengths , and several weaknesses that have contributed to early symptoms of unnecessary risk .

on the positive side , hcfa plans to design and develop mts to allow for future modifications .

with the vast and varied medicare reform issues before the congress , this is essential .

hcfa also plans to build , test , and implement mts in increments , or segments , thereby mitigating the impact of large - scale problems ; similarly , the system is planned for deployment initially at a limited number of sites , which means that hcfa should be able to identify problems and correct them before further implementation .

finally , hcfa's plans include worthwhile goals such as improving customer service through direct access to medicare claims information through mts , both for beneficiaries and providers .

these are all good ideas .

we see problems , however , that seem to stem from the lack of a disciplined management process that has as its hallmark managing information systems and technology as investments .

not managing mts in this way has led to system design and development proceeding despite ( 1 ) difficulties in defining requirements , ( 2 ) a compressed schedule containing significant overlap of system - development phases , and ( 3 ) a lack of reliable information about costs and benefits .

these deficiencies increase risk .

the results of our work looking at systems - development initiatives shows , however , that management attention to implementing effective investment - control practices can reduce such risk .

hcfa officials have expressed interest in learning more about effective management practices that have helped other organizations succeed with similar projects , and we have agreed to continue to work with them by suggesting successful approaches to reduce mts development risks .

now is the time for careful scrutiny and improvement to enhance the chances that mts will perform as required: fortunately , the project is still in its early developmental stages , and the outlay of funds has been limited .

hcfa's vision , which we support , is for a single , unified system to replace the nine current systems now used by medicare , the nation's largest health insurer , serving about 37 million americans .

the goals of mts are to better protect program funds from waste , fraud , and abuse ; allow better oversight of medicare contractors' operations ; improve service to beneficiaries and providers ; and reduce administrative expenses .

at present , hcfa expects mts to be fully operational in september 1999 , and to process over 1 billion claims and pay $288 billion in benefits per year by 2000 .

these are ambitious goals , and we realize that developing such a system is complex and challenging .

currently , when legislative or administrative initiatives result in revised payment or coverage policies , each of the nine automated systems maintained by medicare contractors to process claims must be modified .

an integrated system would eliminate the need for such cumbersome and costly multiple processes .

in january 1994 , hcfa awarded a contract to gte government systems corporation to design , develop , and implement the new automated system for processing claims .

two related contracts were awarded: to intermetrics , inc. , in april 1994 for what is known as independent verification and validation , or iv&v — a separate technical check on gte's work ; and to seta corporation in september 1995 for systems testing .

over the last 12 years , the federal government has spent more than $200 billion on information technology , and we have evaluated hundreds of these projects .

on the basis of this work , we have determined that two basic , recurring problems constrain the ability of organizations to successfully develop large systems: ( 1 ) failure to adequately select , plan , prioritize , and control information system projects ; and ( 2 ) failure to take advantage of business process improvements that can significantly reduce costs , improve productivity , and provide better services to customers .

these problems have often led to meager results in federal agency efforts to design , develop , and acquire complex information systems .

for example , after investing over 12 years of effort , the federal aviation administration ( faa ) chose to cut its losses in its problem - plagued advanced automation system by cancelling or extensively restructuring elements of this modernization of the nation's air traffic control system .

the reasons for faa's problems included the failure to ( 1 ) accurately estimate the project's technical complexity and resource requirements , ( 2 ) finalize system requirements , and ( 3 ) adequately oversee contractor activities .

similarly , our work on irs' tax systems modernization , designed to automate selected tax - processing functions , identified several weaknesses .

for example , irs lacked ( 1 ) a disciplined process for managing definition of requirements , and ( 2 ) a management process for controlling software development .

these problems caused significant rework and delays .

last year , to help federal agencies improve their chances of success , we completed a study of how successful private and public organizations reached their goals of acquiring information systems that significantly improved their ability to carry out their missions .

our report describes an integrated set of fundamental management practices that were instrumental in producing success .

the active involvement of senior managers , focusing on minimizing project risks and maximizing return on investment , was essential .

to accomplish these objectives , senior managers in successful organizations consistently followed these practices — which have become known as best practices — to ensure that they received information needed to make timely and appropriate decisions .

among others , one key practice is for executives to manage information systems as investments rather than expenses .

this requires using disciplined investment control processes that provide quantitative and qualitative information that senior managers can use to continuously monitor costs , benefits , schedules , and risks ; and to ensure that structured systems - development methodologies are used throughout the system's life cycle .

a consensus has emerged within the administration and the congress that better investment decisions on information technology projects are needed to help the government improve service .

important changes recently made to several laws and executive policy guidance are instituting best - practice approaches of leading organizations into the federal government .

this month , the office of management and budget will issue guidance that describes an analytical framework for making information technology investment decisions .

developed in cooperation with gao , this guidance calls for agencies to implement management practices to select , control , and evaluate information technology investments throughout their life cycles .

hcfa has not yet instituted a set of well - defined investment control processes to measure the quality of development efforts and monitor progress and problems .

this situation has contributed to a series of problems related to requirements - definition , schedule , and costs ; these problems raise concerns that mts may suffer the same fate as many other complex systems — extensive delays , large cost increases , and the inability to achieve potential benefits .

first , hcfa has not sufficiently followed sound practices in defining mts project requirements .

as a result , hcfa has twice redirected the approach and , 2 years into the contract , requirements definition at the appropriate level of specificity has not been completed .

requirements , which are defined during the analysis phase of a project , document the detailed functions and processes the system is expected to perform and the performance level to be achieved .

they are intended to correct deficiencies in the current system and take advantage of opportunities to improve program economy , efficiency , and service .

because requirements provide the foundation for designing , developing , testing , and implementing the system , it is critical that they be precisely defined to avoid ambiguity and overlap , and that they completely and logically describe all features of the planned system .

using an appropriate methodology to define requirements significantly reduces risk that requirements defects will cause technical problems .

originally , hcfa's plans called for gte to document the current systems' requirements , while hcfa staff defined new or future requirements for mts .

however , in september 1994 , hcfa concluded that gte's analysis of the current systems did not contain enough detail to fully describe the current systems' requirements .

hcfa then directed gte to provide additional detail .

in september 1995 , hcfa concluded that the products gte was developing were too detailed , and again directed gte to refocus its efforts — this time , however , on assisting hcfa staff in defining future mts requirements .

on the basis of our experience in evaluating other systems , such multiple redirections in the analysis phase of a major project indicate that hcfa's process to control requirements lacks discipline .

hcfa currently lacks an effective process for managing requirements , and has not provided adequate guidance to staff responsible for defining requirements .

these deficiencies have also been cited by the iv&v contractor as an area of significant risk .

because of problems in completing the definition of requirements , and hcfa's plans to implement a fully functional mts in september 1999 , hcfa is proceeding into the next phase of system development , the design phase , before requirements have been completed .

hcfa plans to select an mts design alternative by the end of this calendar year , but requirements are not scheduled to be completed until september 1996 .

because design alternatives are used to determine how the system will be structured , if the alternatives do not reflect key requirements , the system's future capabilities may be seriously constrained .

the iv&v contractor pointed out that hcfa's plan to select the system design in parallel with defining system requirements also increases risks that the system will not meet important goals .

hcfa officials told us they believe that mts requirements are sufficiently defined to prepare high - level system - design alternatives , but the iv&v contractor disagrees .

to support critical design decisions , requirements need to be sufficiently detailed to include such functions and processes as performance levels and response times .

when we reviewed hcfa's preliminary set of requirements , we found that many of them did not contain enough detail .

second , hcfa's development schedule for mts contains significant overlap — or concurrency — among the various system - development phases: analysis , design , programming , testing , validation , and implementation .

as shown in figure 1 , the april 1994 mts schedule — an early estimate by hcfa — is used only to illustrate the sequential nature of these phases .

the november 1995 schedule shows extensive concurrency ; for example , the analysis and design phases are occurring simultaneously during the period from july 1994 to september 1996 .

in our january 1994 report on mts , we stated that if a contractor advances too far into a succeeding system - development phase before sufficient progress has been made in the previous phase , the risk that technical problems will occur is significantly increased .

senior hcfa officials recently told us that the mts schedule contains concurrency because it is important to deploy the system before the end of the century ; otherwise , significant costs would be incurred to modify existing systems .

what is needed is quantifiable information on this cost , compared with an assessment of the risks of concurrency .

hcfa has not , however , implemented a formal process to assess and manage system - development risks .

the iv&v contractor has also cited this lack of a formal risk - assessment process as a problem .

in addition , while hcfa's mts schedule has been revised several times because of the redirection of requirements definition in the analysis phase , the initial and final system - implementation dates have remained largely unchanged .

as a result , the time scheduled to complete the rest of the system - development phases to meet those dates is now significantly compressed .

for example , because hcfa did not adjust the initial operating capability date , it is now scheduled , at one point in a 1-year period , to work concurrently on the remaining development phases — design , programming , testing , and validation .

on the basis of our previous work on large systems - development efforts , we believe that failure to allow for sufficient time to complete system - development phases increases risk and will likely result in reduced systems capability .

moreover , hcfa has not developed an integrated schedule that reflects both hcfa and contractor activities , work products , and time frames needed to perform these activities .

such a schedule provides an important tool for closely monitoring progress and problems in completing various activities .

without detailed insight about the actual status of all development activities , management will not have the information it needs to make timely decisions .

hcfa's iv&v contractor also cited concerns about the lack of an integrated schedule baseline for mts .

hcfa officials agreed that such a schedule is important .

finally , hcfa has not sufficiently developed disciplined processes to adequately monitor progress in achieving cost and benefit objectives , which are important to managing projects as investments .

the estimated mts project costs , pegged by hcfa at $151 million in 1992 , have not been updated since then , and hcfa is not tracking internal costs associated with the project , such as personnel , training , and travel .

according to hcfa officials , they plan to update their cost estimate next year , to reflect their current understanding of mts' capabilities .

similarly , except for estimated administrative savings of $200 million a year during the first 6 years of operation ( 1997-2002 ) , hcfa has not yet quantified other important expected benefits of mts , such as targets for reducing fraud , waste , and abuse , and improving services to beneficiaries and providers .

without current information on costs and potential benefits , hcfa executives will not be in the best position to realistically monitor performance or identify and maximize the system's true return on investment .

we have seen an inescapable pattern in agencies' development of information systems: even on a small scale , those that are not developed according to sound practices encounter major , expensive problems later on .

the larger the project , the bigger the risk .

it takes serious , sustained effort and disciplined management processes to effectively manage system development .

effective oversight greatly reduces exposure to risk ; without it , risk is dramatically and needlessly increased .

the risks we see in the development of mts can be substantially reduced if hcfa management implements some of the best practices that have been proven effective in other organizations: managing systems as investments , changing information management practices , creating line manager ownership , better managing resources , and measuring performance .

hcfa still has time to correct these deficiencies .

we are encouraged by hcfa's expression of interest in learning about how to implement the best practices in systems development used by successful organizations , and look forward to working with them .

this concludes our statement , mr .

chairmen .

we will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

