we are pleased to be here today to discuss the national weather service's ( nws ) systems modernization program .

at an estimated cost of about $4.5 billion , it is one of the largest modernization programs in the federal government .

the modernization is vital to the weather service's plans for improving operations ; at the same time , it is intended to help nws streamline and downsize its organization , and is an effort that we continue to endorse .

as with most large systems - development projects , however , this program faces persistent challenges that must be overcome if the considerable anticipated benefits of full modernization are to be realized .

our concerns led us to place the weather service effort on our 1995 list of high - risk government programs , where it remains today .

the work of the national weather service is critically important to all americans , as the united states experiences considerable severe weather .

in a typical year , the united states is pummeled by about 10,000 violent thunderstorms ; 5,000 floods ; 1,000 tornadoes ; and several hurricanes .

as we have seen in recent months , unpredictable weather can wreak havoc in people's lives ; sometimes the difference between tragedy and recoverable loss lies in the ability of early forecasts and warnings of potentially dangerous weather to help protect life and property .

nws uses a variety of systems and manual processes to collect , process , and disseminate weather data to and among its network of field offices and regional and national centers .

prior to the modernization , these systems and processes were largely outdated .

radar equipment dated back to the 1950s , and much of the current information processing , display , and data communications system has been in use since the 1970s .

to enhance its ability to deliver weather services , nws determined some 15 years ago to use the power of technology to “do more with less.” to reach the goal of better forecasting and earlier warnings with a smaller , downsized operation , the weather service has been acquiring new observing systems — including radars , satellites , and ground - based sensors — as well as powerful forecaster workstations .

the goals of the modernization were to ( 1 ) achieve more uniform weather services nationwide , ( 2 ) improve forecasting , ( 3 ) provide more reliable detection and prediction of severe weather and flooding , ( 4 ) permit more cost - effective operations , and ( 5 ) achieve higher productivity .

the modernization includes four major systems - development programs , which i will briefly describe .

this program integrates , for the first time , satellite , radar , and other data to support weather forecaster decision - making and communications ; it is the linchpin of the nws modernization .

operating under a $550-million funding cap , the system is expected to be fully deployed in 1999 .

awips development systems have been delivered to 16 locations nationwide ; this represents the first two of six modules , or “builds.” awips is planned for a total of 152 locations once fully deployed .

this is a program to acquire , launch , and control five satellites for identifying and tracking severe weather events , such as hurricanes .

the first satellite was launched in 1994 , and the second in 1995 .

three more satellites are planned for launch between now and 2002 .

the total cost for these five satellites is estimated to be just under $2 billion .

this is a program to acquire 163 doppler radars .

largely deployed , these radars have helped nws increase the accuracy and timeliness of warnings for severe thunderstorms , tornadoes , and other hazardous weather events .

scheduled for completion this year , 121 of a planned 123 nws nexrad radars have been delivered to operational locations .

the cost of this program is just under $1.5 billion .

this is a program to automate and enhance methods for collecting , processing , and displaying surface weather conditions , such as temperature and precipitation , and to replace human weather observers .

scheduled for completion in fiscal year 1998 , the system has been installed at 265 of 314 planned nws operational locations .

estimated costs for asos are about $351 million ; this includes the nws units and 554 units for the federal aviation administration and the department of defense .

the modernization also includes upgrades to existing systems , improved weather models , and the acquisition of several smaller systems .

in addition , nws is restructuring its field offices to be more efficient ; table 1 indicates the before - and - after plan .

the weather service has generated better data — particularly with the new radars and satellites — and greatly improved forecasts and warnings .

these can be related directly to saving lives and reducing the effects of natural disasters .

as shown in figure 1 , lead times of warnings for severe storms and tornadoes improved by about 5 minutes between 1986 and 1996 , which is not insignificant .

with tornadoes , for example , it can mean the difference in whether people have time to reach shelter .

in some instances , lead times are much earlier .

last year , for instance , nws issued flood potential “statements” 2-3 days in advance of hurricane fran .

flash flood warnings were issued with 6 hours' lead time .

similarly , in the east coast blizzard of 1996 , nws issued forecasts 3 to 5 days in advance .

notwithstanding such successes , however , each of the four programs has experienced cost increases and schedule delays .

some of these increases and delays can be attributed to changes in requirements ; others were caused by program management and development problems .

we reported in 1995 that six of eight sensors in the asos system did not meet contract specifications for accuracy or performance .

for example , the precipitation accumulation sensor underreported rainfall amounts during heavy downpours , and the temperature and dew point sensor readings frequently fell short of dew point reliability requirements .

some of these shortfalls occurred because of the contractor's failure to deliver products that met specifications , and others resulted from the failure of government - furnished equipment to meet specifications .

in addition , we found that asos users from the aviation , meteorology , and climate communities had needs that the asos system , as specified , did not satisfy .

we recommended that nws define and prioritize — in conjunction with asos users — all system corrections , enhancements , and supplements necessary to meet valid user needs .

we further recommended that nws formulate — again in conjunction with asos users — explicit system performance and cost / benefit criteria governing the release of human observers .

because of these problems , nws delayed plans for releasing human weather observers and implemented actions to correct shortfalls in meeting specifications and to address other user concerns .

in reference to nexrad , we testified in 1995 that many nws and air force radars were not available nearly as often as required .

for example , between 10 and 62 percent of air force nexrad radars were falling short of availability requirements .

 ( nws did not know if its radars were meeting the availability requirement because it was not monitoring availability on a site - by - site basis. ) .

further , we found that a radar upgrade to address one cause of unavailability — the lack of an uninterruptible power supply — was not to be completed until fiscal years 1999 and 2002 for the air force and nws , respectively .

we recommended that nws analyze and monitor system availability data on a site - specific basis for operational nexrads and correct any shortfalls in system availability revealed by the analysis .

we also recommended that the air force improve the reliability of air force nexrad availability data and correct any shortfalls found .

nws and the air force did initiate steps in 1995 to implement our recommendations to improve nexrad availability .

in terms of staffing , the sizable reductions promised as a result of the modernization will not be realized .

while nws originally planned to reduce staff by 21 percent , we reported in 1995 that the goal had been scaled back to 8 percent .

nws attributes the reduced goal primarily to the need for more staff than originally envisioned to operate new systems , and to other unanticipated requirements .

mr. chairman , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa ) ultimate success in completing the modernization depends , in part , on how well and how quickly it can complete a systems architecture and address specific risks associated with the crucial awips system .

the modernization needs an overall architecture to guide systems development ; nws agrees that such a technical blueprint is necessary , and is currently working on one .

yet until such an architecture is developed and enforced , the modernization will likely continue to be subject to higher costs and reduced performance .

this is an important point as component systems continue to evolve to meet additional demands and take advantage of improved technology .

we cannot emphasize too strongly the need for an overall architecture to guide system evolution .

an architecture would help ensure that changes to nexrad , for example , are compatible with the many systems with which nexrad must exchange data .

as we have reported several times over the past few years , full utilization of the data from the new observing systems has been prevented by delays and continuing problems with awips .

we have made several recommendations that we feel will strengthen the weather service's ability to acquire awips .

first , we recommended that nws ensure that each “build” is fully tested and all material defects corrected before beginning software development associated with the next build .

second , we recommended that nws establish a software quality assurance program to increase the probability of delivering promised awips capability on time and within budget .

third , we recommended that nws obtain an independent assessment of the cost to develop and deploy awips .

progress to date in these areas has , however , been uneven , and we remain concerned about awips development risks — risks that threaten the system's ability to be completed on time , within budget , and with the functional capability that awips must be able to provide .

until awips is deployed and functioning properly , nws will not be able to take full advantage of the nearly $4 billion investment it has made in the other components of the modernization .

after early successes in demonstrating the technical feasibility of system functions , design problems and disagreements between noaa and the development contractor in 1993-1994 stymied progress .

some development responsibility was brought in - house — to nws / noaa labs — in 1995 .

the awips program strategy was changed again in 1996 , when even more development responsibility — for awips data acceptance , processing , and display capabilities — was brought in - house , primarily to noaa's forecast systems laboratory ( fsl ) .

at that time , nws decided to use fsl's prototype system , called weather forecast office ( wfo ) - advanced , which was being developed in parallel with awips as a risk - reduction tactic .

nws officials chose wfo - advanced because of its demonstrated superior data - acceptance , processing , and display capability over the contractor's version , hoping that it would enable the agency to deploy these awips capabilities to field operations more quickly .

the contractor did , however , retain responsibility for communications , system monitoring and control , and other capabilities .

with these changes , nws expects awips to make its 1999 target date for full deployment , within the $550-million cap .

as we reported in december 1994 , noaa / nws labs are research and development operations that primarily develop prototype systems ; as such , they did not employ software development processes characteristic of a software - production environment .

specifically , the labs did not have the software quality assurance and configuration management processes , among others , sufficient to ensure production of stable , reliable software code .

developing software code for use in one or two prototype installations requires a far less rigorous approach than what is needed when nationwide deployment is planned .

however , some of the software the noaa / nws labs were developing was intended for operational use in awips and was essentially being handed off directly from the labs to the contractor .

we therefore recommended that nws and noaa strengthen their processes for developing production - quality software code .

with the 1995 and 1996 awips development changes , significantly more design and development responsibility has been transferred to the government , in particular to noaa's fsl .

in visiting fsl in boulder , colorado , we found that — with the exception of one subsystem that we specifically discussed in 1994 — the question of capability remained: lab quality assurance and configuration management processes for production - level software were still lacking .

however , nws and noaa officials said that they have heeded our 1994 recommendations and are improving their processes in other ways .

they said that in order to preserve the labs' research and development missions , they do not wish to impose any unnecessary , rigorous software development procedures on the labs .

instead , noaa management plans to play a more active role in preparing the government - furnished software for the contractor .

according to nws officials , they plan to improve the software development processes for wfo - advanced and other government - developed software using staff from nws headquarters , noaa's systems acquisitions division , and the contractor .

specifically , nws plans to ( 1 ) more fully document the lab's design and software code , ( 2 ) design the integration of government - furnished software and contractor - developed software , ( 3 ) fully test all government software before it is turned over to the contractor , and ( 4 ) strengthen quality assurance and configuration management .

to help accomplish this , nws has established several specific contract task orders .

weather service officials acknowledge that preparing wfo - advanced for the contractor is a large task because it comprises such a significant portion of the awips software .

in addition , officials understand that there is no room for schedule delays due to unforeseen problems .

they feel confident , however , that they can meet this challenge because of the steps i have just described , and because they have experience in turning government software over to a contractor .

for example , nws' office of hydrology provided hydro - meteorological software to the contractor for the first awips module ( “build 1” ) , which was successfully tested last summer .

in addition , nws officials said that they are applying to awips lessons learned from their configuration management experiences in the nexrad and asos development projects .

noaa has put into place appropriate plans and procedures to mitigate these risks ; how it implements these plans and procedures will be critical if noaa is to avoid turning the risks into actual problems .

unfortunately , systems development risks in large projects such as awips frequently do turn into problems .

and , as discussed , awips has suffered development setbacks in the past .

given these circumstances , we believe it will be extremely difficult for noaa and nws to develop and deploy the awips system within the $550-million cap .

what can be done to minimize such risks ? .

first , noaa and nws management need to be vigilant to identify new problems with awips software development .

new software and wfo - advanced must be fully tested to ensure that they are up to production quality and will not cause complications when integrated with other awips software .

second , we believe that noaa needs to renegotiate as quickly as possible the contract for awips builds 4 through 6 .

while noaa officials expect no major cost or schedule changes , this is not a guarantee ; noaa must exercise close oversight of this process .

another important element of the weather service modernization is the acquisition of geostationary operational environmental satellites ( goes ) .

these satellites are uniquely positioned to be able to observe the development of severe weather , such as hurricanes and thunderstorms , and provide information allowing forecasters to issue timely warnings .

satellites in the current series will , however , begin to reach the end of their useful lives within 5 years ; noaa is now planning to procure replacements , which will be very similar to the current satellites .

at issue , mr. chairman , is the type of satellite system to build for the longer term , especially in light of noaa's budget , which is likely to remain constrained in the immediate years ahead .

our report on both short - and long - term satellite replacements was released last month .

in brief , we found noaa's approach for the near term reasonable , although we recommended that the agency clarify its policy for replacing partially failed satellites and backing up planned launches .

for the longer term , we concluded that changing the goes system design offers many potential benefits: improved performance , lower costs , and more closely meeting the needs of forecasters .

several new approaches have been suggested in recent years , by government , academic , and industry experts ; many include technologies unavailable when the present series of satellites was designed .

these approaches have pros and cons ; all options would require careful engineering analysis before an informed decision about the future of the goes program can be made .

our concern centers on noaa's delay in conducting such analyses and developing specific proposals .

at present , noaa anticipates beginning its follow - up program in 2003 at the earliest .

given that developing a new satellite takes up to 10 years , deferring a start until 2003 likely means that noaa will have to rely on its current , early - 1980s - design satellites until about 2013 .

mr. chairman , given the range of options that exist for a significantly improved goes system , the congress may wish to evaluate the costs and benefits of different approaches to the timing , funding , and scope of the follow - up program .

this could include a potential role for the national aeronautics and space administration's advanced spacecraft technology programs .

in summary , we see clear benefits in the national weather service modernization — improved forecasts and warnings .

we also see risks — risks that can only be reduced through development and enforcement of a systems modernization architecture , careful implementation of planned mitigation techniques in the case of awips , and commitment to earlier planning in the case of the goes satellites .

this concludes my statement , mr. chairman .

i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

national oceanic and atmospheric administration: weather service modernization and noaa corps issues ( gao / t - aimd / ggd - 97-63 , march 13 , 1997 ) .

weather satellites: planning for the geostationary operational environmental satellite program needs more attention ( gao / aimd - 97-37 , march 13 , 1997 ) .

high - risk series: information management and technology ( gao / hr - 97-9 , february 1997 ) .

noaa satellites ( gao / aimd - 96-141r , september 13 , 1996 ) .

weather forecasting: recommendations to address new weather processing system development risks ( gao / aimd - 96-74 , may 13 , 1996 ) .

weather forecasting: nws has not demonstrated that new processing system will improve mission effectiveness ( gao / aimd - 96-29 , february 29 , 1996 ) .

weather forecasting: new processing system faces uncertainties and risks ( gao / t - aimd - 96-47 , february 29 , 1996 ) .

weather forecasting: radars far superior to predecessors , but location and availability questions remain ( gao / t - aimd - 96-2 , october 17 , 1995 ) .

weather service modernization staffing ( gao / aimd - 95-239r , september 26 , 1995 ) .

weather forecasting: radar availability requirements not being met ( gao / aimd - 95-132 , may 31 , 1995 ) .

weather forecasting: unmet needs and unknown costs warrant reassessment of observing system plans ( gao / aimd - 95-81 , april 21 , 1995 ) .

weather service modernization questions ( gao / aimd - 95-106r , march 10 , 1995 ) .

weather service modernization: despite progress , significant problems and risks remain ( gao / t - aimd - 95-87 , february 21 , 1995 ) .

meteorological satellites ( gao / nsiad - 95-87r , february 6 , 1995 ) .

high - risk series: an overview ( gao / hr - 95-1 , february 1995 ) .

weather forecasting: improvements needed in laboratory software development processes ( gao / aimd - 95-24 , december 14 , 1994 ) .

weather forecasting: systems architecture needed for national weather service modernization ( gao / aimd - 94-28 , march 11 , 1994 ) .

weather forecasting: important issues on automated weather processing system need resolution ( gao / imtec - 93-12br , january 6 , 1993 ) .

weather satellites: action needed to resolve status of the u.s. geostationary satellite program ( gao / nsiad - 91-252 , july 24 , 1991 ) .

weather satellites: cost growth and development delays jeopardize u.s. forecasting ability ( gao / nsiad - 89-169 , june 30 , 1989 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

