we are pleased to be here today to discuss the small business administration's ( sba ) activities to complete planning for its loan monitoring system , as required by the small business reauthorization act of 1997 .

as we recently reported , sba has prepared a project plan for completing the eight actions mandated in the act .

my testimony today discusses our recent report and focuses on sba's project plan for completing the mandated actions .

while sba has not yet completed any of the mandated actions in the 6 months since the act was passed , it has written a project plan that describes an approach for addressing those actions that has many positive aspects .

as sba moves forward to execute the plan , however , it will face several technical and management challenges and risks .

sba's need to monitor activities of lenders that help deliver its programs has increased significantly in recent years .

one reason is that the reported volume of loans processed by lenders almost doubled between 1992 and 1997 , from about $24 billion to about $46 billion .

a second reason is that sba shifted to lenders the responsibility for key loan origination , servicing , and liquidation functions during this same time period .

in 1993 , sba district offices reviewed the creditworthiness of about 84 percent of lenders' requests for loan guarantees , with the remainder being processed under a preferred lender program .

at that time , sba also serviced and liquidated all loans that went into default .

by 1997 , preferred lenders processed about 52 percent of the loans and , starting in 1998 , lenders became responsible for servicing and liquidating all loans they make under the 7 ( a ) program , which constitutes about 80 percent of sba's loan portfolio .

to improve its ability to monitor lenders' loan servicing and liquidation actions , sba asked for $18 million in its fiscal year 1998 budget request .

according to sba , these funds were to be used for ( 1 ) recruiting expertise in lender oversight , ( 2 ) establishing financial performance goals for private - sector partners , ( 3 ) creating a database for lender and portfolio management , and ( 4 ) developing an information system for timely and accurate reporting to agency management .

“perform and complete the planning needed to serve as the basis for funding the development and implementation of the computerized loan monitoring system , including — ( 1 ) fully defining the system requirement using on - line , automated capabilities to the extent feasible ; ( 2 ) identifying all data inputs and outputs necessary for timely report generation ; ( 3 ) benchmark loan monitoring business processes and systems against comparable industry processes and , if appropriate , simplify or redefine work processes based on these benchmarks ; ( 4 ) determine data quality standards and control systems for ensuring information accuracy ; ( 5 ) identify an acquisition strategy and work increments to completion ; ( 6 ) analyze the benefits and costs of alternatives and use to demonstrate the advantage of the final project ; ( 7 ) ensure that the proposed information system is consistent with the agency's information architecture ; and ( 8 ) estimate the cost to system completion , identifying the essential cost element.” the act also required sba , within 6 months of enactment , to submit a report to the congress and to us on its progress in carrying out these mandated actions .

as required , sba submitted its report on june 2 , 1998 .

we were required by the act to evaluate and report on sba's compliance with the act within 28 days of receipt of sba's report .

on june 30 , 1998 , we reported that sba had formed a team for the loan monitoring system in december 1997 , but it had not yet completed any of the eight mandated actions .

we noted that sba's report included a project plan , laying out its approach for addressing these actions .

work on the first of the required planning actions was begun in may 1998 and , according to the project plan , sba will complete work on the last of the eight mandated actions in august 1999 .

in conducting our review , we analyzed sba's systems development and related information resources management policies and procedures , reviewed sba's activities to prepare for undertaking the required planning actions , and reviewed and analyzed sba's june 2 , 1998 , report to the congress on its progress in carrying out the eight required actions that was issued pursuant to the small business reauthorization act of 1997 .

our work was performed from december 1997 through june 1998 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .

sba's project plan provides information in many key areas to explain how it intends to complete the mandated actions .

the plan delineates the project's goals and objectives , resource requirements , quality standards and control systems , assumptions , methodologies , work breakdown structure with a timetable for completion of tasks , and estimated costs .

sba established four goals for the loan monitoring system project: have high - quality , timely data necessary to perform roles such as the management of risk , collection of fees from recipients , and reporting to internal and external entities .

enforce uniform practices for loan making and reporting that will result in equal access by all eligible small businesses .

have business processes that support a streamlined workforce , use appropriate work flows , use best practices of both the government and private sectors , and include the ability to cope with both upward and downward changes in demand and resource availability .

have a computer infrastructure that supports efficient and user friendly information exchanges within sba and among sba and external entities , and that can enhance sba's program delivery and its ability to carry out its oversight functions .

according to the project plan , sba's strategy for achieving these goals is to build on “best industry practices,” reengineer inefficient business processes , and implement contemporary technologies .

in support of these goals , sba also established objectives for the loan monitoring system ; they include the following functionality: on - line update by lenders of disbursements , payments , unilateral servicing actions , and requests for sba approvals , as necessary ; waiting - to - be - processed queues for action by service center personnel ; electronic ( digital ) signatures to identify and verify who takes and electronic notification of actions via external e - mail or lender notification on - line exception reporting to notify sba of potential problems , such as “neglected” loans , poor credit analysis , and slow lender servicing or reporting ; data analysis tools for management information , such as lender and loan trend identification , and end - user query and reporting ; a centralized electronic file to replace on - site paper loan folders ; integrated interactive voice response allowing borrowers and lenders to receive status data ; on - line electronic collateral file with a centralized storage site for paper centralized , automated generation of uniform commercial code filing expanded use of auto - dial for collections ; and sophisticated industry models to analyze and manage credit risk and portfolio performance .

sba included estimates of the personnel resources that it would need to execute the project plan .

it estimated that 18 staff would be needed for the first phase of the project , which addresses the completion of the mandated actions , and that an additional three staff would be needed for the development phase .

the project plan also describes the types of skills needed — such as programming , systems architecture , and database administration — to manage and execute the project .

to address the quality standards and controls to be used for the loan monitoring system project , the plan includes work elements to establish systems development standards and procedures and process change control procedures .

the plan also describes the quality control process that sba plans to use to identify compliance with standards , and defines how the compliance findings will be reported .

the plan recognizes that the project includes a number of assumptions that may affect its success .

it identifies seven key assumptions that sba made but will need to validate during the project .

for example , sba assumed that the agency's information technology architecture will be completed before it is needed to support this project , and that agreements with benchmarking partners will be timely and structured to meet sba's needs .

the project plan also cites the methodologies that sba plans to use or is considering for key areas of the project .

these include methodologies for project planning and management , benchmarking , reengineering , systems development , software acquisition , risk management , and development of an information technology architecture .

in some areas , such as software acquisition , sba is comparing its current methodologies with industry best practices to select the methodologies that will be used for the project .

in other areas , such as benchmarking , sba did not have a methodology ; it has now either selected a new methodology or is in the process of selecting one for these areas .

included in the project plan is a work breakdown structure that lists the work elements from the start of the project through completion .

these elements include the individual steps necessary to complete the mandated actions and the steps planned for the subsequent system design , development or acquisition , and implementation .

the work elements for completing the mandated actions are sequenced , beginning with benchmarking and ending with the identification of an acquisition strategy to support a make - or - buy decision .

the project plan recognizes that the project will not have enough information to fully evaluate the make or buy issue until it has completed benchmarking , business process reengineering , requirements gathering and analysis , and benefits and costs analyses .

according to the project plan , sba estimates that the loan monitoring system will cost about $20 million to complete .

in addition to the automated system , this estimate includes the costs of staffing ; developing training ; developing lender performance standards ; establishing subsidy rate analysis processes ; and making infrastructure improvements , such as buying communications hardware and software .

the project plan specifies that sba will refine the cost estimates after the systems requirements have been defined and the alternatives analyzed .

while developing the project plan is a good start , sba must still successfully execute it to complete the eight mandated actions .

in executing the plan , sba will face formidable technical and management challenges and risks , including establishing software project management capability while undertaking its largest information technology project ever ; using methodologies and practices for the first time while conducting a large , complex project ; and implementing the loan monitoring system project without having an information technology architecture in place .

sba recognizes the need to establish defined processes for software project management and use them on this project .

research by the software engineering institute has shown that defined and repeatable processes for managing software acquisition or development are critical to an organization's ability to consistently deliver high - quality information systems on time and within budget .

these critical management processes include project planning , requirements management , software project tracking and oversight , software quality assurance , software configuration management , and change control management .

if sba cannot implement disciplined software development and acquisition processes for this project , it risks building or buying a system that does not effectively meet its requirements , is delivered late or over budget , or does not perform as specified .

the loan monitoring system project team will be using , for the first time , methodologies it has selected for benchmarking , business process reengineering , information technology architecture development , project management , and systems development .

each of these methodologies is complex and will require staff with the necessary skills and abilities for rigorous implementation .

the staff currently on the project management team will need to develop the skills and abilities to use the new methodologies as they execute this large undertaking .

sba may also need to hire staff with the necessary skills and abilities to use the new methodologies , and hire contractors with the necessary expertise to support the project team .

successfully learning and employing several new methodologies simultaneously will present a considerable technical and management challenge .

if the team is not up to the task , the project may not achieve its intended results .

sba plans to work concurrently on an information technology architecture and the loan monitoring system as separate projects .

the act requires sba to ensure that the loan monitoring system is consistent with the architecture .

an information technology architecture provides a comprehensive “construction plan” or “blueprint” that systematically details the breadth and depth of an organization's mission - based mode of operation .

an architecture provides details first in logical terms , such as defining business functions , providing high - level descriptions of information systems and their interrelationships , and specifying information flows ; and second in technical terms , such as specifying hardware , software , data , communications , security , and performance characteristics .

by enforcing an information technology architecture to guide and constrain a modernization program , an agency can preclude inconsistent systems design and development decisions , and the resulting suboptimal performance and added cost .

sba has started developing an information technology architecture by documenting its current computing environment .

it plans to continue developing the architecture while the loan monitoring system project is underway .

as stated earlier , sba assumes that the information technology architecture will be completed before it is needed to support this project .

if both logical and technical components of the architecture are not completed as scheduled , the loan monitoring system project will likely be delayed and plans may need to be revised because , as required by the act , the plans must be consistent with the information technology architecture .

in conclusion , the extent to which sba meets these challenges and manages these risks will determine how well business processes and systems requirements are defined , and the quality of support for decision - making on the purchase or development of the needed system .

because this system is a critical part of sba's modernization , its senior officials must closely monitor progress in implementing the project plan and ensure that appropriate steps are taken to mitigate the significant risks involved .

sba should complete all of the eight actions mandated by the small business reauthorization act of 1997 before buying hardware or systems .

in particular , sba should ensure that ( 1 ) the project has the active participation and support of senior program managers and staff , ( 2 ) a disciplined software development and acquisition processes is implemented for this project , ( 3 ) project staff are adequately trained and supported by contractors with expertise in the methodologies used for this project , and ( 4 ) the information architecture is adequately developed and used to guide the requirements for the loan monitoring system .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

