i appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss gao's work on the deficit and the long - term economic health of our nation .

in 1992 , we examined the role of fiscal policy in promoting or inhibiting long - term economic growth and concluded that deficit reduction was key to our nation's future economic health .

we noted then that long - term economic growth and the requisite investment are central to almost all our major concerns as a society .

the surest way to increase the resources available for investment is to increase national savings , and the surest way to increase national savings is to reduce the federal deficit .

we also noted that how the deficit is reduced matters .

last year , we updated this work for you and chairman domenici .

by now , the relationship of the deficit to the nation's long - term interest has been more broadly recognized .

both the congress and the president have proposed plans to reverse previous fiscal trends and balance the budget .

it seems reasonable to conclude that the debate is no longer over whether to balance the budget , but rather over when and how .

in my testimony today , i will first describe gao simulations of the economic impact of different fiscal policies over the long term and then address several issues related to the impact of deficit reduction specifically: the important and compelling benefits to be gained from successfully shifting to a new fiscal policy ; the importance of how we reduce the deficit — by which i mean both the composition of federal spending and the need to deal with the drivers of the deficit ; and the experience of other industrial nations .

long - term simulations can be useful for comparing potential outcomes of alternative policies within a common economic framework .

given the broad range of uncertainty about future economic changes , however , any simulations should not be interpreted as forecasts of the level of economic activity 30 years in the future .

instead , simulation results provide illustrations of the budget or economic outcomes associated with alternative policy paths .

in our most recent work , we used a long - term economic growth model to simulate three of the many possible fiscal paths through the year 2025: a “no action” path that assumed the continuation of fiscal policies in effect at the end of fiscal year 1994 ; a “muddling through” path that assumed annual deficits of approximately 3 percent of gross domestic product ( gdp ) ; and a path that reaches balance in 2002 and sustains it .

to suggest some of the trade - offs facing policymakers in choosing among fiscal policies , we examined some long - term economic and fiscal outcomes of these paths .

we also simulated how some types of early action on the deficit , including early action on health care spending , might affect the long - term deficit outlook .

finally , we examined the prospects for sustaining balance over the long term .

while we discuss the consequences of alternative fiscal paths , we do not suggest any particular course of action , since only the congress can resolve the fundamental policy question of choosing the fiscal policy path and the composition of federal activity .

in our simulations we employed a model originally developed by economists at the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) that relates long - term gdp growth to economic and budget factors .

details of that model and its assumptions can be found in our reports .

as we noted in 1992 and 1995 , important and compelling benefits can be gained from shifting to a new fiscal policy path .

as illustrated in figure 1 , chronic deficits have consumed an increasing share of a declining national savings pool , leaving that much less for private investment .

lower investment will ultimately show up in lower economic growth .

future generations of taxpayers will pay a steep price for this lower economic growth in terms of lower personal incomes and a generally lower standard of living at a time when they will face the burden of supporting an unprecedented number of retirees as the baby boom generation reaches retirement .

the problem has been that the damage done by deficits is long - term , gradual , and cumulative in nature and may not be as visible as the short - term costs involved in reducing deficits .

this has presented , and continues to present , a difficult challenge for public leaders who must mount a compelling case for deficit reduction — and for the steps required to achieve it — that can capture public support .

the updated simulations we presented to you and chairman domenici last spring confirmed that the nation's current fiscal policy path is unsustainable over the longer term .

specifically , a fiscal policy of “no action” on the deficit through 2025 implies federal spending of nearly 44 percent of gdp , and as figure 2 shows , a deficit over 23 percent of gdp .

let me explain these ominous trends .

the increased spending is principally a function of escalating federal spending on health care and social security , which is driven by projected rising health care costs and the aging of our population .

spending on interest on our national debt also rises as annual deficits and accumulated public debt expand .

essentially , current commitments in these areas become progressively unaffordable for the nation over time .

without any significant changes in spending or revenues , such an expanding deficit would result in collapsing investment , declining capital stock , and , inevitably , a declining economy by 2025 .

as emphasized in both our 1992 and 1995 reports , we do not believe that such a scenario would take place .

rather , we believe that the prospect of economic decline would prompt action before the end of our simulation period .

nevertheless , this “no action” scenario , by illustrating the future logic of existing commitments , powerfully makes the case that we have no choice but to take action on the deficit .

the questions that remain are when and how .

our 1995 simulations also confirm the long - term economic and fiscal benefits of deficit reduction .

we assessed the long - term impacts of balancing the budget by 2002 , as was contemplated in the fiscal year 1996 budget resolution and in the recent executive - congressional discussions over budget policy , and of sustaining such a posture through 2025 .

we also estimated the effects of following a path that we called “muddling through” — that is , running deficit of about 3 percent of gdp over the next 30 years .

although current policy is better than this in the near term , it is still a useful illustration .

a fiscal policy of balance would yield a stronger economy in the long term than either a policy of no action or of muddling through .

table 1 shows that a budget balance reached in 2002 and sustained until 2025 would , over time , lead to increased investment , increased capital stock , a larger economy , and a much lower national debt than either of the other scenarios .

this means that americans could enjoy a higher standard of living than they might otherwise experience .

reaching and sustaining balance would also shrink the share of federal spending required to pay interest costs , thereby reducing the long - term programmatic sacrifice necessary to attain deficit reduction targets .

even “muddling through” with deficits of 3 percent of gdp would exact a price through higher interest costs and thus require progressively harder fiscal choices as time progresses .

under the balance path , debt per capita would decline from $13,500 in 1994 to $4,800 in 1995 dollars by 2025 ; debt as a percentage of the economy would drop from about 52 percent to 13 percent .

because of this shrinkage in the debt , by 2025 a balance path could bring interest costs down from about 12 percent in 1994 to less than 5 percent of our budget , compared to about 18 percent under “muddling through” and almost a third of our budget with no action .

these differences are illustrated in figure 3 .

alarming as these model results may appear , they are probably understated .

our model incorporates conservative assumptions about the relationship between savings , investment and gdp growth that tend to understate the differences between the economic outcomes associated with alternative fiscal politicize .

furthermore , budget projections for the near term and those assumed in our long - term model results may not tell the whole story .

by convention , baseline budget projections do not include all the legitimate claims that may be made on the budget in the future .

rather , budget projections ignore many future claims and the costs of unmet needs unless they are the subject of policy proposals in the budget .

examples of such claims and needs would include the cost of cleaning up and restructuring the department of energy's ( doe ) nuclear weapons production complex , the cost of hazardous waste pollution clean - up at military facilities , and cost overruns in weapons systems .

in short , most of the risks to future budgets seem to be on the side of worse - than - expected , rather than better - than - expected outcomes .

i make this observation not to create despair but to underline the need to continue efforts at deficit reduction .

not all spending cuts have the same impact over the long run .

decisions about how to reduce the deficit will reflect — among other considerations — judgments about the role of the federal government and the effectiveness of individual programs .

i would like to call attention today to two significant considerations in deficit reduction: ( 1 ) the importance of federal investment in infrastructure , human capital , and research and development ( r&d ) , and ( 2 ) the importance of addressing the fast - growing programs in the budget .

in our 1992 work , we drew particular attention to the importance of well - chosen federal investment in infrastructure , human capital , and r&d .

a higher level of national savings is essential to the achievement of a higher rate of economic growth but , by itself , is not sufficient to assure that result .

certain other ingredients are necessary — including the basic stability with which this nation has been blessed in its social , political , and economic environment .

in addition , however , economic growth depends on an efficient public infrastructure , an educated work force , an expanding base of knowledge , and a continuing infusion of innovations .

in the past , the federal government , through its investments in these areas , has played an important role in providing an environment conducive to growth .

thus the composition of federal spending , as well as overall fiscal policy , can affect long - term economic growth in significant ways .

the extent to which deficit reduction affects spending on fast - growing programs also matters .

although a dollar is a dollar in the first year it is cut — regardless of what programmatic changes it represents — cutbacks in the base of fast - growing programs generate greater savings in the future than those in slower - growing programs , assuming the specific cuts are not offset by increases in the growth rates of the programs .

figure 4 illustrates this point by comparing the long - run effects of a $50 billion cut in health spending with those of the same dollar amount cut from unspecified other programs .

for both paths the cut occurs in 1996 and is assumed to be permanent but , after 1996 , spending is assumed to continue at the same rates of growth as those shown in the “no action” simulation .

we used the simple assumption that a reduction in either health or other programs would not alter the expected growth rates simply to illustrate the point that a cut in high - growth areas of spending will have a greater fiscal effect in the future than the same size cut in low - growth areas .

a $50 billion cut in health spending in 1996 leads to a deficit in 2025 that is about 4 percent of gdp lower than would be the case from a $50 billion cut in a low - growth program .

further , our simulations show that even if a balanced budget is achieved early in the next century , deficits would reappear if we fail to contain future growth in health , interest , and social security costs .

we conclude from these simulations that how and when deficit reduction occurs can have important long - term implications for the future economy and future budgets .

as noted earlier , the benefits of deficit reduction in the long run may not seem as compelling as the short - term costs necessary to reduce the deficit .

nevertheless our work on the deficit reduction experiences in other nations shows that significant fiscal improvement is indeed possible in modern democracies , at least for a time .

to reach fiscal balance or surplus , the governments we studied instituted often painful measures while generating and maintaining political support .

spending control proved the dominant policy tool used to achieve fiscal goals , although few programs were actually eliminated .

notably , however , several countries restrained social benefit commitments in their quest for savings .

government leaders sought to gain support or at least defuse potential opposition by bringing key interest groups that would be affected into the decision - making process .

in addition , the design of the specific deficit - reducing strategies helped .

approaches such as reducing benefits instead of eliminating programs , targeting benefit cuts to higher - income beneficiaries , and deferring or shifting painful adjustments all helped maintain political support for spending reductions .

the deficit reduction brought about in these governments provided significant fiscal benefits by slowing or reversing the growth of public debt , thereby slowing or reversing the growth of government interest costs .

as we simulated in our long - term growth model , what was once a “vicious” circle of rising deficits , debt , and interest , which can in turn increase deficits , became a “virtuous” circle of falling deficits or rising surpluses , accrued even though most governments we studied did not sustain fiscal balance or surplus , possibly in part because public support for austerity was frequently linked to relatively short - run concerns .

despite this return to deficit , the increases in savings and investment resulting from deficit reduction may have boosted economic prospects for the long - term future , as well as provided fiscal benefits in the short run .

although the experiences of the nations in gao's study suggest that resolving deficits is possible in advanced democracies , they also indicate that sustaining fiscal discipline over the longer term is difficult .

thus , deficit reduction strategies designed to promote long - term fiscal progress may help ensure that future budgets are better positioned to withstand future economic and political pressures .

for the united states , reaching budgetary balance in 2002 would indeed represent an achievement that by itself would bring about fiscal and economic benefits .

yet this achievement will not eliminate the need for future fiscal discipline .

in fact , the needs of an aging society will be more easily met if fiscal balance — or even surplus — is both achieved and sustained for several years .

in conclusion , mr. chairman , i would repeat our view that current policy is unsustainable .

the question , therefore , is not whether to reduce the deficit but when and how .

we believe those choices matter .

mr. chairman , this concludes my written statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or your colleagues might have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

