we are pleased to be here today to discuss the information technology challenges facing the social security administration ( ssa ) and its recently appointed commissioner .

as with every other organization , both public and private , successfully crossing the threshold into the next century is the top information technology priority .

my testimony today will update our report of last fall on where ssa stands in this area .

beyond ensuring readiness for the millennium , another large challenge for ssa is successfully implementing its intelligent workstation / local area network ( iws / lan ) initiative .

ssa expects this new capability , which my testimony will also address , to play a major role in its redesigned work processes and in better serving an increasing beneficiary population .

today we will also discuss our recent report assessing ssa's actions to improve its software development processes .

finally , we will update our testimony of last year on ssa's experiences with making personal earnings and benefits information available to individuals via the internet .

for the past several decades , computer systems have typically used two digits to represent the year , such as “98” for 1998 , in order to conserve electronic data storage and reduce operating costs .

in this format , however , 2000 is indistinguishable from 1900 because both are represented as “00.” as a result , if not modified , systems or applications that use dates or perform date - or time - sensitive calculations may generate incorrect results beyond 1999 .

ssa has been anticipating the change of century since 1989 , initiating an early response to the potential crisis .

it made significant early progress in assessing and renovating mission - critical mainframe systems — those necessary to prevent the disruption of benefits — and has been a leader among federal agencies .

yet as our report of last october indicated , three key risks remained , mainly stemming from the large degree to which ssa interfaces with other entities in the sharing of information .

one major risk concerned year 2000 compliance of the 54 state disability determination services ( dds ) that provide vital support to the agency in administering ssa's disability programs .

the second major risk concerned data exchanges , ensuring that information obtained from outside sources — such as other federal agencies , state agencies , and private businesses — was not “corrupted” by data being passed from systems that were not year 2000 compliant .

ssa exchanges data with thousands of such sources .

third , such risks were compounded by the lack of contingency plans to ensure business continuity in the event of systems failure .

our report made several specific recommendations to mitigate these risks .

these included ( 1 ) expeditious completion of the assessment of mission - critical systems at state dds offices and the use of those results to establish specific plans of action , ( 2 ) stronger oversight by ssa of dds year 2000 activities , ( 3 ) discussion of the status of dds year 2000 activities in ssa's quarterly reports to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , ( 4 ) expeditious completion of ssa's year 2000 compliance coordination with all data exchange partners , and ( 5 ) development of specific contingency plans that articulate clear strategies for ensuring the continuity of core business functions .

ssa agreed with all of our recommendations , and actions to complete them are underway .

we understand that the states are in various stages of addressing the year 2000 problem , but note that ssa has begun to monitor these activities ; among other things , it is requiring biweekly status reports from the ddss .

further , as of this week , the agency planned to have a contingency plan available at the end of the month .

the resources that ssa plans to invest in acquiring iws / lan are enormous: over 7 years the agency plans to spend about $1 billion during phase i to replace its present computer terminals with “intelligent” workstations and local area networks .

as of march 1 , ssa had completed installation of about 30,000 iwss and 800 lans , generally meeting or exceeding its phase i schedule .

the basic intelligent workstation that ssa is procuring includes a ( 1 ) 15-inch color display monitor , ( 2 ) 100-megahertz pentium workstation with 32 megabytes ( mb ) of random access memory , ( 3 ) 1.2-gigabyte hard ( fixed ) disk drive , and ( 4 ) 16-bit network card with adaptation cable .

preliminary testing has indicated that the iws / lan workstation random access memory will need to be upgraded from 32 mb to at least 64 mb .

last year ssa's contractor , unisys corporation , submitted a proposal to upgrade to a processing speed higher than 100 megahertz at additional cost .

unisys noted that it was having difficulty in obtaining 100-megahertz workstations .

although personal computers available in today's market are about three times this speed , ssa stated that the 100-megahertz processing speed does meet its current needs .

the agency is , however , continuing to discuss this issue with unisys .

as the expected time period for implementation of iws / lan will span the change of century , it is obviously important that all components be year 2000 compliant .

ssa's contract with unisys does not , however , contain such a requirement .

moreover , ssa has acknowledged , and we have validated , that some of the earlier workstations that it acquired are not year 2000 compliant .

however , ssa maintains — and we have confirmed — that the operating system it has selected for iws / lan , windows nt , corrects the particular year 2000-related problem .

ssa has also said that it is now testing all new hardware and software , including equipment substitutions proposed by unisys , to ensure year 2000 compliance before site installation .

phase ii is intended to build upon acquisition of the initial iws / lan infrastructure , adding new hardware and software — such as database engines , scanners , and bar code readers — to support future process redesign initiatives .

contract award for phase ii is planned for fiscal year 1999 , with site installations between fiscal years 1999 and 2001 .

we have not identified any significant problems in ssa's installation of iws / lan equipment at its field offices to date , and the agency has taken steps to minimize adverse impact on service to the public while installation takes place .

some state ddss , however , have recently raised concerns about lack of control over their networks and inadequate response time on iws / lan service calls , resulting in some disruption to their operations .

ssa currently maintains central control .

under this arrangement , problems with local equipment must be handled by ssa's contractor , even though many ddss feel they have sufficient technical staff to do the job .

because of this issue , states have said that they want ssa to pilot test iws / lan in one or more dds offices to evaluate options that would allow states more flexibility in managing their networks .

florida , in fact , refused to accept more iws / lan terminals until this issue is resolved .

ssa is now working with the ddss to identify alternatives for providing the states with some degree of management control .

turning to managing the acquisition of information technology resources as an investment , ssa has — consistent with the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and omb guidance — followed several essential practices with iws / lan .

this includes assessing costs , benefits , and risks , along with monitoring progress against competing priorities , projected costs , schedules , and resource availability .

what ssa has not established , however , are critical practices for measuring iws / lan's contribution toward improving mission performance .

while it does have baseline data and measures that could be used to assess the project's impact on performance , it lacks specific target goals and a process by which overall iws / lan impact on program performance can be gauged .

further , while omb guidelines call for post - implementation evaluations to be completed , ssa does not plan to do this .

in a september 1994 report , we noted that ssa had initiated action to identify cost and performance goals for iws / lan .

ssa identified six categories of performance measures that could be used to track the impact of iws / lan technology on service delivery goals , and had planned to establish target productivity gains for each measure upon award of the iws / lan contract .

at the conclusion of our review , however , ssa had not established targeted goals or a process for using performance measures to assess iws / lan's impact on agency productivity improvements .

according to officials , the agency has no plans to use these measures in this way because it believes the results of earlier pilots sufficiently demonstrated that savings will be achieved with each iws / lan installation , and because the measures had been developed in response to a general services administration ( gsa ) procurement requirement .

since gsa no longer performs this role , ssa sees these actions as no longer necessary .

yet without specific goals , processes , and performance measurements , it will be difficult to assess whether iws / lan improves service to the public .

further , the clinger - cohen act requires agencies to develop performance measures to assess how well information technology supports their programs .

knowing how well such technology improvements are actually working will be critical , given the expected jump in ssa's workload into the next century .

the number of disability beneficiaries alone is expected to increase substantially between calendar years 1997 and 2005 — from an estimated 6.2 million to over 9.6 million .

concurrent with phase i installation is development of the first major programmatic software application — the reengineered disability system ( rds ) — to be installed on the iws / lan infrastructure .

it is intended to support ssa disability claims processing under a new client / server environment .

pilot testing of rds software to evaluate actual costs and benefits of the system and identify iws / lan phase ii equipment needs began last august .

however , performance and technical problems encountered during the rds pilot have resulted in a planned 9-month delay — to july 1998 — in implementing the pilot system in the first state , virginia .

this will likely cause corresponding delays in ssa's schedule for acquiring and implementing iws / lan phase ii equipment , and further delays in national implementation of rds .

how software is developed is another critical consideration ; whether the modernized processes will function as intended and achieve the desired gains in productivity will depend in large measure on the quality of the software .

yet software development is widely seen as one of the riskiest areas of systems development .

ssa has recognized weaknesses in its own capability to develop software , and is improving its processes and methods .

this comes at a critical time , since the agency is beginning development of its new generation of software to operate on the iws / lan to support the redesigned work processes of a client / server environment .

significant actions that ssa has initiated include ( 1 ) launching a formal software process improvement program , ( 2 ) acquiring assistance from a nationally recognized research and development center in assessing its strengths and weaknesses and in assisting with improvement , and ( 3 ) establishing management groups to oversee software process improvement activities .

key elements of the software improvement program , however , are still lacking — elements without which progress and success cannot be measured .

these are: specific , quantifiable goals , and baseline data to use in assessing whether those goals have been attained .

until such features are available , ssa will lack assurance that its improvement efforts will result in the consistent and cost - effective production of high - quality software .

our report recommends that as part of its recently initiated pilot projects , ssa develop and implement plans that articulate a strategy and time frames for developing baseline data , identifying specific goals , and monitoring progress toward achieving those goals .

we are encouraged by ssa's response , which included agreement and a description of steps it had begun to carry out these recommendations .

for over 10 years , ssa has been providing , on request , a personal earnings and benefit estimate statement ( pebes ) .

the statement includes a yearly record of earnings , estimates of social security taxes paid , and various benefits estimates .

beginning in fiscal year 1995 , such statements were sent annually to all eligible u.s. workers aged 60 and over ; beginning october 1 , 1999 , the statements are to be sent to all eligible workers 25 and over — an estimated 123 million people .

the public has generally found these to be useful in financial planning .

in an effort to provide “world - class service” and be as responsive as possible to the public , ssa in march 1997 initiated on - line dissemination of pebes to individuals via the internet .

the agency felt that using the internet in this way would ensure that client data would be safeguarded and confidentiality preserved .

within a month , however , press reports of privacy concerns circulated , sparking widespread fear that the privacy of this information could not be guaranteed .

ssa plans many initiatives using the internet to provide electronic service delivery to its clients .

as such , our testimony of last may before the subcommittee on social security focused on internet information security in general , describing its risks and approaches to making it more secure .

the relative insecurity of the internet makes its use as a vehicle for transmitting sensitive information — such as social security information — a decision requiring careful consideration .

it is a question of balancing greater convenience against increased risk — not only that information would be divulged to those who should not have access to it , but also that the database itself could be compromised .

for most organizations , a prudent approach to information security is three - pronged , including the ability to protect against security breaches at an appropriate level , detect successful breaches , and react quickly in order to track and prosecute offenders .

the internet security issue remains a daunting one , and ssa — like other federal agencies — will have to rely on commercial solutions and expert opinion ; this is , however , an area in which there is no clear consensus .

shortly before our may testimony , the acting commissioner suspended on - line pebes availability , promising a reexamination of the service that would include public forums around the country .

after analyzing the results of those forums , the acting commissioner announced last september that a modified version of the on - line pebes system would be available by the end of 1997 .

the new commissioner , however , has placed implementation of the new system on hold .

ssa has hired a private contractor to assess the risk of the modified system ; we see this as an important , welcome step in determining the vulnerabilities involved in the use of the internet .

in summary , it is clear that ssa has made progress in dealing with its information technology challenges ; it is equally clear , however , that such challenges will continue to face the agency , especially as it transitions to a new processing environment while concurrently dealing with the coming change of century .

as a prime face of the government to virtually every american citizen , the stakes in how well the agency meets these continuing challenges are high .

this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

