i know that you and other members of this subcommittee are deeply concerned about finding ways for federal agencies to cut costs and streamline operations .

that is why i am very pleased to be here today to discuss governmentwide travel management , ways in which it can be improved , and the efforts underway to do so .

federal executives , operating in the current environment of reduction and change , face a difficult challenge .

they must cut costs while still maintaining , if not improving , operations .

most efforts that have attempted to address this challenge have had to come to grips with the difficulties of change — change is easy to talk about , but it is much harder to accomplish .

it is usually much easier to cut , than it is to improve .

indeed , there has been a growing acknowledgement within government that what is needed is a revamping of how the government does what it does .

real change , concrete improvements , and substantive cost savings will not occur until underlying processes are systematically reassessed and reengineered .

one area with great potential for reengineering is travel management , and with good reason .

in fiscal year 1994 , the federal government reported travel obligations for individuals of about $7.6 billion — about $5 billion for the department of defense ( dod ) and about $2.6 billion for the civilian agencies .

this amount was for direct costs ( i.e. , costs directly related to travel , such as transportation , lodging , rental cars , etc. ) .

related primarily to two types of travel — temporary duty ( tdy ) and permanent relocation .

the general services administration ( gsa ) currently negotiates some of these direct rates with travel vendors , at significant savings to federal agencies .

however , another component that often gets hidden is the administrative cost of arranging and processing travel .

this cost includes arranging travel , getting it approved , and reporting travel expenses , as well as the organization's cost for processing , auditing , and reimbursing the travel .

these administrative costs can be significant , into the hundreds of millions of dollars , especially when considering the number of travel authorizations and vouchers that are processed each year .

there are a number of private - sector companies who have set themselves apart from other organizations , both public and private , by streamlining and automating their travel processes and adopting a common set of best practices .

in doing so , millions in administrative costs have been saved .

a handful of federal agencies have also begun to implement best practices and reduce costs .

there is no reason , however , why all federal agencies cannot achieve comparable results .

with some variation , the essential elements of travel are similar for almost any organization , private or public .

and the costs for improvement are low , especially given the potential return — hundreds of millions of dollars could be saved .

mr. chairman , because of the interest you and other members of this subcommittee have shown in the demonstrated improvements of these leading organizations , we set out to discover how they manage travel , what practices and strategies they followed to get there , and how federal agencies compare .

last march , we reported to this subcommittee on our work assessing and comparing dod's travel practices to those of two leading organizations .

now , at your request , we have analyzed the travel practices of civilian federal agencies and compared them to leading organizations .

to do this , we obtained cost and process information from three leading organizations , and additional process information from a fourth .

we then conducted a survey at 70 executive - branch civilian agencies ( who represented 92 percent of total travel obligations for executive - branch agencies for fiscal year 1994 ) .

we received responses from 64 agencies ( a 91-percent response rate ) .

finally , we conducted case studies in specific locations at three agencies to gain additional information on how travel is arranged and processed .

as the information is presented , it is important to keep a couple of points in mind .

first , we only looked at tdy travel that is conducted by regular federal employees as part of normal business operations .

second , while we developed standard cost and process elements to help provide assurance that the cost numbers are comparable , because organizations used different methods to identify these numbers , some may not be exact comparisons .

third , all of the cost estimates are sensitive to the time and salary estimates that the agencies and organizations provided .

fourth , most of the cost and processing information was self - reported .

while we assessed the reasonableness of various cost and process elements that were provided , we did not independently verify all of this information .

finally , in addition to cost , there are other factors and trade - offs , such as quality , levels of risk , and the size of the investment of modernization , that must be considered when assessing and redesigning processes .

for instance , an organization may be able to reduce administrative costs by eliminating process steps ; however , without also ensuring that appropriate internal controls remain in place , the increased risk of fraud and abuse may outweigh any savings that are achieved .

we did not address these other factors .

what we found was that leading organizations have cut administrative costs — some cut expense report processing costs by more than 80 percent — and time — what once took 3 weeks can now be done within 48 hours — as a direct result of reengineering how they arrange and process travel .

their total administrative costs per trip now range from about $10 to $20 .

they achieved these improvements by consolidating travel management and processing centers , eliminating unnecessary review layers , simplifying the travel process , and streamlining and automating the expense reporting process and integrating it with the financial system .

most federal agencies' administrative travel costs and processes , on the other hand , lag behind those of leading organizations , although some agencies have begun to close the gap .

many agencies have not determined what their administrative travel costs and processes are , and for those agencies for whom costs were determined , their administrative costs per trip ranged from about $37 to $123 — 1 and a half to 12 times more expensive than the leading organizations .

many federal agencies use numerous processing centers , require multiple travel documents , and fill out these travel documents manually or maintain travel systems that do not have an agencywide automated interface with the financial system .

part of the problem has been that a primary focus of many federal agencies' travel management has historically been on maintaining and monitoring compliance , rather than on managing costs and efficiencies .

this is not to say that all federal agencies' processes are poor or that administrative costs are high .

indeed , most agencies' travel costs and processes lie along a continuum of performance .

some agencies , in fact , have reduced their administrative costs to levels that begin to match those of leading organizations .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) , for instance , has reported total administrative costs of about $39 per trip , while the forest service ( region 5 ) has reported administrative costs of about $37 .

and there are also several agencies , including gsa and the departments of state , transportation , defense , and energy , who have initiated pilots that could go a long way to improving operations and reducing administrative travel costs .

figure 1 provides a listing of estimated total administrative costs for the leading organizations and four civilian agencies .

the figure also shows administrative cost estimates developed by six dod agencies , although these estimates may not be fully comparable .

in addition , the chart highlights two estimates — current federal agency costs per trip and improved costs per trip — that were developed by a travel improvement task force from the joint financial management improvement program ( jfmip ) .

comparable civilian agency cost estimates ( includes estimates from the forest service ( region 5 ) , irs national office , jmd , and state ) dod cost estimates ( includes estimates from the dod language institute for both the army and air force , dod performance review , the air force district of washington , naval post - graduate school , and nsa ) figure 2 shows where agencies stand in their identification of administrative costs .

the chart breaks the agencies into three groups — those that could identify all administrative costs , those that identified some of their administrative costs , and those who could not identify any of their administrative costs .

finally , the following table lists the travel practices of the leading organizations and compares them to the practices of federal agencies , as found in our survey .

when looking at the leading organizations and what they have accomplished , it is important to remember that all of them found themselves , at one point or another , in a situation very similar to where many federal agencies now stand — they had to reduce costs , while at the same time dramatically improving service to the customer .

these leading organizations set out to rethink and redesign how their financial management processes , including travel processing , were conducted .

in doing so , the leading organizations shared many of the same characteristics: they generally assessed travel management as part of a larger , financial management reengineering effort , they benchmarked themselves against other recognized organizations , and they instituted a common set of best practices .

the strategies used by these leading organizations in reengineering and adapting their practices can be grouped into three common areas: consolidation , simplification , and automation and integration .

by addressing all three of these areas , the organizations were able to achieve dramatic cost and process improvements .

a travel manager from one of the leading organizations told us that after assessing current practices and processes , the first thing he would do when embarking on an improvement effort would be to consolidate operations .

before they started reengineering , leading organizations had business units that operated independently .

each unit was responsible for making travel arrangements and for processing their own travel .

for instance , one organization was processing expense reports at over 300 separate locations .

these decentralized operations can ( 1 ) lead to duplication of effort because each unit has to be responsible for similar processes , such as reimbursement and expense processing , ( 2 ) reduce opportunities to achieve economies of scale , ( 3 ) make organizationwide travel policy enforcement more difficult and inconsistent , and ( 4 ) hinder the organization from gathering and maintaining organizationwide travel data .

leading organizations realized that they could cut costs and improve service by having central , organizationwide sources for making travel arrangements and for processing expense reports .

they also established a central travel management group to oversee organizationwide travel and to establish , monitor , and enforce travel policies .

as processing locations were consolidated , the organizations found that they were able to reduce costs and cycle time .

they also began to maintain travel data on the organization as a whole .

these corporate travel data can be particularly helpful in negotiating rates with vendors .

the leading organizations also reduced the number of travel agencies that they were using .

there are several benefits that can be gained from this .

for instance , this can ( 1 ) assist in uniform monitoring and enforcing of the organization's travel policies , ( 2 ) ensure consistency in how services are provided , and ( 3 ) provide management reports on the travel patterns of both individual travelers and the organization as a whole .

this travel information is particularly helpful in monitoring policy compliance , tracking travel trends for negotiating rates with travel vendors , and for comparing actual to reported expenses .

the second strategy used by leading organizations was to simplify operations , for both the traveler and the organization .

such simplification includes eliminating the need for front - end travel approval and consolidating all expense reporting on one form .

two of the organizations even automated the expense reporting process once they had decided on a streamlined reporting structure .

a travel manager from one of the leading organizations noted that prior to reengineering , up to seven signatures were required to approve one expense report ; now the expense report is automated and the only approval step occurs at the back end of the process after the voucher has been processed .

consolidating information also cuts cycle time , makes it easier to track costs , and provides easier access to data because all information is maintained in one central location .

leading organizations also simplified and streamlined operations by mandating the use of charge cards for all transportation and lodging expenses , as well as for cash advances , cost areas that can account for 80 to 90 percent of all travel expenses .

one organization , in fact , requires an explanation for any instance in which the corporate charge card is not used for at least 90 percent of all business travel expenses .

a key benefit of using a corporate charge card is eliminating advance processing costs and cycle time .

under the old system , a traveler would have to spend time filling out an advance request form and getting it approved by a supervisor .

the organization would also have to keep an amount of petty cash on hand at various cash windows .

and the organization had to track and reconcile each cash disbursement that occurred .

by mandating charge card usage for cash advances , an organization can eliminate the processing time and costs for getting the advance , no longer has to maintain petty cash at cash windows , and can conduct one reconciliation for all travel expenses .

other benefits of using a corporate charge card are that it provides greater cash management and establishes better information management .

finally , once leading organizations had assessed and consolidated their current processes , they looked to use automation to further simplify and streamline operations .

they integrated expense reporting with travel expense processing , built policy conformance checks into the travel system , reimbursed travelers electronically , and developed a management information system to maintain the travel data that were being gathered .

maintaining this information gives an organization the specific information it needs when negotiating rates with travel vendors and setting predetermined travel costs .

it also helps to track and enforce policy compliance and provides greater assurance of data integrity .

as mentioned previously , two of the leading organizations we talked to developed an automated expense reporting system as part of their consolidation and simplification efforts .

the expense reporting systems they developed are user friendly and provide various aids to the traveler , including calculating expense totals and maintaining current per diem rates .

one organization's system builds policy compliance into the traveler's expense reporting by using a series of prompts and questions to highlight exceptions to policy .

the system prompts the traveler to provide reasons whenever a response deviates from policy , such as using a noncontracted vendor or exceeding per diem rates .

the system highlights the exceptions to the approving supervisor , who must approve all of them before reimbursement can occur .

the system also produces a report that highlights to senior management all approved exceptions .

another benefit of automation is the reduced cycle time provided by electronic reimbursement .

for instance , prior to implementing their automated systems , it took two leading organizations over 3 weeks to reimburse travel expenses .

now a traveler can travel one day , submit an expense report the next day , and be reimbursed the following day .

a final benefit of automation is that all travel information can be maintained in a central repository .

as one travel manager from a leading organization noted , “travel management is really about information management.” the information that is gathered can come from a variety of sources , including the charge card company , booking information from the travel agency , and expense information from the expense reporting system .

this information is useful to analyze and compare what was booked , what was charged , and what is claimed .

mr. chairman , a question you or others may be asking now is whether federal agencies can match what these leading organizations have done .

the answer is yes , but there are many factors and issues , ranging from governmentwide policy , technical , and regulatory issues to agency - specific union and culture issues , that have to be taken into account .

i would like to highlight a couple of the key issues .

the first issue facing agencies is the lack of accurate , up - to - date information related to travel costs and processes .

such baseline information is essential to measure progress and to ensure that the organization is focusing its improvement efforts on the most critical areas .

without accurate baseline information , organizations can waste valuable time and effort investigating technological solutions without truly knowing what process problems they are trying to solve .

in addition , if the organization does not know where it is starting from , it is very difficult to measure what progress has been made .

one travel manager from a leading organization summed it up by noting that you can't travel cheaper until you know exactly how you travel .

it appears that many federal agencies may be going ahead with improvement projects , including the acquisition of automation , without first assessing what their current situation is .

for example , in response to our survey , 25 agencies said that they recently revised their travel processes , but only 11 of these agencies reported that they had assessed their current processes .

as we have highlighted in previous reports , the risk of automating without analyzing current processes is that hardware and software may be acquired to automate the inefficient processes that are already in place .

the justice management division ( jmd ) within the department of justice , for instance , recently acquired a travel system to streamline operations by producing travel authorizations and vouchers and providing for electronic approval of these documents .

jmd plans for this system to be fully integrated with the financial system .

however , this does not occur now .

as a result , the travel system produces a hard - copy version of the voucher and information from the voucher must then be manually reentered into the financial system .

such duplication is inefficient and introduces a risk of data error during reentry .

as agencies look to automate their travel systems they will also have to ensure that they incorporate adequate controls , as noted in title 2 and title 7 of gao's policy and procedures manual for guidance of federal agencies , to ensure the integrity of the data .

we have issued several reports emphasizing that improvements to streamline employee travel payment processes should be made only within a framework of adequate , cost - effective controls that reasonably ensure that payment transactions are properly authorized and sufficient records of these transactions are maintained .

one area where this has drawn particular attention is in the approval of authorizations and vouchers through the use of electronic signature .

we have previously reported that to provide adequate safeguards , an electronic signature should be ( 1 ) unique to the signer , ( 2 ) under the signer's sole control , ( 3 ) capable of being verified , and ( 4 ) linked to the data in such a way that if the data are changed , the signature is invalidated .

the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) has established procedures for the evaluation and approval of certain electronic signature techniques to ensure the integrity of the data and compliance with the previously mentioned criteria .

several federal pilots , including the corps of engineers , the department of energy , and dod , are currently working with us and nist to address these concerns and develop standardized systems that can be used by other agencies .

another factor that will have to be addressed as agencies look to reengineer travel is the federal travel regulations ( ftr ) , which govern how federal travel is to be conducted .

for instance , the ftr say that a traveler must obtain both a travel authorization ( pre - trip ) and travel voucher ( post - trip ) and that travel approval for both must be given by an authorized official .

in its report on improving governmentwide travel management , the jfmip travel improvement task force made nine recommendations for improving how tdy travel was processed .

of these nine recommendations , the task force estimated that eight would require some regulatory change , and the final recommendation will require both legislative and regulatory changes .

all of this is not to say that improvements have not been made , or that little is being done in the federal government .

on the contrary , there is a great deal of momentum for changing how travel is arranged and processed .

for instance , 50 agencies in our study said that they planned to implement a revised travel process or that they were planning to revise in the near future .

some federal agencies have already begun to implement many of the best practices and reduce administrative costs .

irs , for instance , processed 83 percent of its fiscal year 1995 travel vouchers using an automated travel system .

travelers enter information in to the travel system and this information is transmitted to a supervisor who approves it electronically .

the travel system is integrated with irs' financial system , where the travel information is processed once approval has been given .

the information is then uploaded into treasury's system for reimbursement .

there are also several federal agencies who have initiated pilots , some that are quite aggressive , that demonstrate the improvements that are possible .

these efforts include the following: a forest service improvement team assessed its processes and found that almost half of its processing steps added no value to the processing of a travel voucher .

it has now made several recommendations about how travel processing can be improved .

the state department studied its travel process and found that it could reduce its indirect costs by $18 to $72 per trip .

state also received waivers from the ftr and developed one form to be used for both travel authorizations and vouchers .

an internal gsa improvement team has proposed , and is beginning to move towards , an even more streamlined approach for gsa in which all paper travel documents would be eliminated .

other agencies that have ongoing pilots include the departments of transportation , defense , and energy .

in addition to these agency - specific efforts , the jfmip travel improvement task force , made up of representatives from several agencies across government , has assessed both tdy and permanent relocation travel and estimated that hundreds of millions could be saved by implementing a number of key recommendations .

these recommendations mirror many of the best practices of leading organizations , including requiring the use of a corporate charge card and consolidating and automating travel data .

in summary , mr. chairman , there are many things that can be done to move the government closer to the performance of leading organizations .

first and foremost , agencies need to assess their costs and processes and establish a baseline of current performance .

as i mentioned earlier , tremendous gains are possible by rethinking and redesigning travel management .

however , it will be difficult for agencies to decide where to start and to measure progress until they assess where they are now .

some of the necessary information will be gathered as part of the requirements of the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act , which requires that agencies provide complete , reliable , and timely information regarding the management activities of the agency .

however , agencies will still need to work to develop and assess other travel - related information .

as agencies develop this baseline , they should also look for areas where operations can be streamlined and consolidated .

we also strongly urge agencies to study and implement the practices and approaches identified by the jfmip travel improvement team .

everyone should eventually be at or near the savings levels offered by jfmip ; irs and the forest service have already shown that achieving these levels is possible .

however , reaching this goal is only a start .

as the travel improvement team noted , the improvements they recommend are just the beginning .

continual assessment and improvement will help agencies move even closer to the results achieved by leading organizations .

finally , agencies should always be looking for new ways to build and learn .

such learning can occur on two levels .

first , agencies can learn from the successes and failures of other organizations , both private and public .

second , they can pilot projects of their own , build on the lessons that they learn , and then look to share this information with others .

in conjunction with agency efforts , gsa , as the government's primary manager of travel policy , should take the lead to oversee the various travel improvement efforts that are planned or underway .

such oversight may include the establishment of travel data standards , a cross - services directory , and an applications directory .

gsa should also form a users group to facilitate the sharing of knowledge and information .

such a group , in coordination with other interested parties , including jfmip and the cfo council , will go a long way to speeding the successful application of the practices and guarding against redundant actions .

finally , gsa needs to assess and revise the ftr based on the suggestions of jfmip and lessons that are learned .

in addition , we encourage the ongoing interest , support , and oversight in this area by congressional committees .

the progress of agencies and gsa should be monitored to ensure that all are moving towards the improvements listed here and in the jfmip report — helping to get higher , better value for the public's dollar by operating more efficiently .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

