money laundering is a global problem requiring collective international efforts to combat .

gao's testimony describes u.s. efforts to deter this activity , including: ( 1 ) u.s. and seven european countries' regulation of financial institutions in regard to money laundering , ( 2 ) u.s. bank regulators' oversight of money - laundering controls at overseas branches of u.s. banks , ( 3 ) u.s. law enforcement agencies' efforts to coordinate their overseas anti - money - laundering activities with host countries' law enforcement agencies , and ( 4 ) u.s. participation in international anti - money - laundering arrangements .

u.s. banking regulators' previous domestic anti - money - laundering efforts relied mainly on reporting regulations that require financial institutions to report currency transactions above certain thresholds .

current approaches include an increased reliance upon reporting suspicious transactions .

also , most u.s. banks have adopted “know your customer” policies to help identify suspicious transactions , according to the american bankers association .

european countries gao visited have relied on suspicious transaction reports as well as on know your customer policies to combat money laundering through financial institutions .

u.s. bank regulators may face impediments in overseeing money - laundering controls at branches of u.s. banks abroad .

these branches are subject to host countries' anti - money - laundering laws rather than u.s. anti - money - laundering laws .

as a result , u.s. regulators' examinations of these branches are more narrowly scoped than comparable examinations of branches in the united states .

in addition , host country bank privacy and data protection laws may serve to prevent u.s. regulators from performing on - site examinations of u.s. branches in certain countries .

however , regulators can rely on other means to counteract or prevent money - laundering activities at these overseas branches .

several u.s. law enforcement agencies are responsible for investigating crimes involving money laundering .

law enforcement officials from two european countries expressed concern to gao about the difficulties of dealing with multiple u.s. agencies .

u.s. law enforcement agency officials , however , prefer not to designate a single agency as a focal point on overseas money - laundering inquiries because of jurisdictional problems .

instead , a number of u.s. agencies have adopted a july 1994 memorandum of understanding that aims to improve overseas coordination .

also , the united states is working with other countries through treaties and arrangements to establish global anti - money - laundering policies , mainly through the financial action task force .

mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss money laundering , a global problem that needs to be fought collectively by the international community .

increased attention to u.s. efforts to combat money laundering abroad is important , particularly as u.s. efforts have made it more difficult for individuals to launder money domestically .

my testimony today will discuss ( 1 ) u.s. and selected european countries' approaches to combating money laundering through regulation of financial institutions , ( 2 ) u.s. bank regulators' oversight of money - laundering controls at overseas branches of u.s. banks , ( 3 ) u.s. law enforcement agencies' efforts to coordinate their overseas anti - money - laundering activities with host countries' law enforcement agencies , and ( 4 ) u.s. participation in international arrangements to combat money laundering abroad .

our work was designed to provide a framework for understanding u.s. international efforts to combat money laundering rather than an assessment of u.s. activities in this area .

my remarks today are based on the work that we performed for ranking minority member henry b. gonzalez over the past year and a half on u.s. efforts to combat overseas money laundering .

most of our work will be more comprehensively summarized in a report we plan to release shortly .

in doing our work , we obtained views and material from ( 1 ) u.s. bank regulatory officials , including the department of the treasury's office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) and the federal reserve board ( frb ) ; ( 2 ) u.s. law enforcement officials in the united states and abroad , including the department of the treasury's customs service , and internal revenue service ( irs ) , and the department of justice's criminal division , federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and drug enforcement administration ( dea ) ; ( 3 ) treasury's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) and the department of state ; ( 4 ) law enforcement , bank regulatory , and financial institution officials we visited in england , france , italy , germany , hungary , poland , and switzerland ; ( 5 ) interpol ( the international criminal police organization ) ; and ( 6 ) the secretary of the multilateral financial action task force ( fatf ) .

money laundering , which is the disguising or concealing of illicit income in order to make it appear legitimate , is a problem of international proportions .

federal law enforcement officials estimate that between $100 billion and $300 billion in u.s. currency is laundered each year .

numerous u.s. agencies play a role in combating money laundering .

law enforcement agencies within the departments of justice and the treasury have the greatest involvement in domestic and international money - laundering investigations .

frb and occ have the primary responsibility for examining and supervising the overseas branches of u.s. banks to ascertain the adequacy of the branches' anti - money - laundering controls .

fincen provides governmentwide intelligence and analysis that federal , state , local , and foreign law enforcement agencies can use to aid in the detection , investigation , and prosecution of domestic and international money laundering and other financial crimes .

in addition , other u.s. agencies play a role , including the state department , which provides information on international money laundering through its annual assessment of narcotics and money - laundering problems worldwide .

until recently , u.s. banking regulators' anti - money - laundering efforts relied heavily on regulations requiring financial institutions to routinely report currency transactions that exceed $10,000 , primarily through filing currency transaction reports ( ctr ) with the irs .

u.s. banking regulators have also relied on approaches in which financial institutions report financial transactions involving known or suspected money laundering.according to a senior treasury official , u.s. regulators' anti - money - laundering efforts in coming years are expected to rely more on the reporting of financial transactions involving known or suspected money laundering .

u.s. regulators will also be expected to continue relying on ctrs , but to a lesser extent .

most u.s. banks have adopted so - called “know your customer” policies over the past few years to help them improve their identification of financial transactions involving known or suspected money laundering , according to the american bankers association .

under these know your customer policies , which are currently voluntary but which the treasury plans to make mandatory in 1996 , financial institutions are to verify the business of a new account holder and report any activity that is inconsistent with that type of business .

according to the american bankers association , these policies are among the most effective means of combating money laundering , and the majority of banks have already adopted such policies .

the seven european countries we visited have tended to model their anti - money - laundering measures after a 1991 european union ( eu ) directive that established requirements for financial institutions similar to those that financial institutions conducting business in the united states must follow .

however , instead of relying on the routine reports of currency transactions that the united states has traditionally emphasized , european countries have tended to rely more on suspicious transaction reports and on know your customer policies .

these know your customer policies are somewhat more comprehensive than comparable u.s. ones , according to european bank and regulatory officials .

while hungary and poland have adopted anti - money - laundering measures following the eu directive , banking and government officials in these two countries told us that the implementation and enforcement of their anti - money - laundering measures have been hindered .

they attributed problems to such factors as resource shortages , inexperience in detection and prevention , and in poland , conflicts between bank secrecy laws and recently adopted anti - money - laundering statutes .

fincen and interpol have recently initiated project eastwash , to attempt to assess money laundering in 20 to 30 countries throughout east and central europe and the former soviet union .

according to fincen officials , as of late 1995 on - site visits had been made to five countries to assess the law enforcement , regulatory , legislative , and financial industry environment in each nation .

information from these visits is to be used for policy guidance and resource planning purposes for both the countries assessed and u.s. and international anti - money - laundering organizations , according to these officials .

u.s. banks had over 380 overseas branches located in 68 countries as of august 1995 .

these branches , which are a direct extension of u.s. banks , are subject to host countries' anti - money - laundering laws rather than u.s. anti - money - laundering laws , according to occ and frb officials .

in some cases , u.s. banking regulators have not been allowed to perform on - site reviews of these branches' anti - money - laundering controls .

according to u.s. banking regulators , bank privacy and data protection laws in some countries serve to prevent u.s. regulators from examining u.s. bank branches located within their borders .

of the seven european countries we visited , u.s. regulators were not allowed to enter switzerland and france to examine branches of u.s. banks because of these countries' strict bank secrecy and data protection laws .

u.s. regulators , however , have other means besides on - site examinations for obtaining information on u.s. overseas branches' anti - money - laundering controls , according to frb and occ officials .

for example , u.s. regulators can and do exchange information — excluding information requested for law enforcement purposes — with foreign banking regulators on their respective examinations of one another's foreign - based branches .

in addition , frb can deny a bank's application to open a branch in a country with strict bank secrecy laws if it does not receive assurance that the branch will have sufficient anti - money - laundering controls in place , according to frb officials .

occ and frb officials said that in countries that allow them to examine anti - money - laundering controls at overseas branches of u.s. banks , such examinations are of a much narrower scope than those of branches located in the united states .

one reason is that host country anti - money laundering measures may not be as stringent as u.s. anti - money - laundering requirements and , thus , may not provide the necessary information for u.s. examiners .

occ and frb officials also said that the expense of sending examiners overseas limits the amount of time examiners can spend reviewing the anti - money - laundering controls of the bank .

however , according to these officials less time is needed to conduct an anti - money - laundering examination at some overseas branches because of the small volume of currency transactions .

frb officials told us that they have recently developed money - laundering examination procedures to be used by its examiners to address the uniqueness of overseas branches' operations and to fit within the short time frames of these examinations .

although these procedures have been tested , they have not been implemented and , thus , we have not had the chance to review them .

responsibilities for investigating both domestic and international crimes involving money - laundering are assigned to numerous u.s. law enforcement agencies , including dea , fbi , irs , and the customs service .

while european law enforcement officials acknowledged the important role u.s. law enforcement agencies play in criminal investigations involving money laundering , some commented about the difficulties of dealing with multiple agencies .

some british and swiss law enforcement officials we spoke with said that too many u.s. agencies are involved in money - laundering inquiries .

this overlap makes it difficult , in some money - laundering inquiries , to determine which u.s. agency they should coordinate with .

these european officials indicated that designating a single u.s. office to serve as a liaison on these money - laundering cases would improve coordination .

according to u.s. law enforcement agency officials , however , designating a single u.s. law enforcement agency as a focal point on overseas money - laundering cases could pose a jurisdictional problem because money - laundering cases are usually part of an overall investigation of another crime , such as drug trafficking or financial fraud .

nevertheless , u.s. law enforcement agencies have taken recent steps to address overseas money - laundering coordination .

in particular , a number of u.s. agencies adopted a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) in july 1994 on how to assign responsibility for international drug money - laundering investigations .

law enforcement officials were optimistic that the mou , which was signed by representatives of the secretary of the treasury , the attorney general , and the postmaster general , would improve overseas anti - money - laundering coordination .

although law enforcement is optimistic about improvements in coordination , we have not assessed how well u.s. international investigations are being coordinated .

the united states works with other countries through multilateral and bilateral treaties and arrangements to establish global anti - money - laundering policies , enhance cooperation , and facilitate the exchange of information on money - laundering investigations .

the united states' multilateral efforts to establish global anti - money - laundering policies occur mainly through fatf , an organization established at the 1989 economic summit meeting in paris of major industrialized countries .

the united states , through the treasury under secretary for enforcement , assumed the presidency of fatf in july 1995 for a one - year term .

fatf has worked to persuade both member and nonmember countries to institute effective anti - money - laundering measures and controls .

in 1990 , fatf developed 40 recommendations that describe measures that countries should adopt to control money laundering through financial institutions and improve international cooperation in money - laundering investigations .

during 1995 , fatf completed its first round of mutual evaluations of its members' progress on implementing the 40 recommendations .

fatf found that most member countries have made satisfactory progress in carrying out the recommendations , especially in the area of establishing money - laundering controls at financial institutions .

fatf has also continued to identify global money - laundering trends and techniques , including conducting surveys of russia's organized crime and central and east european countries' anti - money - laundering efforts .

in addition , fatf has expanded its outreach efforts by cooperating with other international organizations , such as the international monetary fund , and by attempting to involve nonmember countries in asia , south america , russia , and other parts of the world .

a more recent multilateral effort involved the united states and other countries in the western hemisphere .

on december 9-11 , 1994 , the 34 democratically elected leaders of the western hemisphere met at the summit of the americas in miami , florida .

at the summit , the leaders signed a declaration of principles that included a commitment to fight drug trafficking and money laundering .

the summit documents also included a detailed plan of action to which the leaders affirmed their commitment .

one action item called for a working - level conference on money laundering , to be followed by a ministerial conference , to study and agree on a coordinated hemispheric response to combat money laundering .

the ministerial conference , held on december 1-2 , 1995 , at buenos aires , argentina , represented the beginning of a series of actions each country committed to undertake in the legal , regulatory , and law enforcement areas .

u.s. department of justice officials told us that these actions are designed to establish an effective anti - money - laundering program to combat money laundering on a hemispheric basis .

further , the officials told us that the conference created an awareness that money laundering is not only a law enforcement issue , but also a financial and economic issue , requiring a coordinated interagency approach .

as part of another multilateral effort , fincen is working with other countries to develop and implement financial information units ( fiu ) modeled , in large part , on fincen operations , according to fincen officials .

fincen has also met with officials from other countries' fius to discuss issues common to fius worldwide .

the most recent meeting was held in paris in november 1995 , during which issue - specific working groups were created to address common concerns such as use of technology and legal matters on exchanging intelligence information .

u.s. treasury officials said that in recent years , the united states has relied on bilateral agreements to improve cooperation in international investigations , prosecutions , and forfeiture actions involving money laundering .

these bilateral agreements , consisting of mutual legal assistance treaties , financial information exchange agreements , and customs mutual assistance agreements with individual countries , also help to facilitate information exchanges on criminal investigations that may involve money laundering .

however , the state department's 1995 annual report on global narcotics crime concluded that many countries still refuse to share with other governments information about financial transactions that could facilitate global money - laundering investigations .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to try to answer any questions you or the committee may have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

