the dress rehearsal for the 2000 census is currently under way at three sites: sacramento , ca ; 11 counties in the columbia , sc , area ; and menominee county in wisconsin , including the menominee american indian reservation .

although it was originally intended to demonstrate the census bureau's plans for the 2000 census , the dress rehearsal will instead leave a number of design and operational issues unresolved .

these unresolved issues led gao in 1997 to raise concerns about the high risk of a failed census in 2000 .

accurate address lists and associated maps are the building blocks of a successful census .

however , the bureau has concluded that its original procedures for building the 2000 census address list might not meet its goal of being 99 percent complete .

although the bureau has since revised its address list development procedures , they will not be tested during the dress rehearsal , thus it will not be known until the 2000 census whether they will meet the bureau's goal .

the bureau's outreach and promotion initiatives are designed to boost mail response rates and thus avoid costly follow - ups to nonresponding households .

while the bureau is to rely on partnerships with local governments and organizations to raise public awareness of the census , the level of participation in these efforts has been inconsistent during the dress rehearsal , suggesting their impact on public response in 2000 may be limited .

uncertainties surround the bureau's ability to staff the 295,000 mostly temporary office and field positions necessary to conduct the census .

census jobs may not be as attractive as other positions , and , if current trends continue , the bureau could find itself competing for workers in a tight labor market .

the bureau's sampling and statistical estimation procedures , while they could reduce costs and improve accuracy if properly implemented , face methodological , technological , and quality control challenges .

procedures .

the longer this impasse continues , the greater the likelihood of a failed census .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the u.s. census bureau's preparations and operational plans for its dress rehearsal for the 2000 census , which is currently under way at three sites: sacramento , ca ; 11 counties in the columbia , sc , area ; and menominee county in wisconsin , including the menominee american indian reservation .

to the extent that the dress rehearsal mirrors the actual census , the dress rehearsal could foreshadow how well key census - taking activities might work in the decennial , and thus indicate where additional congressional and bureau attention is needed now to ensure successful results in 2000 .

my overall point today is that the dress rehearsal , originally contemplated as a concerted demonstration of a well - defined census design for 2000 , instead will leave a number of design and operational questions unanswered .

these unresolved issues led us in 1997 to raise concerns about the high risk of a failed census in 2000 .

at your request , my statement focuses on the progress , if any , that the bureau has made since july 1997 , when we reported that the risk of a failed census in 2000 had increased since we originally designated the 2000 census as a high - risk area in february 1997 .

specifically , we pay special attention to the challenges the bureau faces in implementing such key census - taking activities as ( 1 ) creating a complete and accurate address list , ( 2 ) increasing the mail response rate through outreach and promotion , ( 3 ) staffing census - taking operations with an adequate workforce , and ( 4 ) carrying out its sampling and statistical estimation procedures .

these subjects are covered extensively in our report prepared at the request of the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on governmental affairs , which we are making available today .

i also provide my preliminary observations on the status of the bureau's dress rehearsal evaluation program .

rehearsal sites , and contacted menominee officials by telephone ; ( 2 ) conducted in - person and telephone interviews with local officials on their experiences in reviewing address lists , promoting the census , andrecruiting and hiring census workers ; and ( 3 ) where applicable , reviewed relevant documents on these activities .

information on the bureau's dress rehearsal evaluation program was obtained by conducting a content analysis of the bureau's evaluation proposals and by interviewing cognizant bureau officials .

since the bureau has yet to finalize its evaluation plans , our observations should be considered preliminary .

the 1990 census was the most costly in history , and it produced data that were less accurate than those from the 1980 census .

about 6 million persons were counted twice in the 1990 census , while 10 million persons were missed — for a total of 16 million gross errors in the count .

of particular concern was the fact that the 1990 census was more likely to miss minority groups and renters , particularly those living in rural areas .

to address the problems that occurred in 1990 , the bureau redesigned key components of the census , such as procedures for developing a complete and accurate address list , increasing the mail response rate through outreach and promotion , staffing census - taking operations with a capable workforce , and reducing costs and improving accuracy through sampling and statistical estimation .

however , congress has not endorsed the bureau's overall design because of its concerns over the validity , legality , and operational feasibility of the bureau's statistical sampling and estimation procedures .

because of the significant and long - standing operational and technical challenges that the bureau faces in taking the census , and the continuing disagreement between congress and the administration over the use of sampling , in february 1997 , we designated the 2000 decennial census as being at high risk for wasted expenditures and unsatisfactory results .

in july 1997 , with still no agreement and uncertainties surrounding the feasibility of some key census operations , we reported that risks of a failed census in 2000 had increased .

day — april 18 , 1998 .

however , as is the case with the actual census , the bureau's dress rehearsal activities span a much wider period of time than this single day .

following the selection of the dress rehearsal sites in july 1996 , the bureau developed preliminary mailing lists and materials for these locations , contacted local governments at the three sites , and conducted staffing activities to hire temporary census employees in those locations .

similarly , after april 18 , the bureau is to develop its census count by conducting the necessary follow - up activities at nonresponding households and completing other fieldwork .

the key to a successful dress rehearsal is making it as much like the decennial census as possible .

thus , according to the bureau , the dress rehearsal for the 2000 census should test nearly all of the various operations , procedures , and questions that are planned for the decennial under as census - like conditions as feasible .

however , as an indication of increasing congressional concern over the bureau's plans for the 2000 census , the administration and congress agreed , as part of a compromise over the bureau's fiscal year 1998 appropriation , that the bureau would use sampling and statistical estimation methods only in the sacramento site , rather than at all three dress rehearsal sites as it plans to do nationally in 2000 .

in the columbia site , the bureau is to follow up on all nonresponding households just as it did nationwide in the 1990 census .

at the menominee dress rehearsal site , the bureau is also to follow - up on all nonresponding households , but is to use sampling and statistical estimation to improve the accuracy of the population count .

although use of the different methods at the dress rehearsal sites invites a comparison of the results , the dress rehearsal is not a test of competing census designs .

geographic , demographic , and possibly other differences among the dress rehearsal locations preclude such a comparison .

of a failed census — one on which the nation would have spent billions of dollars and still have demonstrably inaccurate results .

complete and accurate address lists , along with precise maps , are the foundation of a successful census .

accurate addresses are essential for delivering questionnaires , avoiding unnecessary and expensive follow - up efforts at vacant or nonexistent residences , and establishing a universe of households for sampling and statistical estimation .

accurate maps are critical for assigning correct portions of the population to their proper locations — an operation that is the foundation of congressional redistricting .

to build its address list , which is known as the master address file ( maf ) , the bureau initially planned , in part , to ( 1 ) use addresses provided by the postal service , ( 2 ) merge these addresses with the address file the bureau created during the 1990 census , ( 3 ) conduct limited checks of the accuracy of selected addresses , and ( 4 ) send the addresses to local governments for verification as part of a process called local update of census addresses ( luca ) .

however , the bureau's analyses of the completeness of the postal service's addresses , when combined with the bureau's 1990 addresses for a selected number of locations , have shown that the resulting address list was not always complete .

for example , address lists created in 1995 for two test locations did not include from 3.6 to 6.4 percent of the addresses identified through other bureau operations , such as field verification .

following these and similar analyses for lists created in 1996 , the bureau concluded in september 1997 that primary reliance on the postal service's and the bureau's 1990 address files was not sufficient , and that it needed to redesign its procedures in order to build a maf for the 2000 census that , as a whole , is 99 percent complete .

under the new procedures , which are estimated to cost an additional $108.7 million , the bureau now plans to canvass neighborhoods across the nation to physically verify the completeness and accuracy of the address file for the 2000 census prior to local address review .

while the components of the new approach have been used and tested in prior censuses , the bureau has not used or tested them either in concert with each other or in the sequence as presently designed for use in the 2000 census , and does not plan to do so in the dress rehearsal .

consequently , it will not be known until the 2000 census whether the bureau's redesigned procedures will allow it to meet its goal .

further , the dress rehearsal results to date suggest that luca may be too inconsistent and face too many obstacles to systematically verify or increase the accuracy of the maf .

for example , despite the bureau's efforts to encourage all local jurisdictions to participate , just 34 of the 60 local jurisdictions involved with the dress rehearsal participated in luca .

reasons for the low participation rate included the lack of resources and / or information to review address lists or maps at the local level .

jurisdictions that participated in luca said that problems with the level of bureau assistance , as well as with the accuracy and completeness of the address lists and maps , impeded their review efforts .

although the bureau's reengineered address development procedures call for obtaining earlier assistance from local governments to review addresses and maps , this does not address other problems encountered by local officials in reviewing address lists during the dress rehearsal , such as the unavailability of bureau assistance and the inconsistent quality of the address list and maps .

to help increase the mail response rate and thus reduce its costly nonresponse follow - up workload , the bureau plans to partner with local governments and other organizations to raise public awareness of the census .

the bureau expects that its outreach and promotion efforts , combined with other initiatives , such as simplified census questionnaires , should produce a mail response rate of 66.9 percent for the 2000 census .

this is 12 percentage points higher than the 55-percent response rate that the bureau expects it would achieve without these activities and slightly higher than the 65-percent response rate achieved in the 1990 census .

nevertheless , the bureau's experience thus far during the dress rehearsal suggests that , in 2000 , this goal might be difficult to achieve .

according to the bureau , the success of its outreach and promotion efforts will depend heavily on the effectiveness of the partnerships it hopes to build with state , local , and tribal governments ; the private sector ; various media ; and other organizations .

citing agency policy , the bureau has said that it is unable to fund local outreach and promotion efforts .

it is therefore placing a priority on working with partners because they can help publicize the census , foster participation , and dispel myths , among other activities .

community , social service , religious , and other local leaders , cccs are to help mobilize grassroots promotion efforts .

however , not all of the dress rehearsal jurisdictions where the bureau hoped to establish committees had done so at the time of our review .

for example , in south carolina , of the 11 counties and the city of columbia participating in the dress rehearsal , just 3 counties and columbia had active committees at the time of our review .

the eight remaining counties either had not started committees or had formed committees that subsequently became inactive .

we found that the operational problems the cccs were encountering had several sources .

among these were communication difficulties between the cccs and the bureau .

four of the six active cccs we contacted at the three dress rehearsal sites indicated that the bureau did not set clear expectations for their cccs , especially when they were first initiated , and / or bureau guidance and literature had been minimal .

another element of the bureau's outreach and promotion strategy is a paid advertising campaign .

in the 1990 census , the bureau relied on pro bono public service advertising to get its message across .

in october 1997 , the bureau announced that it had awarded its 2000 census paid - advertising contract to young & rubicam , which is a private advertising agency .

the bureau has budgeted about $100 million dollars for this effort , of which about 80 percent has been earmarked for buying advertising in print and broadcast media .

nevertheless , the advertising agency faces not only the familiar task of developing public awareness of the census , but also the greater challenge of motivating people to return their questionnaires in spite of a long - term decline in the mail response rate .

while the bureau found that 93 percent of the public was aware of the census in 1990 , the mail response rate was only 65 percent , 10 percentage points lower than it was in 1980 .

for the 2000 census , the bureau estimates that it will need to recruit over 2.6 million applicants to fill about 295,000 positions .

aside from the large numbers of people needed , hiring census workers could be difficult because most census jobs are part - time and temporary and do not come with such benefits as health insurance .

consequently , potential applicants may not find census jobs as attractive as alternative work opportunities .

pay employees a wage that is based on local rates and to offer productivity incentives .

however , if current employment trends continue , the bureau could find itself recruiting workers in a tighter labor market than prevailed in 1990 .

furthermore , the bureau's decision to focus its recruitment efforts on moonlighters and retirees is based on informal discussions with census workers during the 1995 census test , the hiring practices of private survey research firms , and census workforce studies that may not necessarily be comparable to the 2000 census situation .

declining response rates have posed problems for the bureau since it began its mail - out / mail - back procedure in 1970 .

hundreds of thousands of additional enumerators must be hired to collect census information from an increasing number of nonresponding households .

to reduce its nonresponse follow - up workload , the bureau plans to sample nonresponding households for the 2000 census .

the bureau has also designed a procedure called integrated coverage measurement ( icm ) by which it is to take a separate sample after the nonresponse follow - up is completed to make adjustments to the census counts .

however , these activities face several challenges .

for example , it is uncertain whether the bureau can complete its nonresponse follow - up and icm operations in the time allotted , considering that in 1990 similar processes took longer even though the amount of work was less .

in 1990 , the bureau allowed 4 weeks from census day for mail response before beginning nonresponse follow - up .

in 2000 , the bureau also plans to allow 4 weeks from census day for mail response .

in 1990 , nonresponse follow - up was scheduled to last 6 weeks , but in some locations lasted 14 weeks .

for the 2000 census , the bureau will again allow 6 weeks for completion of nonresponse follow - up .

in 1990 , an operation similar to the icm was not completed until january 4 , 1991 , while for the 2000 census , the bureau plans to perform the same tasks for five times the number of households by the end of september 2000. other individuals outside of the nonresponding households , a method that in the past has been shown to be less accurate .

a properly designed evaluation program that provides information on the cost , performance , required resources , timing of various census operations , and the quality and completeness of census data , is essential for the bureau to assess the feasibility of its operational plans .

we believe that , to be most effective , the evaluation effort needs to begin with a determination of what information will be required to support critical decisions and when that information needs to be available to bureau and other decisionmakers .

however , we are concerned that , with dress rehearsal census day a little over 3 weeks away , the bureau's evaluation program plan is still a work in progress , and that uncertainties surround the bureau's approaches and methodologies for carrying out specific studies .

according to the bureau , its dress rehearsal evaluation program or “report card” is designed to validate plans for the 2000 census , measure coverage of persons and housing units , and evaluate the completeness and quality of census data .

specifically , it is to consist of a status report to track the performance of key census operations at different points in time during the rehearsal , a quality assurance checkpoint system to monitor key dress rehearsal processes and signal where additional assistance is necessary to ensure operations remain on track , and a series of evaluations to determine how good the census data is in terms of statistical and other quality measures .

the bureau plans to establish a set of performance standards for measuring success at each site .

such performance standards are to measure , for example , the completeness of the maf and the effectiveness of the paid advertising campaign .

the standards , however , will not be used to measure the operational performance of one site against another .

evaluation plans , and the methodologies for some of these evaluations are not sufficiently defined to provide assurances that needed evaluation data will be available on a timely basis .

the bureau continues to complete the methodological details of its evaluations , and plans to issue those details as they are finished .

in summary , although the bureau has made progress in addressing some of the problems that occurred during the 1990 census , key activities continue to face operational challenges at a disturbingly late stage in the census cycle when the bureau should be fine tuning rather than revising its basic operational plans .

moreover , the ongoing lack of an agreement between congress and the administration over the final design of the 2000 census has only added to the challenges facing the bureau .

so long as this condition persists , the risk of a failed census in 2000 will continue to increase .

we look forward to supporting congressional oversight of the planning and conduct of the decennial census , and we will continue monitoring the dress rehearsal and the census evaluation program , as well as the bureau's preparations for the decennial census .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

