the postal service may be nearing the end of an era .

during the past 5 years , the service has made notable improvements in its financial position and delivery performance .

the service has recorded positive net income and has maintained or improved the overall delivery of certain specific classes of mail .

however , the service expects declines in its core business in the coming years .

the growth of the internet , electronic communications , and electronic commerce has the potential to substantially affect the service's mail volume .

as a result , the service may experience growing difficulty in maintaining its position in a dynamic communications and delivery environment .

these developments make it imperative for the service to resolve long - standing performance challenges , which involve four major areas .

maximize performance: the service's ability to maximize performance in the face of increasing customer demands and choices calls for establishing processes to accurately assess performance results and collecting and maintaining reliable data to support such assessments .

manage employees: the service's management of employees , its greatest asset , will in large part involve continued attention to labor - management relations problems that have plagued the service and its unions and management associations for several years .

maintain financial viability: the extent to which the service can maintain financial viability by controlling costs and enhancing revenues will involve appropriately managing its capital investments in technology and infrastructure as well as working to improve productivity .

adapt to competition: the means by which the service can adapt to a rapidly changing communications environment of growing competition will involve positioning the organization to meet changing customer needs , improve performance , and operate more efficiently .

gao is also highlighting the need for the postal service to take action to address long - standing issues related to the quality of data used in ratemaking and recommending that the postmaster general report to congressional oversight subcommittees on the actions taken and planned in this area .

in recent years , the service has progressed in addressing various challenges and is continuing to initiate significant changes that respond to the challenges .

however , as the service stands on the brink of the 21st century , time appears to be growing short for the service to successfully address its challenges so that it can sustain and improve current performance levels and remain competitive in a rapidly changing communications environment .

mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here today to participate in the subcommittee's oversight hearing on the u.s .

postal service .

in my testimony , i shall provide an overview of where the service stands today , as we come to the end of the 20th century , by looking back at trends in its financial and service delivery performance and also looking forward to the major challenges confronting the service at the start of a new millennium .

also , i will discuss ongoing work and work that we have completed since june 1998 related to four major challenges facing the postal service: maximizing performance in the face of increasing customer demands managing employees , the service's most valuable asset , to maximize attainment of agency goals and continuous improvement of employee performance ; maintaining financial viability by controlling costs and enhancing positioning the organization to adapt to a rapidly changing communications and delivery environment with a growing number of competitors .

i will also discuss other major postal oversight issues related to work that we have completed during the past year .

a list of the reports and testimonies we have issued since june 1 , 1998 , is included in the attachment to this statement .

the service has continued to report improvements in the areas of financial and service delivery performance and has undertaken a number of initiatives to respond to the four major challenges that we identified .

given the nature and extent of the challenges facing the service , we understand that it will take time to implement and assess the impact of major initiatives intended to address the challenges .

and , although the service has made progress and is continuing to make significant changes , time appears to be growing short for the service to successfully address these challenges so that it can sustain and improve current performance levels and remain competitive into the 21st century .

the service faces growing challenges from competition , notably from private delivery companies and electronic communications alternatives such as the internet .

the service projects that such competition will lead to substantial declines in the service's first - class mail volume in the next decade .

should this occur , the service will likely face unprecedented challenges as it seeks to fulfill its primary mission of providing universal postal service at reasonable rates while remaining self - supporting from postal revenues .

the service and other stakeholders agree that growth in the service's core business of delivering first - class mail has already been affected by the rapid growth of the internet , electronic communications , and electronic commerce .

although the service's mail volume increased in the 1990s to record levels , the rate of growth has slowed .

as figure 1 indicates , the service projects that first - class mail volume will decline at an average annual rate of 0.8 percent in fiscal years 1999 to 2008 .

specifically , first - class mail is projected to grow at an average annual rate of 1.8 percent in fiscal years 1999 to 2002 — the projected peak — and then to decline at an average annual rate of 2.5 percent in fiscal years 2003 to 2008 .

such a decline would be unprecedented in the service's history and would likely create financial and performance challenges .

as the postmaster general has noted , the service's environment is changing rapidly , and therefore the service cannot predict precisely when or to what extent competitive pressures may affect the service's revenues .

statement u.s .

postal service: challenges to sustaining performance improvements remain formidable on the brink of the 21st century note 1: the u.s .

postal service forecasts first - class mail to increase by an average annual rate of 1.8 percent in fiscal years 1999 through 2002 and to decline by an average annual rate of 2.5 percent in fiscal years 2003 through 2008 .

the service also forecasts standard a mail to increase by an average annual rate of 5.3 percent in fiscal years 1999 through 2002 and to increase by an average annual rate of 3.3 percent in fiscal years 2003 through 2008 .

note 2: actual data for fiscal year 1999 are not yet available .

standard a mail is primarily advertising mail and includes letters , flats , and parcels that are not sent by first - class mail or priority mail .

historically , increases in mail volume — including the volume of first - class mail — have helped the service cover its costs .

in the 1990s , increasing postage rates and mail volume helped provide the service with additional revenue to finance wage increases , modernization efforts , and improvements in the quality of delivery service .

the service projects that total mail volume will continue to increase from fiscal years 2000 through 2008 by an average annual rate of 1.7 percent , with the growth rate tapering off during the decade and total mail volume peaking in fiscal year 2006 .

even if total mail volume increases , a decline in first - class mail volume would present the service with the challenge of making corresponding reductions in the costs of handling first - class mail — that is , in costs that historically have varied directly or indirectly with changes in first - class mail volume — in order to hold down first - class rates .

further , in fiscal year 1998 , revenues from first - class mail covered about two - thirds of the service's institutional costs .

a substantial reduction in first - class mail volume would reduce its contribution to institutional costs , which could lead to somewhat higher postage rates in the future .

the service recently provided us with a detailed explanation of its volume forecast scenario and why it projects a substantial decline in first - class mail in the next decade .

the service's chief financial officer wrote us on september 9 , 1999 , that first - class mail volume is projected to decline on the basis of the assumption that diversion of mail to electronic communications alternatives would accelerate in a new and vastly different environment in which the service would operate .

in this environment , changes in technology and business would create a climate in which current hypotheses about mailing behavior may no longer hold .

notably , the combination of consumer movement to alternative bill payment methods and the consolidation in the financial sector would reduce the number of bills , statements , and payments in the mail stream .

moreover , the movement of advertisers to the internet would cause a slowdown in the growth of standard a mail , while growth in priority mail and parcel post would continue to be robust as consumers embrace electronic commerce and more packages are shipped by internet retailers .

specifically , the service's forecast was based on the following assumptions: potential year 2000-related complications are largely avoided , increasing business and consumer confidence in electronic alternatives to traditional mail - based bill and statement streams .

businesses increase research and development and technology spending as a result of the easy year 2000 transition , resulting in rapid implementation of on - line banking and financial applications and the spread of internet - based small business electronic data interchange .

first - class letter advertising reaches a saturation point because of consolidation in the banking sector , as well as the diversion of bills and payments away from the mail stream .

advertisers move away from traditional media to internet - based platforms because of increased consumer use of the internet .

another key development has been the globalization of the service's competitors in the delivery sector , which has contributed to recent declines in the service's international mail volume .

further , the service's competitors have charged that the service is using its governmental status to compete unfairly .

these developments have fueled the debate over whether the service should be allowed to introduce new nonpostal products in competition with the private sector , or whether the service should be limited to offering traditional postal services and wind down its operations as its core business declines .

regardless of how this public policy debate is resolved , the service has recognized that it must continue to meet customer needs , improve its performance , and operate more efficiently in order to be successful in an increasingly competitive environment .

the service projects positive results for both financial and service performance for fiscal years 1999 and 2000 .

as shown in figure 2 , the service projects a net income of $200 million in fiscal year 1999 , and its integrated financial plan for fiscal year 2000 projects a net income of $100 million .

appears to be on track for achieving record delivery service performance for this year .

the service's performance plan for fiscal year 2000 sets goals to continue the improved performance in these areas , as well as setting an additional performance target for on - time delivery of advertising mail .

we have identified four major challenges facing the postal service as the 21st century quickly approaches: ( 1 ) maximizing performance in the face of increasing customer demands and choices , ( 2 ) managing employees — the service's most valuable asset — to maximize attainment of agency goals and continuous improvement of employee performance , ( 3 ) maintaining financial viability by controlling costs and enhancing revenues , and ( 4 ) adapting to a rapidly changing communications and delivery environment with a growing number of competitors .

demands and choices .

as part of this effort , the service has established a results - oriented planning process .

as required by the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) , the service has published annual performance plans .

these plans were aligned with its planning process and identified the service's major goals and objectives , strategies for accomplishing the goals and objectives , and some performance indicators to measure progress toward these goals .

the service's performance plan should help guide its actions over the next year and provide information useful to the service's ongoing dialogue with congress and other stakeholders .

the preliminary annual performance plan for fiscal year 2000 specified goals and targets for the service's intended performance in such areas as providing timely delivery , improving workplace relations , and achieving its target for net income .

in response to a report we issued in april 1999 , the service agreed to identify its top goals for fiscal year 2000 in its final performance plan .

also , the final plan provided updated information on the service's projected revenues and costs for fiscal year 2000 as well as an updated summary of the service's efforts to reduce its costs .

early next year , the service is to publish its first annual program performance report under the results act as part of its fiscal year 2000 comprehensive statement on postal operations .

this report should help the service , congress , and other stakeholders assess the service's performance in the past fiscal year compared to the goals included in its performance plan .

in this regard , it will be important to many postal stakeholders for the service to continue to make tangible progress toward implementing a more complete set of performance measures and targets .

for example , in fiscal year 2000 , the service intends to develop new measures of timely delivery of international mail , publications , and bill payments sent through the mail .

as we observed in our january 1999 report on the service's major performance and management challenges , the prospect of declines in the service's core business has heightened the need for the service to resolve long - standing performance issues and implement reliable indicators of postal performance .

goal , and emphasizes that the end result should achieve organizational and individual success. .

the postal service's ability to maintain financial viability by controlling costs , improving productivity , and enhancing revenues also presents a continuing challenge .

the service's strategic plan stated that aggressive cost management would be necessary to guarantee success in mitigating historic cost trends that drive price increases .

the service's annual performance plan for fiscal year 2000 established goals for controlling costs through cost reduction programs as well as by achieving productivity gains .

the plan also reported that it is not unusual for the service's productivity to fluctuate from one year to another , but over the long run a successful organization will achieve positive growth in productivity .

further , the service has recognized that it must have strong and effective internal operating controls to avoid unwarranted costs and protect its revenues .

the service's ability to adapt to increasing competition is critical if the service is to maintain a competitive position in the rapidly changing communications and delivery environment .

increasing competition , particularly from electronic alternatives , has slowed the service's revenue growth and is expected to have a continuing impact on the service's revenues in the next decade .

other issues related to the service's competitive position have also been raised .

some concerns revolve around types of new products and services that the service is allowed to develop .

we recently provided information on the postal service marketing department's process for the review and approval of its new products .

also , some of our work has addressed various concerns regarding the service's competitive position with respect to international postal organizations .

other major issues we recently addressed include monitoring the service's actions to meet the challenges of preparing for the year 2000 as well as protecting consumers from deceptive mail practices , protecting the privacy of address changes , and improving its management of capital facility projects .

currently , we are also reviewing the effectiveness of the breast cancer stamp as a fundraiser .

in previous assessments and in planning a recovery management process to restore its operations if year 2000 problems should occur .

we also testified recently before this subcommittee on our work related to protecting consumers from deceptive mail marketing practices .

we provided information on the extent and nature of consumers' problems with deceptive mail and identified initiatives various federal agencies and other organizations have made to address deceptive mail problems and educate consumers .

we also recently released a report on another issue of interest to consumers , the service's protection of consumer address information from unauthorized disclosure .

we followed up on the recommendations we had previously made for specific actions the service should take to strengthen oversight of its national change of address ( ncoa ) program .

the service had not taken action on our recommendation that it explicitly state , in the acknowledgment form signed by customers of the service's address correction licensees , that ncoa program - linked data are not to be used to create or maintain new - movers lists .

we have suggested that congress may wish to consider amending the postal reorganization act of 1970 to establish requirements concerning the language in the form so that the service could help ensure that the use of ncoa program - linked data is limited to the purposes for which they were collected .

the postal service faces a major challenge in updating its computer systems , mail processing equipment , and infrastructure equipment to avoid year 2000 malfunctions that could disrupt mail delivery .

the service has a special responsibility to correct its computers because a number of private sector and government groups may need to use the service as a backup delivery system if their computers malfunction .

for this reason , the service is concerned about the prospect of a mail surge in january 2000 .

an early assessment by the service's office of inspector general showed that the service was slow to recognize the scope of the challenge and act to ensure that its computer systems were year 2000 compliant .

equipment correction and testing , ( 2 ) ensuring the readiness of hundreds of local facilities , ( 3 ) determining the ability of key suppliers and electronic data exchange partners to be year 2000 ready , ( 4 ) completing simulation testing of business process areas , and ( 5 ) completing the development and testing of business continuity and contingency plans .

since february , the service has strengthened its management approach to the year 2000 problem and made significant progress in fixing its systems and determining that its key suppliers and electronic data exchange partners will also be year 2000 ready .

for example , as of this august , the service reported to the office of management and budget that it completed renovation of 136 of its 137 severe and critical computer systems and expected to complete all non - mission critical systems by september 30 , 1999 ; certified all 38 critical mail processing equipment and embedded chip devices as year 2000 ready ; performed business impact assessments on all 353 critical field facilities and expected to finish remaining readiness activities by october 15 , 1999 ; expected to complete impact assessments by november 30 , 1999 , for all 3,500 field activities that have automated systems and functions with life safety and security ramifications ; obtained assurances of year 2000 readiness for 273 , or 99.6 percent , of its critical suppliers and completed site visits for all 34 “high profile” suppliers , i.e. , those most integral to the continuity of mail operations ; obtained assurances on year 2000 readiness for 73 percent of suppliers critical to the service's field operations ; and certified all 737 severe and critical electronic data exchanges as year 2000 compliant and reported that all 106 important , but not critical , electronic data exchanges would be certified as compliant by september 30 , 1999. and extensive supporting technology infrastructures .

over 40 applications that support critical business processes were tested in the first of a two - phased testing effort that ended in august 1999 .

the service is still analyzing the results of these tests ; however , it has reported that at least one application will require additional testing .

finally , the service has completed over 500 business continuity and component contingency plans for its critical processes .

this is another crucial phase of the year 2000 effort because core processes may still be disrupted by year 2000-induced failures and by errors in business partner systems or public infrastructure systems , such as power , water , transportation , and telecommunications systems .

the service's plans include preemptive measures and work - arounds to ensure critical business processes continue in the event of a year 2000-related disruption or system failure .

the field plans were distributed in august 1999 , and all rehearsals and adjustments to these plans are expected to be completed by november 30 , 1999 .

with these actions under way , the service is clearly much better positioned to face the upcoming century change .

however , the challenge facing the service is still significant: there are less than 3 months remaining before the year 2000 deadline , the service is now entering into the holiday business rush , and many important tasks — including the rehearsal and finalization of contingency and continuity plans — remain .

thus , the service will need to sustain top management attention to the problem and continue to do everything necessary to ensure that the continuity of important postal operations is maintained into 2000 .

likely to increase by over $300,000 each year .

in addition , the service has not addressed the long - standing problems , such as mail delivery problems and space deficiencies , that were the basis for the proposed antelope valley project .

we recommended that the postmaster general take action to resolve the status of the project and report on planned actions to address the operational deficiencies in the antelope valley area .

one of our ongoing efforts is a review of the service's breast cancer research stamp .

the “stamp out breast cancer act,” enacted august 13 , 1997 , required that the service market , for 2 years , a semipostal stamp for breast cancer research .

a semipostal stamp is a stamp that carries a surcharge for a special purpose .

the service issued the first - class breast cancer research stamp on july 29 , 1998 .

the stamp is currently priced at 40 cents — 33 cents for postage with a 7-cent surcharge .

the stamp is to be available for sale until july 29 , 2000 .

the net proceeds from the surcharge are going to the national institutes of health and department of defense for breast cancer research .

the breast cancer research stamp is the service's first - ever semipostal stamp .

in addition to requiring the service to market the breast cancer research stamp , the act also mandated that the comptroller general report to congress , between january 29 , 2000 , and april 29 , 2000 , on the effectiveness and appropriateness of using a semipostal stamp to raise funds for breast cancer research .

also , this report is to include information on the monetary and other resources required of the service to produce and market the breast cancer research stamp .

after 1 year of sales , the service reports that surcharge revenue generated by the breast cancer research stamp totaled approximately $8 million .

we expect to issue our report on the stamp to congress in the early part of the year 2000 , as mandated by the act .

actions planned to improve ratemaking data quality , including the priorities and time frames for short - term and long - term actions .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or the members of the subcommittee may have .

for future contacts regarding this testimony , please contact bernard l. ungar at ( 202 ) - 512-8387 .

individuals making key contributions to this testimony included teresa anderson , gerald barnes , anne hilleary , kenneth john , sherrill johnson , roger lively , charles wicker , and lisa wright - solomon .

kim raheb provided graphics support .

carl urie and greg donnellon provided information on the postal service's year 2000 compliance .

the results act: observations on the postal service's preliminary performance plan for fiscal year 2000 ( gao / ggd - 99-72r , april 30 , 1999 ) .

major management challenges and program risks: u.s .

postal service ( gao / ocg - 99-21 , jan. 1999 ) .

the results act: observations on the postal service's preliminary annual performance plan ( gao / ggd - 98-144 , july 10 , 1998 ) .

equal employment opportunity: the postal service needs to better ensure the quality of eeo complaint data ( gao / ggd - 99-167 , sept. 28 , 1999 ) .

equal employment opportunity: complaint caseloads rising , with effects of new regulations on future trends unclear ( gao / ggd - 99-128 , aug. 16 , 1999 ) .

equal employment opportunity: data shortcomings hinder assessment of conflicts in the federal workplace ( gao / ggd - 99-75 , may 4 , 1999 ) .

u.s .

postal service: diversity in high - level eas positions ( gao / ggd - 99- 26 , feb. 26 , 1999 ) .

u.s .

postal service: information about selected promotions of women and minorities to eas management - level positions ( gao / ggd - 98-200r , sept. 21 , 1998 ) .

equal employment opportunity: rising trends in eeo complaint caseloads in the federal sector ( gao / ggd - 98-157br , july 24 , 1998 ) .

public - private partnerships: key elements of federal building and facility partnerships ( gao / ggd - 99-23 , feb. 3 , 1999 ) .

u.s .

postal service: development and inventory of new products ( gao / ggd - 99-15 , nov. 24 , 1998 ) .

u.s .

postal service: postal and telecommunications sector representation in international organizations ( gao / ggd - 99-6br , oct. 29 , 1998 ) .

u.s .

postal service: competitive concerns about global package link service ( gao / ggd - 98-104 , june 5 , 1998 ) .

u.s .

postal service: deficiencies continue while antelope valley project status remains uncertain ( gao / ggd - 99-147 , aug. 31 , 1999 ) .

deceptive mail: consumers' problems appear substantial ( gao / t - ggd - 99-150 , aug. 4 , 1999 ) .

u.s .

postal service: status of efforts to protect privacy of address changes ( gao / ggd - 99-102 , july 30 , 1999 ) .

year 2000 computing crisis: challenges still facing the u.s .

postal service ( gao / t - aimd - 99-86 , feb. 23 , 1999 ) .

proposed legislation: issues related to honesty in sweepstakes act of 1998 ( s. 2141 ) ( gao / t - ggd - 98-198 , september 1 , 1998 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

