we are pleased to be here today to discuss the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) efforts to improve veterans' access to health care .

va operates one of our nation's largest health care systems , including 173 hospitals and 220 clinics .

last year , va spent about $16 billion serving 2.6 million veterans .

traditionally , almost all veterans seeking care have used va - operated facilities .

va's hospitals and clinics , however , are often located hundreds of miles from each other .

as a result , about half of all veterans live over 25 miles from a va hospital , including 6 percent who live over 100 miles away ; and over a third live more than 25 miles from a va clinic .

veterans have frequently indicated that they do not use va health care because they live too far from the nearest hospital or clinic .

to improve veterans' access to health care , va recently empowered network and hospital directors to employ all means at their disposal , within available resources , to establish new access points .

va defines an access point as a va - operated clinic or a va - funded or - reimbursed private clinic , group practice , or single practitioner that is geographically distinct or separate from the parent facility .

in general , access points are to provide primary care to all veterans and refer those needing specialized services or inpatient stays to va hospitals .

in using access points to restructure their direct delivery systems into integrated service - delivery networks , va directors have considerable freedom to develop their own goals and objectives as well as their own implementation strategies .

to date , 9 hospitals have opened 12 new access points .

recently , va notified the congress that 47 hospitals ( including 5 of the original 9 ) are ready to open an additional 58 access points .

another 200 are under development and could be operating by this december .

current va users .

to date , the 12 access points have enrolled nearly 5,000 veterans .

at your request , we have reviewed va's efforts to establish access points and will provide you with a report this summer .

today , we would like to discuss some legal , financial , and equity - of - access issues facing va managers as they strive to establish new access points .

finally , we will highlight several options to address these issues .

our comments today are based on visits to 3 va hospitals that operate 6 new access points ; interviews with 115 veterans now using them ; and discussions with officials of the other 6 hospitals that are now operating new access points .

we also reviewed a wide range of records and documents provided by these facilities .

we have discussed the results of our work with the deputy under secretary for health as well as other va officials and representatives of veterans' service organizations .

in summary , in establishing new access points , va has identified what could be a cost - effective way to enhance the availability of health care for current users , especially those residing in underserved areas .

doing this , however , has raised some important issues that va has not yet adequately addressed .

for example , va is not adhering to statutory limitations that govern what services va may provide and who may be served .

as a result , veterans are receiving more services than current statutes allow .

also , creating hundreds of new access points may attract more veterans than network and hospital directors can finance within their existing budgets .

empowering local hospital directors to establish new access points provides an opportunity to ensure that similarly situated veterans are afforded equal access to va care .

however , access inequities may continue , given that directors are establishing new access points without clear , consistent criteria for targeting new locations and populations to be served .

historically , the congress has limited va's authority to provide medical care to veterans , expanding it in a careful and deliberate manner .

although va's authority has increased significantly over the years , important limitations have not been recognized by va in establishing and operating new access points .

at the access points we visited , many veterans receive primary care contrary to applicable statutory limitations and priorities on their eligibility for such services .

as authority for operating contract access points , va relies on a statute ( 38 u.s.c .

8153 ) that permits it to enter into agreements “for the mutual use , or exchange of use , of specialized medical resources when such an agreement will obviate the need for a similar resource to be provided” in a va facility .

specialized medical resources are equipment , space , or personnel that — because of cost , limited availability , or unusual nature — are unique in the medical community .

va officials assert that primary care provided at access points is a specialized medical resource because its limited availability to veterans in areas where va facilities are geographically inaccessible ( or inconvenient ) makes it unique .

one significant aspect of va's reliance on this authority is that it effectively broadens the eligibility criteria for contract outpatient care , thus allowing some veterans , who would otherwise be ineligible , to receive treatment .

in our view , this statute does not authorize va to provide primary care through its access points .

nothing in the statute suggests that the absence of a va facility close to veterans in a particular area makes primary care physicians unique in the medical community .

the purpose of allowing va to contract for services under the specialized medical resources authority is not to expand the geographic reach of its health care system , but to make available to eligible veterans services that are not feasibly available at a va facility that presently serves them .

furthermore , contracting for the provision of primary care at access points does not obviate the need for primary care physicians at the parent va facility .

va has specific statutory authority ( 38 u.s.c .

1703 ) to contract for medical care when its facilities cannot provide necessary services because they are geographically inaccessible .

that are more restrictive than those under 38 u.s.c .

8153 , upon which va relies .

for example , under 38 u.s.c .

8153 , a veteran who has income above a certain level and no service - connected disability is eligible for pre - and post - hospitalization medical services and for services that obviate the need for hospitalization .

but under 38 u.s.c .

1703 , that same veteran is not eligible for pre - hospitalization medical services or for services that obviate the need for hospitalization .

if access points are established in conformance with 38 u.s.c .

1703 , va would need to limit the types of services provided to all veterans except those with service - connected disabilities rated at 50 percent or higher ( who are eligible to receive treatment of any condition ) .

all other veterans are generally eligible for va care based on statutory limitations ( and to the extent that va has sufficient funds ) .

for example , veterans with service - connected conditions are eligible for all care needed to treat those conditions .

those with disabilities rated at 30 or 40 percent are eligible for care of non - service - connected conditions at contract access points to complete treatment incident to hospital care .

furthermore , veterans with disabilities rated at 20 percent or less , as well as those with no service - connected disability , may only be eligible for limited diagnostic services and follow - up care after hospitalization .

most veterans currently receiving care at access points do not have service - connected conditions and , therefore , do not appear to be eligible for all care provided .

va is to assess each veteran's eligibility for care on the merits of his or her unique situation each time that the veteran seeks care for a new medical condition .

we found no indication that va requires access point contractors to establish veterans' eligibility or priority for primary care or that contractors were making such determinations for each new condition .

last year , va proposed ways to expand its statutory authority and veterans' eligibility for va health care .

several bills have been introduced that , if enacted , should authorize va hospitals to establish contract access points and provide more primary care services to veterans in the same manner as the new access points are now doing .

va hospital directors are likely to face an evolving series of financial challenges as they establish new access points .

in the short term , hospitals must finance new access points within their existing budgets ; this will generally require a reallocation of resources among hospitals' activities .

over the longer term , va hospitals may incur unexpected , significant cost increases to provide care to veterans who would otherwise not have used va's facilities .

these costs may , however , be offset somewhat if access points allow hospitals to serve current users more efficiently .

so far , va hospitals have successfully financed access points by implementing local management initiatives , unrelated to the access points , which allow the hospitals to operate more efficiently .

for example , one hospital director estimated that he had generated resources for new access points by consolidating underused medical wards at a cost savings of $250,000 .

to date , most directors have concluded that it was more cost - effective to contract for care in the target locations than operate new access points themselves .

essentially , they have found that it is not cost - effective to operate their own access points for a relatively small number of veterans .

for example , one hospital that targeted 173 veterans for an access point concluded that this number could be most efficiently served by contracting for care .

by contrast , private providers seem willing to serve small numbers of veterans on a contractual , capitated basis because they already have a non - va patient base and sufficient excess capacity to meet va's needs .

the longer - term effects of new access points on va's budget are less certain .

this is because va has not clearly delineated its goals and objectives ; nor has it developed a plan that specifies the total number of potential access points , time frames for beginning operations , estimates of current and potential new veterans to be served , and related costs .

of these , key cost factors appear to be the magnitude of new users and their willingness to be referred to va hospitals for specialty and inpatient care .

costs could potentially vary greatly depending on whether va hospitals' primary objective is to improve convenience for current users or to expand their market share by attracting new users .

average , each spend about $300,000 a year to provide primary care to about 1,500 veterans .

this hospital can reduce the number of teams to 4 once it enrolls 1,500 veterans at new access points closer to their homes .

these newly established access points could be cost - effective if their total costs are the same or lower than the va hospital's costs — $300,000 or less in this case .

va hospitals , however , could experience significant budget pressures if new access points modestly increase va's market share .

for example , va currently serves about 2.6 million of our nation's 26 million veterans .

to date , 40 percent of the 5,000 veterans enrolled at va's 12 new access points had not received va care within the last 3 years .

most of the new users we interviewed had learned about the access points through conversations with other veterans , friends , and relatives or from television , newspapers , and radio .

va's access points may prove more attractive to veterans in part because they overcome barriers such as geographic inaccessibility and quality of care .

about half of the veterans who have used va health care in the past , and a larger portion of the new users , said that it matters little whether they receive care in a va - operated facility .

in fact , almost two - thirds of the new users indicated that if hospitalization is needed , they would choose their local hospital rather than a distant va facility .

veterans will also generally benefit financially by enrolling in new va access points .

for example , prior va users will save expenses incurred traveling to distant va facilities as well as out - of - pocket costs for any primary care received from non - va providers ; most said that they use both va and non - va providers .

new va users will also save out - of - pocket costs , with low - income veterans receiving free care and high - income veterans incurring relatively nominal charges .

now va pays the contract provider a capitated rate and then bills the insurer to recover its costs on a fee - for - service basis .

the combination of these factors could lead to va attracting several hundred thousand new users through its access points .

this may force va to turn veterans away if sufficient resources are not available , or it may cause va to seek additional appropriations to accommodate the potential increased demand .

currently , va is to provide outpatient care to the extent resources are available .

when resources are insufficient to care for all eligible veterans , va is to care for veterans with service - connected disabilities before providing care to those without such disabilities .

furthermore , when va provides care to veterans without service - connected disabilities , it is to provide care for those with low incomes before those with high incomes .

presently , most of the nine hopsitals encourage current and new users to enroll in their new access points .

for example , the 3 hospitals we visited had enrolled 1,250 veterans in new access points .

of the 1,250 , about 20 percent had service - connected disabilities , including about 4 percent rated at 50 percent or higher .

of the remaining 80 percent , most had low incomes , including about 10 percent who were receiving va pensions or aid and attendance benefits .

inequities in veterans' access to va care have been a long - standing concern .

for example , about three - fourths of veterans ( both those with service - connected conditions and others ) using va clinics live over 5 miles away , including about one - third who live over 25 miles away .

establishing new access points gives va the opportunity to reduce some of these veterans' travel distances .

although va provided general guidance , it left the development of specific criteria for targeting new locations and populations to be served to network and hospital directors .

directors have several options when targeting new locations and populations to be served .

for example , they could target those current users or potential new users living the greatest distances from va facilities .

have improved convenience for existing users and attracted new users as well .

however , two new access points have served only current va users , while another one has served only new users .

va's plans to establish access points could represent a defining moment for its health care system as it prepares to move into the 21st century .

on one hand , va hospitals could use a relatively small amount of resources to improve access for a modest number of current or new users , such as those living the greatest distances from va facilities or in the most underserved areas .

on the other hand , va hospitals could , over the next several years , open hundreds of access points and greatly expand market share .

there are over 26 million veterans and 550,000 private physicians who could contract to provide care at va expense .

va's growth potential appears to be limited only by the availability of resources and statutory authority , new veteran users' willingness to be referred to va hospitals , and other health care providers' willingness to contract with va hospitals .

although va should be commended for encouraging hospital directors to serve veterans using their facilities in the most convenient way possible , va has not established access points in conformance with existing statutory authority .

in our view , under current statutes , new access points should be va - operated or provide contract care for only those services or classes of veterans specifically designated by va's geographic inaccessibility authority .

while legislative changes are needed to authorize va hospitals to provide primary care to veterans in the same manner as the new access points are now doing , such changes carry with them several financial and equity - of - access implications .

in addition , va has not developed a plan to ensure that hospitals establish access points in an affordable manner .

if developed , such a plan could articulate the number of new access points to be established , target populations to be served , time frames to begin operations , and related costs and funding sources .

it could also articulate specific travel times or distances that represent reasonable veteran travel goals that hospitals could use in locating access points .

points in accordance with the statutory service priorities .

if sufficient resources are not available to serve all eligible veterans expected to seek care , new access points that are established would serve , first , veterans with service - connected disabilities and then , second , other categories of veterans , with higher income veterans served last .

finally , this approach could provide for more equitable access to va care than va's current strategy of allowing local hospitals to establish access points that serve veterans on a first - come , first - served basis and then rationing services when resources run out .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions that you or other members may have .

for more information , please call paul reynolds , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7109 .

michael o'dell , patrick gallagher , abigail ohl , robert crystal , sylvia shanks , linda diggs , larry moore , and joan vogel also contributed to the preparation of this statement .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

