we are pleased to be here today to discuss steps the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) could take to help beneficiaries make more informed choices among medicare health plans .

in 1996 we reported to you that beneficiaries received little or no comparative information on medicare health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) .

among other things , we recommended that hcfa produce plan comparison charts , require plans to use standard formats and terminology in key aspects of their marketing materials , and publicize readily available plan performance indicators such as disenrollment rates .

in addition , medicare+choice provisions under the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) authorize new health plan options for medicare beneficiaries and mandate that hcfa provide beneficiaries with comparative information about the medicare+choice options .

my remarks today will focus on the extent to which hcfa's medicare+choice information development efforts are likely to ( 1 ) enable beneficiaries to readily compare benefits and out - of - pocket costs using plan brochures and ( 2 ) facilitate the agency's approval of plans' marketing materials and other administrative work required of both hcfa and the health plans .

i am basing these remarks on our ongoing work for this committee .

i will also discuss the findings from our recent report on hmo disenrollment rates and how data that hcfa already collects , but does not publish , may be useful to beneficiaries .

in summary , hcfa has begun making certain plan - specific information available to beneficiaries .

for example , in march of this year , hcfa posted summary information on health plans' premiums , out - of - pocket costs , and benefits on the internet .

hcfa is also working to provide a printed version of this information directly to beneficiaries and meet other bba information dissemination requirements .

these efforts , however , do not address the problem beneficiaries face in trying to carefully evaluate their health plan choices using the plans' summaries of benefits and other marketing materials .

these materials are a major source of health plan information .

currently , plans use widely varied formats and definitions of benefits in the materials they distribute to beneficiaries .

as we reported in 1996 , this lack of common formatting and language made it difficult , if not impossible , for beneficiaries to rely on hmos' marketing literature to compare benefits and premiums .

preliminary results from our current work on hmos' prescription drug benefit — a benefit that attracts many medicare beneficiaries to managed care — suggest this situation continues to exist .

our current work also suggests that critical information is sometimes missing from plans' marketing materials .

the diverse formats and terms also cause problems for health plans and hcfa staff .

without hcfa's specifying common standards for plans' marketing materials , agency staff have wide discretion when deciding to approve or reject these documents .

plan representatives and hcfa staff we spoke with said that this latitude leads to inconsistent hcfa decisions , unnecessary delays , and extra costs .

the lack of required standards similarly affects the efficient development of comparative benefits information .

under current circumstances , agency staff must comb through dissimilar information submitted by plans for hcfa's contract approval process and contact the plans to clarify the information before producing benefit comparison summary charts .

to help beneficiaries evaluate their health plan options , hcfa could move faster to publish readily available plan performance indicators such as plans' disenrollment rates .

with this information , beneficiaries could then decide to seek more information about a plan before enrolling .

hcfa could better serve beneficiaries , reduce burdens on health plans , and leverage its own resources by setting information standards for health plans' marketing literature .

we believe , therefore , that hcfa should adopt the recommendations we made in 1996 and require plans to use standard formats and terminology in their benefit descriptions .

in addition , hcfa should use plan performance data it already collects to help inform beneficiaries' health plan decisions .

most beneficiaries live in areas where they can choose to receive medicare benefits either through a managed care plan or through traditional fee - for - service medicare .

of the 6 million beneficiaries enrolled in medicare managed care , approximately 90 percent are in “risk - contract” hmos.medicare pays these hmos a fixed , per beneficiary fee , regardless of what the hmo spends for each beneficiary's health care .

these plans are called “risk” hmos because the hmo assumes the financial risk of providing care for the amount medicare pays .

although hmos are required to cover all traditional medicare benefits , many also provide additional services , such as outpatient prescription drugs , routine physical examinations , and hearing aids .

in addition , plan costs can vary: some hmos charge a monthly premium ( in addition to medicare's part b premium ) , but others do not .

except for emergency services , hmo enrollees must generally receive all covered care through health care professionals designated by their plans .

the number of medicare beneficiaries enrolled in risk hmos has more than doubled in the last 3 years , from 2.3 million in december 1994 to 5.2 million in december 1997 .

the number of medicare risk hmos also increased , from 154 to 307 , in the same time period .

the growth in medicare managed care enrollees and plans is expected to continue , fueled in part by the bba , which provided for new types of medicare managed care plans and increased plan payments in many areas that previously lacked a fee - for - service alternative .

unlike other large health care purchasing organizations , hcfa has not routinely provided plan - specific information directly to beneficiaries .

however , the bba now requires hcfa to distribute comparative information that can help beneficiaries interested in managed care select a health plan .

in addition , hmos will continue to advertise and distribute summaries of benefits as part of their marketing efforts to enroll new members .

hcfa , through its regional offices , approves the hmos' marketing materials before plans use them .

hcfa regional offices also oversee hmo marketing and enrollment efforts by reviewing plans' sales practices and responding to beneficiaries' complaints .

hmos must include certain explanations in their marketing materials , such as provider restrictions , but otherwise have wide latitude in what information is included and how it is presented .

each year , as part of the contracting process , hmos submit to hcfa detailed information on their proposed benefits , premiums , and other beneficiary out - of - pocket costs .

hcfa's central office reviews these proposals for compliance with medicare regulations and approves the contracts .

although hcfa has efforts under way to publish comparative information on medicare+choice plans , it has not taken the steps needed to enable beneficiaries to make similar comparisons using individual plans' marketing materials .

the absence of standards for format and terminology used to describe benefits and out - of - pocket costs limits the usefulness of these materials for comparison purposes .

such standardization would help beneficiaries in comparing health plans and lessen the administrative burden on both hcfa and the plans .

extending these standards to the information that plans provide to hcfa in their contract submissions would facilitate the agency's efforts to assemble comparative information .

until this year , hcfa produced little comparative information on medicare hmos .

in march 1998 , hcfa made available a database it calls “medicare compare,” which posts summary information on the internet comparing health plans' benefits and out - of - pocket costs .

hcfa intends to update the database and add plan performance indicators as they become available in the coming months and years .

in addition , hcfa plans to include comparison charts in the next medicare handbook to be mailed to beneficiaries .

agency staff are also conferring with seniors' advocacy groups to determine how best to inform beneficiaries of their new medicare+choice options .

federal employees and retirees can readily compare benefits among health plans in the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) because the office of personnel management , which administers fehbp , requires plan brochures to follow a common format and use standard terminology .

in contrast , hcfa does not require medicare hmos to use standardized formats or terms , including definitions , in their marketing materials .

consequently , medicare beneficiaries cannot easily use plans' marketing materials to compare benefit packages .

neither hcfa's medicare hmo / competitive medical plan ( hmo / cmp ) manual nor its supplemental medicare managed care national marketing guide requires standardization in plan materials .

in fact , the manual , which provides guidance on the contents of plans' marketing materials and hcfa's process for reviewing these materials , specifically states , “hcfa does not mandate a format or style for .

 .

 .

marketing materials other than requiring that the member rules be written and that the marketing materials .

 .

 .

be understandable to the average beneficiary.” hcfa's marketing guidelines do contain model language and documents hmos can adopt , but plans are not required to use the models .

without required standards from hcfa , hmos are left to their individual discretion , as we reported in 1996 .

we recently asked the eight medicare hmos serving the tampa , florida , area to send us their marketing materials .

we received a wide array of brochures , pamphlets , and other written documents .

although all plans provided benefit summaries , the formats and benefit categories varied considerably from plan to plan .

this lack of consistency may impair a beneficiary's ability to compare benefits and related costs .

for example , we found that only five tampa plans mention mammograms in their benefit summaries — even though all plans covered mammograms .

most plans listed mammograms under the benefit category of preventive services .

one plan , however , listed mammograms under hospital outpatient services .

consistent presentation is important because beneficiaries may rely on plans' benefit summaries for coverage and out - of - pocket cost information .

beneficiaries typically do not receive more detailed benefit descriptions until after they enroll in a plan .

the hmos we reviewed also differed in the terms they used to describe the same benefit .

some plans used technical terms but did not define them .

consequently , beneficiaries could misinterpret important out - of - pocket costs or benefit restrictions .

for example , some plans used the term “formulary” in describing their drug benefit but did not explain what it meant .

beneficiaries reading a plan's marketing materials may not understand that use of nonformulary drugs may result in substantially higher out - of - pocket costs .

to learn what “formulary” means when it is not defined in the marketing literature , beneficiaries would have to ask plan representatives or read the plan's “evidence of coverage” — a document normally provided to beneficiaries after they enroll in a plan .

seemingly straightforward benefit comparisons may be misleading because plans' marketing materials sometimes omit key details .

plan descriptions of prescription drug coverage , a benefit offered by many hmos , illustrate how missing information can lead to erroneous conclusions about the value of plans' benefits .

under the best of circumstances , the relative value of plans' prescription drug coverage may be hard to compare .

for example , plans that have formularies often set one copayment amount for formulary drugs and another , higher copayment for nonformulary drugs .

beneficiaries' out - of - pocket costs for such plans depend both on the specific drugs included in the formularies and the two copayment amounts .

beneficiaries may use a plan's stated annual dollar limit , or cap , to judge the drug benefit's consumer value .

for example , beneficiaries may assume that an hmo offering prescription drug coverage up to a $1,200 annual cap has a more generous benefit than another hmo offering coverage up to $1,000 .

this comparison may be misleading , however .

plans differ in how they calculate the dollar amount of drugs used by beneficiaries .

some plans use retail prices to compute this amount .

others may use drugs' average wholesale prices ( awp ) or a lower price discounted from awp to calculate a member's total drug usage in dollars .

one hmo gave us an illustration of how the value of a drug benefit depends on whether drug cost is measured by retail prices , awp , or discounted awp .

the hmo used the drug prilosec for the example because it is one of the brand - name drugs most commonly prescribed for its medicare members .

according to the plan , the retail price of prilosec is $123 and the awp is $101 .

the hmo said it computes the dollar amount of a member's prilosec usage using a discounted awp of about $91 per prescription .

if the plan used awp , or the even higher retail price , members would receive fewer prescriptions before reaching the annual dollar coverage limit .

the consumer value of a drug benefit could vary substantially between two hmos with the same annual cap if they used different prices to compute drug usage .

in addition , hmos' marketing materials do not always disclose key details that beneficiaries need to make accurate comparisons .

for example , marketing materials from several tampa hmos did not mention what prices plans used ( that is , retail , awp , or some price below awp ) to compute the dollar amount of members' drug use .

one - half of the plans did not disclose that their prescription benefits involve formularies .

similarly , plan materials often failed to inform members that they face higher out - of - pocket costs if they choose a brand - name drug when a generic drug is available .

hcfa's lack of standards for benefit descriptions also complicates hcfa's review of marketing materials and delays their distribution .

hmo officials said that hcfa's medicare managed care national marketing guide provides broad criteria for plan materials sent to beneficiaries .

it does little to ensure that hcfa's regional office staff will review plans' marketing materials consistently and uniformly nationwide — a problem we noted in 1996 when the guidelines were being developed .

individual hcfa staff have wide discretion in approving and rejecting plans' marketing materials .

hmos report that this discretion leads to inconsistent decisions and unnecessary delays in the development and distribution of plan materials .

for example , plans report that hcfa reviewers frequently require changes to materials that were previously approved by other hcfa reviewers .

these changes may delay printing or limit the use of materials already printed and increase plans' costs .

plans report being particularly disturbed by inconsistent hcfa decisions based on individual reviewers' preferences .

for example , one reviewer may require a plan to use the term “contracting provider” instead of “participating provider,” even though both terms are approved by hcfa's marketing guidelines .

the rework caused by inconsistent reviews is time consuming and costly for both hcfa and the plans .

hmo representatives reported that corporate purchasers often require plans to use standard language .

the hmo representatives suggested that medicare information standards could reduce the amount of time hcfa and plan staff spend reviewing and reworking marketing materials .

all of the plans' representatives we spoke with said that they would be in favor of such standards developed in conjunction with all relevant parties .

the lack of standards for benefit descriptions in plans' contract submissions hinders hcfa's efforts to produce benefit comparison charts and complicates the agency's reviews of plans' marketing materials .

as part of the normal medicare contracting process , hmos regularly submit to hcfa detailed information on their benefit packages .

hcfa's center for health plans and providers reviews these packages and approves plans' medicare contracts .

however , hmos are not required to conform to standard formats , language , or descriptions in their contract submissions .

consequently , it is difficult for the center for beneficiary services ( cbs ) , hcfa's new unit responsible for providing information to beneficiaries , to develop benefit comparison summaries from these contract submissions .

instead , cbs has to recontact hmos and request benefit information for its own use .

moreover , hcfa regional offices , which must review plans' marketing materials for accuracy , cannot easily rely on contract submissions to confirm required premiums , copayments , and benefits .

hcfa recognizes that the agency needs to standardize the information that plans submit for contract approval .

hcfa staff said this would reduce the administrative burden on health plans and the agency .

it addition , the agency could more readily produce comparison charts and check hmos' marketing materials for accuracy .

according to hcfa staff , the agency has a group working on revising the contract approval process .

implementation of new contract information requirements , however , is targeted for 2001 or later .

hcfa collects a considerable amount of data for program administration and contractor oversight that can indicate beneficiaries' relative satisfaction with hmos in their market .

these indicators include statistics on beneficiary disenrollment and complaints .

of these indicators , disenrollment rates may be most useful to beneficiaries trying to distinguish among plans .

our analyses , contained in our 1996 report and our most recent report , showed that disenrollment rates vary widely among hmos that serve the same market .

however , hcfa has not systematically analyzed or published medicare hmos' disenrollment rates .

nor has hcfa yet surveyed beneficiaries who disenrolled from hmos to learn why some plans have relatively high disenrollment rates .

relative disenrollment rates may serve as broad indicators of hmo enrollee satisfaction even though they cannot pinpoint the causes of disenrollment .

they cannot distinguish , for example , disenrollment caused by quality or service problems from disenrollment caused by price or value competition .

nonetheless , beneficiaries who are considering joining a managed care plan and know relative disenrollment rates may want to seek explanations for plans' high disenrollment rates .

ten years ago , we first reported that some medicare hmos had high disenrollment rates .

in 1995 , we recommended that hcfa publish hmos' disenrollment rates .

hcfa took no action on our recommendation , even though the agency already collects , for plan payment purposes , the data necessary to calculate disenrollment rates .

in 1996 , we reported that hmos' disenrollment rates varied widely in the two market areas we studied: miami and los angeles .

we also restated our recommendation that hcfa publish plans' disenrollment rates .

our most recent report shows that many hmos nationwide had relatively high voluntary disenrollment rates .

in many markets , the highest disenrollment rates exceeded the lowest rate by more than fourfold .

in a few markets , the range in disenrollment rates was even wider .

for example , in houston , texas , the highest disenrollment rate was nearly 56 percent , while the lowest rate was 8 percent .

the bba includes provisions requiring hcfa to publish plans' disenrollment rates .

hcfa officials told us they intend to meet that requirement by publishing rates sometime in 1999 .

hcfa could act sooner , however , to provide this information to beneficiaries .

because hcfa already collects the necessary data , plans would not be burdened by providing additional data .

hcfa could publish disenrollment rates this year .

in fact , some hcfa regional offices have periodically distributed these data to hmos .

medicare hmos would have a strong incentive to improve their performance if hcfa published the disenrollment rates for all plans .

rates of complaints to hcfa from hmo enrollees can also indicate relative satisfaction levels .

some states and large purchasers routinely publish plan rankings based on complaint rates .

this information would be relatively simple for hcfa to compile and publish .

although some hcfa offices track the complaints they receive , no hcfa office publishes hmo - specific complaint rate statistics .

hcfa's initial efforts to assess beneficiaries' satisfaction with individual medicare hmos may be seriously flawed .

recently , hcfa sponsored a survey of hmo members , known as the consumer assessment of health plans study .

hcfa intends to release the results later this year to help beneficiaries compare the plans' ability to satisfy their members .

shortcomings in the survey's sampling methodology , however , will greatly limit the usefulness of the results and preclude accurate comparisons .

the consumer assessment study includes only beneficiaries who have remained in the same health plan for at least 12 months .

beneficiaries who left dissatisfied or left for other reasons are excluded .

a survey of only those beneficiaries who are satisfied enough to remain enrolled in their health plans may yield biased results .

for example , we spoke with representatives of one hmo that conducted an annual member survey .

because the survey showed that 90 percent of its members were satisfied , hmo officials did not understand why their plan had a 40-percent disenrollment rate .

when the hmo conducted a survey of disenrollees , however , it discovered that many beneficiaries had left to obtain better benefits at other hmos .

hcfa is planning to survey medicare hmo disenrollees in the future .

if designed appropriately , such a survey could help explain why some hmos have high disenrollment rates .

for example , survey results may indicate whether disenrollees left because of quality or access problems or because competing hmos offered more generous benefits .

the disenrollee survey instrument and methodology have not yet been defined , and , according to hcfa staff , the results will not be available until 2000 at the earliest .

hcfa faces many new responsibilities and challenges in implementing medicare+choice .

the success of the program depends in part on the agency's ability to set priorities and use resources efficiently .

although hcfa is working to produce information to help beneficiaries compare their health plan options , the agency could leverage its resources by setting information standards , especially for plans' marketing materials .

the benefits would accrue not only to the beneficiaries making comparisons , but also to health plans and hcfa staff in the review and approval of plan documents .

similarly , hcfa could also take immediate advantage of the data it already collects to publish such performance indicators as annual disenrollment rates .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i am pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have .

medicare: many hmos experience high rates of beneficiary disenrollment ( gao / hehs - 98-142 , may 1 , 1998 ) .

medicare managed care: hmo rates , other factors create uneven availability of benefits ( gao / t - hehs - 97-133 , may 19 , 1997 ) .

medicare managed care: hcfa missing opportunities to provide consumer information ( gao / t - hehs - 97-109 , apr .

10 , 1997 ) .

medicare: hcfa should release data to aid consumers , prompt better hmo performance ( gao / hehs - 97-23 , oct. 22 , 1996 ) .

health care: employers and individual consumers want additional information on quality ( gao / hehs - 95-201 , sept. 29 , 1995 ) .

medicare: increased oversight could improve quality and access to care ( gao / hehs - 95-155 , aug. 3 , 1995 ) .

medicare: experience shows ways to improve oversight of health maintenance organizations ( gao / hrd - 88-73 , aug. 17 , 1988 ) .

federal employees need better information for selecting a health plan ( mwd - 76-83 , jan. 26 , 1976 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

