i am pleased to be here today as you discuss the quality of information that medicare managed care organizations ( mco ) distribute to beneficiaries and steps that the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) could take to ensure that this information is reliable , complete , and useful .

hcfa's leadership in this area is important .

the agency is responsible for approving all of the information that mcos distribute and has the authority to set standards for that information .

by successfully fulfilling this responsibility , hcfa can help make certain that mcos provide the information that beneficiaries need to make informed health plan choices and understand their rights under medicare managed care .

mcos' medicare plans differ from one another in the services they cover and the fees they charge .

at a minimum , plans must provide all medicare - covered services , but many plans cover additional services , such as outpatient prescription drugs and routine physical examinations .

some plans charge a monthly premium ( in addition to medicare's part b premium ) , but others do not .

although the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba ) required hcfa to make available some basic comparative plan information , the membership literature that mcos distribute remains the only source of detailed information that beneficiaries have about plans' fees and covered services .

this information helps beneficiaries select a plan that fits their needs .

once they are enrolled , this information helps shape their understanding of their plan's obligations to its members .

in addition , mcos distribute other plan information that can affect the extent to which beneficiaries understand their rights , such as complaints about plan care .

consequently , it is vital that beneficiaries trust the plan information that they receive from mcos and that hcfa ensures that their trust is not misplaced .

currently enrolled in managed care plans .

informed choices will be particularly important as bba phases out the opportunity for beneficiaries to disenroll from a plan on a monthly basis and moves toward the private sector practice of annual reconsideration of plan choice .

my comments today will focus on ( 1 ) the accuracy , completeness , and usefulness of the information medicare mcos distribute about their plans' benefit packages ; ( 2 ) the extent to which mcos inform beneficiaries of their plan appeal rights and the appeals process ; and ( 3 ) hcfa's review , approval , and oversight of the plan information that mcos distribute .

my remarks are based on two recently released reports done for this committee .

in brief , we found problems with the benefit information distributed by all of the 16 mcos we reviewed .

for example , although hcfa had reviewed and approved all of the information we examined , some mcos misstated the coverage they were required by medicare or their contracts to offer .

one mco advertised a substantially less generous prescription drug benefit than it had specified in its medicare contract .

in addition , some mcos provided complete benefit information only after a beneficiary enrolled ; others never provided full descriptions of benefits and restrictions .

finally , as we have reported previously , it is difficult to compare available options using literature provided to beneficiaries because mcos use different formats and terminology to describe the benefit packages being offered .

the variation in medicare plan literature contrasts sharply with the uniformity of plan information distributed by mcos that participate in the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) .

mcos participating in fehbp are required to provide prospective enrollees with a single , comprehensive , and comparable brochure to facilitate informed choice .

skilled nursing care .

this delay can increase a beneficiary's potential financial liability should the beneficiary appeal the plan's decision and lose .

many of the information problems we identified regarding plan benefit packages and beneficiaries' appeal rights went uncorrected because of shortcomings in hcfa's review practices .

in addition , hcfa has not exercised its authority to require mcos to distribute plan information that is more complete , timely , and comparable .

agency officials recognize many of the shortcomings we identified and are beginning efforts to address them .

however , we believe that the agency could do more .

in our two accompanying reports , we recommend that hcfa undertake a variety of additional actions including ( 1 ) following the lead of fehbp and requiring medicare mcos to distribute brochures that fully describe — using a prescribed format and terminology — plan benefits , fees , and coverage restrictions ; and ( 2 ) setting standards for when mcos distribute certain information and that the agency improve the consistency and thoroughness of its oversight practices .

in commenting on our two reports , hcfa generally agreed with our recommendations .

about two - thirds of all medicare beneficiaries live in areas where they can choose among traditional fee - for - service and one or more managed care plans .

although approximately 82 percent of beneficiaries are in the fee - for - service program , the percentage of beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans is growing .

over the last 3 years , medicare managed care enrollment has nearly doubled to almost 7 million members , as of march 1999 .

most medicare managed care enrollees are members of plans that receive a fixed monthly fee for each beneficiary they enroll .

in enacting bba , the congress sought to widen beneficiaries' health plan options .

bba permitted new types of organizations — such as provider - sponsored organizations and preferred provider organizations — to participate in medicare .

it also changed medicare's payment formula to encourage the wider availability of health plans .

provide some basic comparative information about the various health care options available .

hcfa is also required to mail basic comparative and other information to all beneficiaries .

however , for detailed information about specific managed care plans , all of these resources direct beneficiaries to the mcos that offer those plans — the only source for specific plan information .

to inform medicare beneficiaries — both those interested in enrolling and those already enrolled — about plan - specific information , mcos distribute membership literature — packets of information that describe plan benefits , fees , and coverage restrictions .

membership literature may be mailed to interested beneficiaries or distributed directly by sales agents who work for the mco .

hcfa requires mcos to include certain explanations in their member materials , such as provider restrictions ; but otherwise , mcos have wide latitude in what information is included and how it is presented .

however , hcfa reviews all materials that mcos distribute to beneficiaries .

in addition to membership literature , hcfa reviews enrollment forms ; administrative letters , such as those notifying beneficiaries of benefit changes ; all advertising ; and other informational materials .

the review process is intended to help ensure that the information is correct and conforms to medicare requirements .

mcos must submit these materials to hcfa , which has 45 days to conduct its review .

if the agency does not disapprove of the materials within that period , the mcos can distribute them .

medicare beneficiaries enrolled in a managed care plan have the right to appeal if their plan's mco refuses to provide health services or pay for services already obtained .

if an mco denies a beneficiary's request for services — such as skilled nursing care or a referral to a specialist — it must issue a written notice that explains the reason for the denial and the beneficiary's appeal rights .

such notices must also tell beneficiaries where and when the appeal must be filed and that they can submit written information to support the appeal .

dissatisfied with chdr's decision have additional appeal options , provided certain requirements are met .

a member who loses an appeal is responsible for the cost of any disputed health care services that were obtained .

hcfa reviews each mco's plan appeals process as part of its biennial evaluation of each organization's compliance with hcfa regulations .

our review of 16 medicare mcos found various types of flaws in the membership literature they distributed .

the documents we examined were used by mcos to inform prospective enrollees and members about covered services , fees , and restrictions .

although hcfa had reviewed and approved the documents , some incorrectly described plan benefit packages .

in several instances , the information was outdated or incomplete .

some mcos provided beneficiaries with detailed benefit information only after they had enrolled in a plan .

we also found it difficult to compare benefit packages because mcos are not required to follow common formats or use standard terms when describing their benefits .

in contrast , each mco that participates in fehbp is required to distribute a single , comprehensive booklet that describes its benefit package using a standard format and standard terminology .

most mcos' plan documents contained errors or omitted information about the three benefits we reviewed — prescription drugs , mammography , and ambulance services .

problems ranged from minor inaccuracies to major errors .

for example , documents from five mcos we reviewed erroneously stated that beneficiaries needed a referral to obtain a routine annual mammogram — a medicare - covered service .

hcfa policy clearly states that plans cannot require a referral for annual mammograms and must inform beneficiaries of this policy .

 ( see fig .

1 for hcfa policy and excerpts from medicare plan materials. ) .

we also found serious problems with plan information regarding coverage for outpatient prescription drugs — a benefit that attracts many beneficiaries to medicare managed care plans .

for example , a large , experienced mco specified in its medicare contract that its plan would provide brand name drug coverage of at least $1,200 per year .

however , the plan's membership literature indicated lower coverage limits — in some areas as low as $600 per year .

based on 1998 enrollment data , we estimate that over 130,000 plan members may have been denied part of the benefit to which they were entitled and for which medicare paid .

another mco , which used the same documents to promote its four plans , stated in its handbook that all plan members were entitled to prescription drug coverage .

however , only two of the mco's four plans provided such coverage .

a third mco provided conflicting information about its drug coverage .

some documents stated that the plan would pay for nonformulary drugs , while other documents said it would not .

some mcos distributed outdated information , which could be misleading .

hcfa allows this practice if mcos attach an addendum updating the information .

hcfa officials believe this policy is reasonable because beneficiaries can figure out a plan's coverage by comparing the changes cited in the addendum with the outdated literature .

however , we found that some mcos distributed outdated literature without the required addendum and that when mcos included the addendum , it often did not clearly indicate that the addendum superseded the information contained in other documents .

in addition , some mcos did not put dates on the literature they distributed , which obscured the fact that the literature was no longer current .

provided general descriptions of their plans' ambulance coverage but did not explain the extent of the coverage .

constitutes only a summary of the .

 .

 .

 .

the contract between hcfa and the [mco] must be consulted to determine the exact terms and conditions of coverage .

hcfa officials responsible for medicare contracts , however , said that if a beneficiary were to request a copy of the contract , the agency would not provide it due to the proprietary information included in an mco's contract proposal .

furthermore , an mco is not required to provide beneficiaries with copies of its medicare contract .

mco officials with whom we spoke differed in their responses about whether their organizations would provide beneficiaries with copies of their medicare contracts .

some mcos we reviewed provided detailed benefit information only after beneficiaries had enrolled .

the information packages distributed by several mcos we reviewed stated that beneficiaries would receive additional , detailed descriptions of plan benefits , costs , and restrictions following enrollment .

in addition , four mcos did not provide 1998 benefit details until several months after the new benefits took effect .

in fact , one mco did not distribute its detailed benefit information until august — 8 months after the benefit changes had taken effect .

the membership literature we reviewed varied considerably in terminology , depth of detail , and format .

these variations are similar to those that we encountered in previous reviews undertaken for this committee and greatly complicated benefit package comparisons .

the lack of clear and uniform benefit information likely impedes informed decisionmaking .

hcfa officials in almost every region noted that a standard format for key membership literature , along with clear and standard terminology , would help beneficiaries compare their health plan options .

to illustrate this problem , we identified the location in each mco's plan literature where enrollees would find answers to basic questions regarding coverage of the three benefits we studied .

this information was often difficult to find ; enrollees would have to read multiple documents to answer the basic coverage questions .

for example , to understand the three plans' prescription drug benefits , we had to review 12 different documents: 2 from plan a , 5 from plan b , and 5 from plan c. ( see fig .

2. ) .

medicare+choice: hcfa actions could improve plan benefit and appeal information plan documents contradict one another as to whether the plan will cover a nonformulary drug .

it was also not easy to know where to look for the information .

for example , the answer to our question about whether a plan used a drug formulary was found in plan a's summary of benefits , in plan b's medicare prescription drug rider , and in plan c's contract amendment .

plan c's materials required more careful review to answer the question because the membership contract indicated the plan did not provide drug coverage .

however , an amendment — included in the member contract as a loose insert — listed coverage for prescription drugs and the use of a formulary .

to avoid the types of problems found in medicare mcos' membership literature , opm requires each participating health plan to describe , in a single document , its benefit package — that is , covered benefits , limitations , and exclusions — and to include a benefit summary in a standardized language and in opm's prescribed format .

opm officials update the mandatory language each year to reflect changes in the fehbp requirements and to respond to organizations' requests for improvements .

finally , opm requires health plans to distribute plan brochures prior to the fehbp annual open enrollment period so that prospective enrollees have complete information on which to base their decisions .

opm officials told us that all participating plans publish brochures that adhere to these standards .

plan membership literature is required to contain information on beneficiaries' appeal rights .

in addition , beneficiaries are supposed to be informed of their appeal rights when they receive a plan's written notice denying a service or payment .

hcfa requires denial notices to contain information telling beneficiaries where and how to file an appeal .

furthermore , denial notices are required to state the specific reason for the denial because vaguely worded notices may hinder beneficiary efforts to construct compelling counterarguments .

vague notices may also leave beneficiaries wondering whether they are entitled to the requested services and should appeal .

finally , hcfa regulations state that whenever mcos discontinue plan services , such as skilled nursing care , they must issue timely denial notices to beneficiaries .

substantial evidence indicates , however , that many beneficiaries did not receive the required information when their mcos denied services or payment for services .

denial notices were frequently incomplete or never issued , and many notices did not indicate the specific basis for the denial .

furthermore , beneficiaries often received little advance notice when their mco discontinued plan services .

studies by the oig , using different methodologies , provide additional evidence that beneficiaries are not always informed of their appeal rights.in one study , the oig surveyed beneficiaries who were enrolled or had recently disenrolled from a managed care plan .

according to the survey results , 41 respondents ( about 10 percent ) said that their health plans had denied requested services .

of these , 34 ( 83 percent ) of the respondents said that they had not received the required notice explaining the denial and their appeal rights .

most notices that we reviewed contained general , rather than specific , reasons for the denial .

in 53 of the 74 chdr cases that contained the required denial notices ( notices were missing in 32 other cases ) , the notices simply said that the beneficiary did not meet the coverage requirements or contained some other vague reason for the denial .

likewise , representatives from several advocacy groups told us that in cases brought to their attention , the denial notices were often general and did not clearly explain why the beneficiary would not receive , or continue to receive , a specific service .

hcfa regulations state that whenever mcos discontinue plan services , they must issue timely denial notices to beneficiaries .

the regulations , however , do not specify how much advance notice is required before coverage is discontinued .

beneficiaries who receive little advance notice may not be able to continue to receive services because of their potential financial liability .

if the beneficiary appeals and loses , he or she is responsible for the cost associated with the services received after the date specified in the denial notice .

in three of the mcos we visited , the general practice was to issue the denial notices the day before the services were discontinued .

we found that many skilled nursing facility ( snf ) discharge notices were mailed to the beneficiary's home instead of being delivered to the facility .

in other cases , it appeared that the beneficiary or his or her representative received the notice a few days after the beneficiary had been discharged from the snf or the snf coverage had ended .

ten of the 25 snf discharge cases we reviewed at chdr also involved the receipt of a notice after the patient had been discharged .

the fourth mco we visited issued snf discharge notices 3 days prior to the discharge date .

this lead time helped ensure that a beneficiary received the notice before the discharge date .

it also allowed more time for the beneficiary to file an expedited appeal and receive a decision from the plan .

consequently , beneficiaries in this mco's plan who appeal and lose are less exposed to the snf costs incurred during the appeals process .

officials from all the mcos we visited said that , in almost every instance , the decision to discharge a beneficiary from a snf is made days in advance and that discharge notices could be issued several days prior to discharge .

although hcfa reviews and approves all materials that mcos distribute to beneficiaries , weaknesses in the agency's review practices and information standards allowed the plan information problems we observed to go uncorrected .

one weakness is that hcfa reviewers must rely on a faulty document to determine whether plan member materials are correct .

in addition , hcfa review practices are sometimes inadequate to detect or correct the problems we found .

finally , hcfa has not used its authority to require that mcos use a common format and terminology to describe their plans' benefit packages .

to ensure the accuracy of membership literature , hcfa reviewers are instructed to compare each mco's membership literature to its medicare contract .

specifically , hcfa reviewers are expected to rely on one particular contract document — the benefit information form — which summarizes plan benefits and member fees .

reviewers told us , however , that this contract document often does not provide the detail they need .

consequently , they sometimes rely on benefit summaries provided by the mcos to verify the accuracy of plan information .

this practice is contrary to hcfa policy , which requires an independent review of mcos' plan literature .

the reviewer who approved the plan literature advertising a $600 annual drug benefit , instead of the contracted $1,200 annual limit , said that the mistake was caused by her reliance on a benefit summary provided by the mco .

copies of the printed documents , they are often unaware as to whether mcos have made the required corrections .

shortcomings in hcfa's monitoring procedures also limit the agency's ability to ensure that beneficiaries know that plans' service and payment decisions can be appealed .

for example , to determine whether mcos informed beneficiaries of their appeal rights , hcfa's monitoring protocol requires agency staff to review a sample of appeal case files .

hcfa staff check these files to determine whether each contains a copy of the required denial notice .

however , it seems reasonable to assume that beneficiaries who appeal are more likely to have been informed of their rights than those who do not appeal .

yet , hcfa does not generally check cases where services or payment for services were denied but not appealed .

furthermore , when mcos contract with provider groups to perform certain administrative functions , such as issuing denial notices , hcfa staff generally do not check to see that the delegated duties were carried out in accordance with medicare requirements .

hcfa has the authority to set standards for the format , content , and timing of the plan information that mcos distribute to beneficiaries .

unlike opm , however , hcfa has made little use of its authority .

instead , each mco decides on the format — and to large extent , content and timing — of the plan information it distributes .

in addition to making plan comparisons more difficult , the lack of common information standards has adversely affected hcfa's review process .

first , the lack of standards has resulted in inconsistent review practices and misleading comparisons .

for example , one mco representative told us that several mcos' plans in its market area required a copayment for ambulance services if a beneficiary was not admitted to a hospital , but not every mco was required to disclose that fact .

consequently , although the plans had similar benefit restrictions , the mcos that were required to disclose the plan restrictions appeared to offer less generous benefits than the other mcos' plans .

considerable amount of time reviewing plan documents that could be standard administrative forms — such as member enrollment applications — and thus had less time to spend reviewing important documents describing plan benefits .

hcfa is moving to address some of the problems and systemwide shortcomings we identified during our recent reviews .

for example , hcfa is working to revise the contract document that agency reviewers use to verify the accuracy of plan information .

the proposed new contract document will help ensure that hcfa collects the same information from each plan and presents the information in a consistent format and in greater detail than the current document .

the agency expects to test this new document later this year and fully implement it in 2000 .

hcfa officials believe that the office of management and budget's clearance process for the proposed new contract document must begin no later that august 1999 to meet this timetable .

otherwise , full implementation could be delayed .

agency officials recognize the importance of more uniform membership literature and have articulated their intent to standardize key documents in future years .

as a first step , the agency established a work group — consisting of representatives from hcfa , mcos , senior citizen advocacy groups , and other relevant entities — to develop a standard format and common language for mcos' plan benefit summaries .

hcfa hopes to establish these new standards by next month so mcos' fall 1999 benefit summary brochures can follow the new standards .

hcfa's long - term goals involve the establishment of standards for other key documents .

however , the agency has not yet developed a strategy for its long - term efforts or decided whether the information standards it sets will be voluntary or mandatory .

hcfa officials said they have also undertaken several initiatives to help ensure that beneficiaries are informed of their appeal rights and the steps necessary to file an appeal .

sometime this year , hcfa intends to publish additional instructions regarding the content of denial notices .

the agency will also revise its monitoring protocol to better ensure that mcos issue the required denial notices .

finally , hcfa is working to develop timeliness requirements for the issuance of notices when mcos reduce or discontinue services , such as skilled nursing care , home health care , or physical therapy .

as the medicare+choice program grows and more health plan options become available , the need for reliable , complete , and useful information will increase .

in our recent reviews , however , we found major problems in the plan information that some mcos provided to beneficiaries .

in several instances the information was incorrect or incomplete ; in other cases , the problem was poor timing — important information was distributed long after the benefit package had changed or only after beneficiaries had enrolled in a plan .

none of the information was provided in a format that facilitated comparisons among plans .

we also found that some mcos did a poor job informing beneficiaries about their appeal rights and the appeals process .

hcfa has both the authority and the responsibility to ensure that medicare mcos distribute information that helps beneficiaries make informed decisions .

to date , however , its policies and practices have fallen short of that mark .

hcfa's review of plan information has been inadequate and has not prevented plans from distributing incorrect and incomplete information .

furthermore , unlike opm , hcfa has not set standards for plan information that could facilitate informed decisions .

the agency is taking some steps to address the problems we identified .

we believe , however , that these problems will not be fully addressed until hcfa implements our past and current recommendations by setting information standards for mcos and requiring them to adhere to those standards .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee might have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

