thank you for inviting me to speak about the rapid growth in the number of noncitizens receiving supplemental security income ( ssi ) benefits .

as you are aware , the ssi program provides means - tested income support payments to eligible aged , blind , or disabled persons .

in 1995 , over 6.5 million ssi recipients received nearly $25 billion in federal benefits and over $3 billion in state benefits .

noncitizens , who include legal immigrants and refugees , accounted for nearly 25 percent of ssi's caseload growth from 1986 through 1993 .

in december 1995 , almost 800,000 noncitizens were receiving ssi benefits , accounting for about 12 percent of all ssi recipients .

in 1995 , federal and state ssi benefits to noncitizens totaled nearly $4 billion .

today , i would like to focus on three issues: the overall growth in noncitizen ssi caseloads and some of the reasons for it ; aged noncitizen recipients and how financial support from their families affects their ssi benefits ; and disabled noncitizens and the potential for translator fraud , and actions the social security administration ( ssa ) can take to reduce such fraud .

my remarks are based on two reports we issued last year relating to immigrants and ssi , and on updated ssa data .

in summary , we found that noncitizens are one of the fastest growing groups of ssi recipients .

they represent nearly 33 percent of aged ssi recipients and about 6 percent of disabled recipients .

while the growth rate for noncitizen caseloads has slowed somewhat , it is still higher than that for citizens , and the proportion of noncitizens relative to other ssi recipients continues to grow .

about two - thirds of noncitizen ssi recipients , roughly 520,000 , live in three states — california , new york , and florida .

on the whole , noncitizens are somewhat more likely to receive ssi than are citizens , but this may be primarily true for refugees and asylees .

moreover , the 1980s saw significant growth in immigration .

adult children of aged immigrants and others who say they are willing to financially support them sometimes do not .

eventually , some of these aged immigrants receive ssi .

also , some translators have assisted noncitizens in fraudulently obtaining ssi disability benefits .

the congress established the ssi program in 1972 to replace federal grants to similar state - administered programs , which varied substantially in benefit levels and eligibility requirements .

the congress intended ssi as a supplement to the social security old age , survivors , and disability insurance programs for those who had little or no social security coverage .

federal ssi benefits are funded by general revenues and based on need , unlike social security benefits , which are funded by payroll taxes and , in effect , are based on the contributions of individuals and their employers .

ssa has overall responsibility for the ssi program .

to be eligible for ssi , individuals must be 65 years old , blind , or disabled .

to be considered disabled , adults must be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of a physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months .

individuals cannot have income greater than the maximum benefit level , which is about $5,600 per year in 1996 , or own resources worth more than $2,000 , subject to certain exclusions , such as a home .

individuals must also be u.s. citizens or immigrants lawfully admitted for permanent residence or noncitizens “permanently residing under color of law” ( prucol ) .

in 1996 , the maximum federal ssi benefit is $470 per month for an individual and $705 for a couple with both spouses eligible ; these benefit rates are adjusted annually for cost - of - living increases .

this monthly benefit is reduced on the basis of various factors: recipients' incomes ; living arrangements , such as living with family ; and other sources of support , including social security benefits .

as a result of these adjustments , the average monthly federal benefit in 1995 was $334 .

in addition to federal ssi benefits , states may provide supplemental benefits .

in december 1995 , nearly 40 percent of ssi recipients received an average of about $105 per month in state supplemental benefits at a total cost to the states of about $3.2 billion a year .

1994 , annual medicaid benefits averaged about $2,800 for the aged ssi recipients who received them and about $5,300 for blind and disabled ssi recipients , excluding long - term care costs .

including long - term care , medicaid benefits averaged about $8,300 for the aged and $7,700 for the disabled .

in september 1994 , a one - person household eligible for both food stamps and ssi , with no other income , could receive nearly $1,000 per year in food stamp benefits , depending on the state .

immigrants are those with “lawful permanent resident” status .

they include those who came here after obtaining an immigrant visa in their country of origin .

they also include noncitizens already living here who have changed to this status .

since ssa data do not usually reflect changes in immigration status , we describe the status ssi recipients had when they applied for benefits .

in addition to immigrants , noncitizens on ssi include refugees and asylees as well as undocumented aliens legalized by the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) .

refugees and asylees are noncitizens who are unable or unwilling to return to their countries of nationality because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution .

refugees apply for their status from outside the united states , while asylees apply from within .

both are eligible for permanent resident status after 1 year of continuous presence in the united states .

some legal immigrants are admitted to the country under the financial sponsorship of a u.s. resident .

the immigration and nationality act of 1952 , as amended , provides for denying permanent resident status to noncitizens who are likely to become public charges .

noncitizens can demonstrate they will be self - sufficient in several ways , including having a financial sponsor .

sponsors sign an affidavit of support assuring the u.s. government that the immigrant will not become a public charge and in which they state they are willing and able to provide financial assistance to the immigrant for 3 years .

however , several courts have ruled that these affidavits of support are not legally binding .

refugees and asylees do not need to demonstrate they will be self - sufficient to reside in the united states .

regardless of whether a sponsor is actually providing financial support .

this provision currently applies for 5 years from the immigrant's entry into the united states .

on may 2 , 1996 , the senate passed an amended version of the immigration control and financial responsibility act of 1996 ( h.r .

2202 ) , which the house of representatives passed on march 21 .

the bill is still pending conference committee action .

both the house and senate versions of the bill contain provisions to make the affidavits of support legally enforceable .

they also contain provisions extending the deeming period .

in addition , the bill makes some changes to eligibility requirements for noncitizens .

it also provides that any noncitizen who receives more than 12 months' worth of federal , state , or local needs - based benefits within 5 years of becoming a lawful permanent resident ( with several exceptions ) would be considered deportable as a “public charge. .

from 1986 through 1994 , the number of aged or disabled noncitizen ssi recipients grew an average of 15 percent annually .

in 1986 , noncitizens constituted about 6 percent of all ssi recipients ; by 1994 , their proportion had grown to nearly 12 percent .

this year , 800,000 noncitizens will receive $3.6 billion in federal ssi benefits ; ssa projects that nearly 1 million noncitizens will receive almost $5 billion in the year 2000 .

from a peak growth rate of 19 percent in 1991 , growth in noncitizen cases has slowed substantially , with a rate of just 6.4 percent last year .

however , this remains higher than the growth in all ssi cases , which was 3.5 percent last year .

ssa projects that growth rates will remain in this lower range at least through the year 2000 .

figure 1 gives past and projected numbers of noncitizens on ssi .

particular , growth among those aged 65 or over differs dramatically between citizens and noncitizens .

while the number of aged noncitizens on ssi has grown dramatically , the number of aged citizens has actually declined .

increased immigration has probably contributed to the growth in noncitizen ssi caseloads .

the number of immigrants rose steadily in the 1980s , from about 500,000 per year early in the decade to 1.5 million in 1990 , then fell to 900,000 in 1993 .

altogether , the number of immigrants totaled more than 7.3 million in the 1980s .

roughly half of these immigrants did not need to demonstrate that they would be self - sufficient .

noncitizens are more likely to receive ssi than citizens: roughly 3 percent of noncitizens receive ssi compared with 1.8 percent of citizens .

one reason that may partially explain this is that noncitizens typically have more limited u.s. work histories than life - long residents do and therefore qualify for smaller social security benefits .

this , in turn , may make noncitizens more likely to qualify for ssi .

still , the likelihood of receiving ssi probably varies for different types of noncitizens .

refugees and asylees may be more likely than citizens to receive benefits .

they are not subject to sponsorship and deeming provisions and may qualify for benefits immediately after arriving here .

immigrants admitted through normal procedures may be no more likely or even less likely than citizens to be on ssi ; data limitations make it difficult to say .

about 46 percent of noncitizen recipients applied for ssi within 4 years of entering the united states .

roughly 5 percent of immigrants receiving ssi applied within a year of entry compared with 52 percent of the remaining noncitizens receiving ssi , such as refugees .

through 1993 ranged from an average of 11 percent for cuba to 33 percent for the former soviet union .

about 20 percent of noncitizens on ssi also qualify for social security benefits , compared with 40 percent of all ssi recipients .

when looking at aged ssi recipients alone , the contrast is even greater .

about 22 percent of aged noncitizens on ssi qualify for social security compared with over 60 percent of all aged recipients .

those noncitizens who do qualify for social security tend to get smaller social security benefits and larger ssi benefits compared with other ssi recipients .

about two - thirds of noncitizen ssi recipients live in three states — california , new york , and florida .

average annual growth rates from 1986 through 1993 for the noncitizen caseload varied from 7 percent in maine to 27 percent in new mexico .

nearly 70 percent of noncitizens on ssi are at least 65 years old .

without the growth in noncitizen cases , ssi's aged population would have decreased 10 percent from 1986 through 1993 ; instead , it remained relatively level .

the aged noncitizen caseload grew an average of 14 percent annually during this period , increasing from 9 percent of aged cases to 23 percent .

in december 1995 , noncitizens were nearly one - third of aged cases .

in 1993 , the average federal ssi monthly benefit was $304 for aged noncitizens compared with $188 for all aged recipients .

nearly 60 percent of aged noncitizen ssi recipients have been in the country fewer than 5 years .

this raises questions about whether immigration policies have been effective in ensuring that immigrants will be self - sufficient .

ssi's deeming provisions apply only to immigrants with financial sponsors .

about 25 percent of immigrants receiving ssi applied for benefits within a year after the deeming period expired .

furthermore , even some affluent sponsors refuse to support the immigrants they sponsor , especially after the affidavits of support expire , but we do not know how many .

orange county , california , social services agency reported a significant cost shift to its general relief program as a result of the extension in the ssi deeming period from 3 to 5 years .

while disabled recipients constitute a smaller share of noncitizen cases than aged recipients , their number is growing faster , averaging 19 percent growth annually from 1986 through 1993 .

noncitizens increased from 3 percent of disabled cases to 5.5 percent during this period .

perhaps the most significant factor contributing to caseload growth for disabled citizens and noncitizens alike was changes in the criteria for qualifying as disabled .

new and broader standards for mental impairments were implemented in the late 1980s .

since then , disabled cases with psychiatric diagnoses have accounted for a large share of the caseload growth .

these changes to the mental impairment standards may have also contributed to growth in noncitizen caseloads involving mentally disabled adults ; the proportion of cases with a psychiatric diagnosis is similar for both citizens and noncitizens .

translator fraud may contribute to disabled caseload growth and occurs primarily in noncitizen cases .

some ineligible non - english - speaking applicants have obtained ssi benefits illegally with the help of translators .

the actual number of people who have done so is unknown .

a translator , also sometimes referred to as a “middleman,” is a person or organization that provides translation and / or other services for a fee to help individuals apply for ssi .

can receive a total of about $113,000 from ssi , medicaid , and the food stamp program .

a combination of factors has contributed to ssi's vulnerability to fraud involving translators .

first , ssa's management practices and shortage of bilingual staff have allowed applicants to use translators that they select .

for example , applicants have been able to apply for benefits at the field office of their choice — ssa has not restricted applicants to offices in which ssa has staff who speak their language .

in addition , applicants' medical histories often have lacked documentation .

and finally , ssa has had limited monitoring of translators , limited funds for investigations , and a lack of coordination with state medicaid agencies .

the congress , ssa , and several states have begun efforts to prevent or detect fraudulent ssi claims involving translators .

federal legislation has made ssi fraud a felony and has given ssa access to information from the immigration and naturalization service and the centers for disease control and prevention .

ssa established a task force in april 1993 on translators that has suggested initiatives such as developing and managing a translator database .

also as a result of this task force , ssa's san francisco regional office is periodically reviewing the disability status of possibly fraudulent cases involving translators .

in addition to these efforts , we have recommended that ssa implement a more comprehensive , programwide strategy for keeping ineligible applicants from ever being accepted on the ssi rolls .

ssa could require that its own bilingual staff or contractors conduct interviews with non - english - speaking applicants and explore the use of videoconferencing technology to maximize the use of ssa bilingual staff .

ssa should also share among its field offices information it has already gathered about translators until its planned database is established .

furthermore , ssa should institute a mechanism to obtain regular access to investigative results from states with medicaid fraud control units to help identify fraudulent claims associated with illegal translator activity .

noncitizens are one of the fastest growing groups of ssi recipients ; their number grew an average of 15 percent annually from 1986 through 1993 .

to some extent , this parallels the rapid growth in immigration in the 1980s as well as in ssi caseloads overall .

caseload growth for noncitizens has slowed substantially to just over 6 percent last year , and ssa projects that growth rates will remain in this more moderate range .

still , according to ssa , noncitizen ssi recipients are projected to number nearly 1 million and receive nearly $5 billion in federal benefit payments in the year 2000 compared with about 800,000 and $3.6 billion this year .

as a percentage of aged ssi recipients , noncitizens increased from 9 percent to nearly 33 percent from 1986 through 1995 .

adult children of some aged immigrants say they are willing to financially support their relatives but sometimes do not .

eventually , some of these aged immigrants receive ssi .

about 25 percent of immigrants receiving ssi applied for benefits within a year of the deeming period's expiration .

regarding translator fraud , our work suggests that it occurs primarily in noncitizen cases .

although we do not know how often such fraud occurs , we believe it can be reduced with a more comprehensive , programwide strategy for keeping ineligible applicants from ever receiving benefits .

this concludes my testimony .

i would be happy to answer any questions .

for more information on this testimony , please call jane ross , director , at ( 202 ) 512-7215 .

other major contributors include assistant directors chris crissman and cindy fagnoni and evaluators ken stockbridge and ann lee .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

