we are pleased to contribute this statement for the record , which discusses the experiences of five school districts in obtaining funding for their education technology programs .

many of the nation's more than 16,000 school districts are investing in computer technology .

although questions still remain about how best to use such technology to improve students' education , many believe that it has an important role to play .

as a result , schools are moving forward , as business and industry have , with plans for computer networks , internet connections , and other technology .

doing so , however , can be costly .

for example , a recent study has estimated that placing one networked computer laboratory in each school nationwide would cost $11 billion up front and $4 billion in annual operating costs .

the congress has taken steps to provide support for education technology in fiscal year 1998 , for example , by appropriating $425 million to fund the technology literacy challenge fund and $106 million for the technology innovation challenge grant program .

relatively little is known , however , about how districts fund the technology they acquire .

to obtain more information about how districts obtain this funding , our study focused on the following questions: ( 1 ) what sources of funding have school districts used to develop and fund their technology programs ? .

 ( 2 ) what barriers have districts faced in funding the technology goals they set , and how did they attempt to deal with these barriers ? .

 ( 3 ) which components of districts' technology programs have been the most difficult to fund , and what have the consequences been ? .

 ( 4 ) how do districts plan to deal with the ongoing costs of the technology they have acquired ? .

my testimony today is based on work we conducted in the past year to answer these questions at five school districts .

we selected these districts to provide insight into what districts may be experiencing as they try to fund their technology programs .

we identified these districts by asking state education officials to suggest candidates that have had interesting experiences .

in addition , we asked the officials to exclude districts that had benefited from extraordinary assistance such as those receiving the major portion of their funds from a company or individual .

the districts we studied are davidson county schools , a rural district in north carolina ; gahanna - jefferson public schools , a suburban district northeast of columbus , ohio ; manchester school district , the largest district in new hampshire ; roswell independent school district , which serves a city of 50,000 in southeast new mexico ; and seattle public schools , a large and ethnically diverse district in the state of washington .

in summary , the five districts we studied used a variety of ways to fund their technology programs .

funding sources included money from district operating budgets , special technology levies and bonds , state and federal funds , and private and other contributions .

districts typically had one primary source supplemented with a combination of several others .

for example , two districts used special levies or bonds for over half of their technology funding as well as other sources such as their operating budgets and federal funds .

officials we spoke with cited a number of barriers they faced in obtaining the needed funds for their technology programs .

four types of barriers seemed to be common to several districts .

first , technology was just one of a number of competing needs and priorities such as upkeep of school buildings .

second , local community resistance to higher taxes limited districts' ability to raise more revenue .

third , officials said they did not have enough staff for fund - raising efforts and therefore had difficulty obtaining grants and funding from other sources such as business .

in addition , some funding sources had restrictive conditions or requirements that made funding difficult to obtain .

to overcome these barriers , officials reported that their districts used a variety of methods to educate and inform the school board and the community about the value of technology .

these ranged from presentations to parent groups to the establishment of a model program at one school to showcase the value of technology .

the parts of the technology program that were hardest to fund , according to those we interviewed , were components such as maintenance , training , and technical support , which depend heavily on staff positions .

for example , in two locations special levy and bond funding could be used only for capital expenditures — not for staff .

in several districts we visited , officials told us that staffing shortfalls in maintenance and technical support had resulted in large workloads for existing staff and in maintenance backlogs .

most said this resulted in reduced computer use because computers were out of service .

as these districts looked to the future to support the ongoing and periodic costs of their technology programs , they typically planned to continue using a variety of funding sources despite uncertainties associated with many of these sources .

the use of computer technology in schools has grown dramatically in the past several years .

surveys conducted by one marketing research firmestimated that in 1983 schools had 1 computer for every 125 students ; in 1997 , the ratio had increased to 1 computer for every 9 students .

meanwhile , many education technology experts believe that current levels of school technology do not give students enough access to realize technology's full potential .

for example , schools should have a ratio of four to five students for every computer or five students for every multimedia computer , many studies suggest .

in addition , concern has been expressed that aging school computers may not be able to run newer computer programs , use multimedia technology , and access the internet .

a computer - based education technology program has many components , as figure 1 shows , which range from the computer hardware and software to the maintenance and technical support needed to keep the system running .

although technology programs may define the components differently , they generally cover the same combination of equipment and support elements .

computer - based technology can be used to augment learning in a number of ways .

these include drill - and - practice programs to improve basic skills ; programs providing students with the tools to write and produce multimedia projects that combine text , sound , graphics , and video ; programs providing access to information resources , such as on the internet ; and networks that support collaborative and active learning .

research on school technology has not , however , provided clear and comprehensive conclusions about its impact on student achievement .

although some studies have shown measurable improvements in some areas , less research data exist on the impact of the more complex uses of technology .

our work focused on funding for school technology .

we did not evaluate district goals or accomplishments or assess the value of technology in education .

each of the districts we visited used a combination of funding sources to support technology in its schools ( see table 1 ) .

at the local level , districts allocated funds from their district operating budgets , levied special taxes , or both .

districts also obtained funds from federal and state programs specifically designated to support school technology or from federal and state programs that could be used for this and other purposes .

finally , districts obtained private grants and solicited contributions from businesses .

although some individual schools in the districts we visited raised some funds , obtaining technology funding was more a district - level function than a school - level function , according to our study .

although districts tapped many sources , nearly all of them obtained the majority of their funding from one main source .

the source , however , varied by district .

for example , in seattle , a 1991 local capital levy has provided the majority of the district's education technology funding to date .

in gahanna , the district operating budget has provided the majority of technology funding .

all five districts chose to allocate funds for technology from their operating budgets .

the portions allocated ranged widely from 16 to 77 percent of their total technology funding .

two districts — seattle and roswell — also raised significant portions of their technology funding using local bonds or special levies .

manchester and seattle won highly competitive 5-year technology innovation challenge grants for $2.8 million and $7 million , respectively .

the grant provided the major source of funding for manchester's technology program — about 66 percent of the funding .

the $1.5 million in grant funding seattle has received so far accounted for about 4 percent of the district's technology funding .

all five districts reported using federal and state program funding that was not specifically designated for technology but could be used for this purpose if it fulfilled program goals .

for example , four districts reported using federal title i funds for technology .

in manchester , a schoolwide program at a title i elementary school we visited had funded many of its 27 computers as part of its title i program .

three districts used state program funds , such as textbook or instructional materials funds , to support their technology programs .

in davidson county , for example , the district has directed about $2 million in such funds , including those for exceptional and at - risk children as well as vocational education , to education technology .

all districts received assistance , such as grants and monetary and in - kind donations , from businesses , foundations , and individuals .

such funding constituted about 3 percent or less of their technology funding .

it is important to note , however , that our selection criteria excluded districts that had benefited from extraordinary assistance such as those receiving the majority of their funding from a company or individual .

officials we spoke with attributed the limited business contributions in their districts to a variety of reasons , including businesses not fully understanding the extent of the schools' needs and businesses feeling overburdened by the large number of requests from the community for assistance .

some said their district simply had few businesses from which to solicit help .

nonetheless , all five districts noted the importance of business' contribution and were cultivating their ties with business .

teacher organization activities and other school fund - raisers .

such supplemental funding amounted to generally less than $7,000 annually but did range as high as $84,000 over 4 years at one school .

staff at two schools reported that teachers and other staff used their personal funds to support technology in amounts ranging from $100 to over $1,000 .

officials in the districts we visited identified a variety of barriers to obtaining technology funding .

four types of barriers were common to most districts and considered by some to be especially significant .

 ( see table 2. ) .

officials in all of the districts we visited reported that district - level funding was difficult to obtain for technology because it was just one of many important needs that competed for limited district resources .

for example , a gahanna official reported that his district's student population had grown , and the district needed to hire more teachers .

a seattle official reported that his district had $275 million in deferred maintenance needs .

some districts had mandates to meet certain needs before making funding available for other expenditures like technology .

manchester officials noted , for example , that required special education spending constituted 26 percent of their 1997 district operating budget , a figure expected to rise to 27.5 percent in fiscal year 1998 .

officials from all districts said that resistance to higher taxes affected their ability to increase district operating revenue to help meet their technology goals .

for example , in davidson county , the local property tax rate is among the lowest in the state , and officials reported that many county residents were attracted to the area because of the tax rates .

in addition , two districts — roswell and seattle — did not have the ability to increase the local portion of their operating budgets because of state school finance systems that — to improve equity — limited the amount of funds districts could raise locally .

officials in three districts reported that the antitax sentiment also affected their ability to pass special technology levies and bond measures .

although all districts identified an environment of tax resistance in their communities , most said they believed the community generally supported education .

many officials reported that they did not have the time to search for technology funding in addition to performing their other job responsibilities .

they said that they need considerable time to develop funding proposals or apply for grants .

for example , one technology director with previous grant - writing experience said she would need an uninterrupted month to submit a good application for a department of commerce telecommunications infrastructure grant .

as a result , she did not apply for this grant .

the technology director in manchester said that when the district applied for a technology innovation challenge grant , two district staff had to drop all other duties to complete the application within the 4-week time frame available .

corporations and foundations typically like to give funds to schools where they can make a dramatic difference .

districts have employed general strategies to overcome funding barriers rather than address specific barriers .

the strategies have involved two main approaches — efforts to inform decisionmakers about the importance of and need for technology and leadership efforts to secure support for technology initiatives .

in their information efforts , district officials have addressed a broad range of audiences about the importance of and need for technology .

these audiences have included school board members , city council representatives , service group members , parents , community taxpayers , and state officials .

these presentations have included technology demonstrations , parent information nights , lobbying efforts with state officials , and grassroots efforts to encourage voter participation in levy or bond elections .

roswell , for example , set up a model technology school and used it to demonstrate the use of technology in school classrooms .

in the districts we visited , both district officials and the business community provided leadership to support school technology .

in all districts , district technology directors played a central leadership role in envisioning , funding , and implementing their respective technology programs over multiyear periods and continued to be consulted for expertise and guidance .

in some districts , the superintendent also assumed a role in garnering support and funding for the technology program .

beyond the district office , business community members sometimes assumed leadership roles to support technology by entering into partnerships with the districts to help in technology development efforts as well as in obtaining funding .

all five districts we visited had developed such partnerships with local businesses .

in roswell and seattle , education foundations comprising business community leaders had helped their school districts' efforts to plan and implement technology , providing both leadership and funding for technology .

other districts we visited continued to cultivate their ties with the business community through organizations such as a business advisory council and a community consortium .

nearly all districts reported maintenance , technical support , and training — components often dependent on staff — as more difficult to fund than other components .

officials we interviewed cited several limitations associated with funding sources that affected their use for staff costs .

first , some sources simply could not be used to pay for staff .

officials in roswell and seattle noted that special levy and bond monies , their main sources of technology funds , could not be used to support staff because the funds were restricted to capital expenditures .

second , some funding sources do not suit the ongoing nature of staff costs .

officials noted , for example , that grants and other sources provided for a limited time or that fluctuate from year to year are not suited to supporting staff .

most districts funded technology staff primarily from district operating budgets .

several officials noted that competing needs and the limited size of district budgets make it difficult to increase technology staff positions .

officials in all five districts reported having fewer staff than needed .

some technology directors and trainers reported performing maintenance or technical support at the expense of their other duties because of a lack of sufficient support staff .

one result was lengthy periods — up to 2 weeks in some cases — when computers and other equipment were unavailable .

several officials observed that this can be frustrating to teachers and discourage them from using the equipment .

teacher training was also affected by limited funding for staff costs , according to officials .

in one district , for example , an official said that the number of district trainers was insufficient to provide the desired in - depth training to all teachers .

most district officials expressed a desire for more technology training capability , noting that teacher training promoted the most effective use of the equipment .

a number of districts had developed mitigating approaches to a lack of technology support staff .

these included purchasing extended warranties on new equipment , training students to provide technical support in their schools , and designating teachers to help with technical support and training .

and ( 2 ) periodic costs of upgrading and replacing hardware , software , and infrastructure to sustain programs .

most districts planned to continue funding ongoing maintenance , technical support , training , and telecommunications costs primarily from their operating budgets and to sustain at least current levels of support .

nonetheless , most districts believed that current levels of maintenance and technical support were not adequate and that demand for staff would likely grow .

some officials talked about hiring staff in small increments but were unsure to what extent future district budgets would support this growing need .

the periodic costs to upgrade and replace hardware , software , or infrastructure can be substantial , and most districts faced uncertainty in continuing to fund them with current sources .

for example , davidson county and gahanna funded significant portions of their hardware with state technology funding .

however , officials told us that in the past , the level of state technology funding had been significantly reduced due to the changing priorities of their state legislatures .

in seattle , special levies are the district's primary funding source , but passing these initiatives is unpredictable .

officials in all districts underscored the need for stable funding sources and for technology to be considered a basic education expenditure rather than an added expense .

they also suggested ways to accomplish this .

some proposed including a line item in the district operating budget to demonstrate district commitment to technology as well as provide a more stable funding source .

one official said that technology is increasingly considered part of basic education and as such should be included in the state's formula funding .

without such funding , he said districts would be divided into those that could “sell” technology to voters and those that could not .

technology supporters in the districts we studied not only had to garner support at the start for the district's technology , but they also had to continue making that case year after year .

to develop support for technology , leaders in these five school districts used a broad informational approach to educate the community , and they formed local partnerships with business .

each district has developed some ties with business .

nonetheless , funding from private sources , including business , for each district , constituted no more than about 3 percent of what the district has spent on its technology program .

other districts like these may need to continue depending mainly on special local bonds and levies , state assistance , and federal grants for initially buying and replacing equipment and on their operating budgets for other technology needs .

lack of staff for seeking and applying for funding and the difficulty of funding technology support staff were major concerns of officials in all the districts we studied .

too few staff to maintain equipment and support technology users in the schools could lead to extensive computer downtime , teacher frustration , and , ultimately , to reduced use of a significant technology investment .

the technology program in each of the five districts we visited had not yet secured a clearly defined and relatively stable funding source , such as a line item in the operating budget or a part of the state's education funding formula .

as a result , district officials for the foreseeable future will continue trying to piece together funding from various sources to maintain their technology programs and keep them viable .

mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .

i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the task force may have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

