the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) now estimates that 4.3 million medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) , and enrollment is growing at a rate of about 100,000 new members per month .

i am pleased to be here today to discuss ways to ensure that quality of care is furnished to medicare beneficiaries joining these hmos .

like large private - sector purchasers of health care , hcfa , which administers medicare , finds the potential for cost savings associated with managed care attractive .

but stakeholders — hcfa , private - sector purchasers , and others , such as individual consumers — are concerned that the cost control strategies hmos use could lead to diminished quality of care .

as a result , stakeholders are interested in programs that protect consumers from cost reduction strategies that might adversely affect their health care .

today , i will discuss the following four areas related to quality assessment: quality assessment methods used by large corporate purchasers of health quality assessment methods used by hcfa in administering the medicare quality assessment methods hcfa plans for the future , and what both corporate purchasers and hcfa are doing to share the information about quality with employees and medicare beneficiaries .

this statement relies on two of our recent reports , titled medicare: federal efforts to enhance patient quality of care ( gao / hehs - 96-20 , apr .

10 , 1996 ) , health care reform: “report cards” are useful but significant issues need to be addressed ( gao / hehs - 94-219 , sept. 29 , 1994 ) , and other past reports on related issues .

 ( a list of related gao products appears at the end of this testimony. ) .

we have also included information drawn from the results of a 1996 report of 384 u.s. employers surveyed by watson wyatt , a benefits consulting group , and the washington business group on health ( wbgh ) .

in brief , two quality assessment methods — accreditation and performance measurement monitoring — are used by large corporate purchasers to ensure that hmos they contract with furnish quality care .

approximately 60 percent of such purchasers consider hmo accreditation before they contract with the hmo and then require periodic reaccreditation thereafter .

approximately 54 percent continually monitor certain performance indicators such as immunization rates , mortality from certain procedures , and patient satisfaction .

although these strategies are the best available to date , possible data and other limitations make them less than perfect , according to recent research .

like corporate purchasers , hcfa is now using similar methods to ensure quality within risk contract hmos .

first , as part of its hmo qualification program , hcfa performs initial and subsequent reviews similar to accreditation .

second , through its medicare peer review organization ( pro ) program , hcfa collects and evaluates performance indicators for certain procedures or diseases to assess hmo performance .

although these are reasonable approaches to assessing quality , we have reported that hcfa has failed to aggressively enforce legal and regulatory requirements for its risk contract hmos .

hcfa is now enhancing its quality assessment methods by strengthening its collaboration with the private sector to jointly develop better performance indicators for the health care needs of older americans .

furthermore , hcfa is placing more emphasis on improving the care all hmos provide , regardless of their prior performance , rather than focusing only on the few providing substandard care .

in addition , hcfa is developing a survey tool to measure beneficiaries' satisfaction with hmo performance .

individual consumers have expressed interest in information describing the quality of care they might obtain from different hmos .

some corporate purchasers are distributing hmo performance information to their employees to help them choose the hmo suited to their needs .

for example , 47 percent distribute patient satisfaction survey results , 31 percent distribute information about accreditation status , and almost 6 percent distribute the results of condition - specific outcome indicators .

although hcfa does plan to distribute information to medicare beneficiaries about plan performance , the timetable for doing so is uncertain .

technical excellence: furnishing the care in the correct way , for example , performing open - heart surgery skillfully ; accessibility: patients being able to get care when needed , for example , getting an appointment with a heart specialist when symptoms first occur ; and acceptability: patients' views of their care , such as being satisfied with the outcome of surgery or the speed with which they get a doctor's appointment .

accreditation and analysis of performance indicators are methods for gauging whether and to what degree quality health care is provided .

accreditation does not directly measure quality , however ; instead , it seeks to ensure that organizational systems necessary to attain quality are in place .

accreditation , a formal designation granted by a third party , is usually based on standards that specify the resources and organizational arrangements needed to deliver good care .

for example , standards might set forth staff qualifications or the requirement that an hmo have an effective quality assurance program .

during an accreditation survey , a survey team reviews an organization's policies and procedures and visits the provider to make certain that the standards are being met .

the survey team discusses the survey findings with appropriate provider officials and subsequently prepares a written report .

if standards are not being met , the hmo usually is given time to take corrective action .

if the hmo does not take action within a specified time period , it could lose its accreditation .

performance indicators more directly measure the attributes of quality than does accreditation .

performance indicators frequently measure appropriateness and technical excellence — providers' actions — and the outcomes of those actions .

for example , these indicators provide information about the rate at which certain preventive health care actions are furnished , the mortality rate from certain procedures , or patient satisfaction survey results .

administrative databases , medical records , and patient surveys provide data for measuring these indicators .

the results are then compared with preestablished benchmarks or with the performance of other hmos .

also requesting information on health plans to help them make their health care purchasing decisions .

some purchasers believe that the standards required to be met for accreditation might have no bearing on whether quality of care is actually furnished .

others view accreditation requirements as a way of ensuring that systems expected to result in quality care are in place .

because accreditation standards do not directly measure quality , however , many purchasers use a combination of accreditation and an analysis of performance indicators , including outcomes .

may contend that poor outcomes are due to their caring for sicker patients .

performance indicators may not be comparable .

nationwide standards for defining and calculating indicator results have not been established .

while relying to some extent on several standard indicators , many health plans continue to use their own criteria for collecting data and computing results .

consequently , purchasers cannot systematically compare health plans to determine which one meets their needs .

cost continues to be an overriding concern to virtually all corporate purchasers .

however , many large corporate purchasers are using accreditation status and information about specific quality - of - care performance indicators to determine which hmo ( s ) to offer their employees .

according to a recent survey of 384 u.s. employers conducted by watson wyatt , a benefits consulting organization , and wbgh , 60 percent of large corporations consider accreditation status by the national committee for quality assurance ( ncqa ) when deciding to purchase health insurance from an hmo .

nineteen percent also consider accreditation from other organizations .

furthermore , some purchasers evaluate other organizational structures .

for example , 55 percent said they evaluate whether a health plan has quality improvement initiatives , and 67 percent determine that the health plan ensures that its providers are qualified .

help gauge the quality of care provided by health plans , and 68 percent evaluate the results of consumer satisfaction surveys .

ncqa recognized the need for outcome indicators when it released its first hedis measures .

in july 1996 , it released for public comment a new draft version of 75 hedis measures based on the recommendations of purchasers , hcfa , and other stakeholders .

this new version , which ncqa expects will be used by health plans in 1997 , includes a revision of prior hedis indicators , a standardized patient satisfaction survey , and more indicators for high - prevalence diseases .

the clinical care measures continue to focus on providers' actions , however , rather than outcomes .

ncqa also released another 30 indicators , a few focusing on outcomes .

ncqa defines these indicators as a “testing set” to be used by health plans only after evidence has been established that certain criteria are met , such as that the indicator is a valid measure of what it is intended to assess .

while ncqa was developing new hedis measures , a large group of corporate purchasers and hcfa established the foundation for accountability ( facct ) to develop standardized outcome measures .

in early fall 1996 , the foundation released eight indicators for treating diabetes , breast cancer , and major depression .

some of these measures focus on outcomes .

the foundation also endorsed an indicator addressing consumers' satisfaction with health plans .

xerox , a large corporate purchaser , provides an example of a purchaser's use of quality assessment methods .

xerox's stated objective is to increase the accountability of health plans contracting with it and to improve the health status of its employees .

xerox officials review health plan reports about the plan's accreditation status , results on hedis performance indicators , access to services , and membership satisfaction .

reports also include goals for each measure as benchmarks .

xerox's goal is to develop long - term relationships with health plans .

to this end , xerox encourages health plans' continuous improvement rather than immediately terminating a contract if a plan does not meet specific performance goals .

of prior performance .

in the past , quality assurance programs focused on the care provided to individual patients , directing improvement activities toward individual “outlier” providers rather than encouraging improvement by health care providers .

these efforts were limited to a small number of providers and often resulted in adversarial relations between the reviewers and those being reviewed .

like other large corporate purchasers , hcfa uses an inspection process and analysis of performance indicators to evaluate the quality of care provided to medicare beneficiaries in risk contract hmos .

hcfa's hmo qualification program is intended to ensure that hmos with medicare contracts meet minimum requirements for organizational structures and processes .

hcfa's medicare pro program is intended to measure an hmo's performance by evaluating indicators for selected diseases or procedures of concern to older americans .

like accreditation , hcfa's hmo qualification program is an inspection method .

hcfa's initial approval of an hmo to serve medicare beneficiaries includes this inspection .

thereafter , hcfa personnel visit contracting hmos at least once every 2 years to monitor their compliance with requirements .

hcfa's inspection team spends several days at the hmo comparing the hmo's policies and procedures with medicare requirements .

the team informs the hmo of its preliminary findings at the end of the visit and later prepares a formal report .

if the hmo has failed to meet one or more requirements , it must submit a corrective action plan , including a timetable for correcting the deficiency .

hcfa personnel may revisit the site to monitor compliance at the end of the time period specified in the plan's timetable or may simply require regular progress reports .

if the hmo fails to correct the deficiency in a timely manner , hcfa may terminate its contract or , under some circumstances , impose a civil monetary penalty or suspend medicare enrollment .

this happens rarely , however , and only after repeated hcfa efforts to get the hmo to correct the deficiencies .

action .

furthermore , hcfa often found that the same problems existed when it made its next annual monitoring visit .

in our august 1995 report , we found the same problems .

we concluded that hcfa's hmo qualification program is inadequate to ensure that medicare hmos comply with standards for ensuring quality of care .

specifically , this program remains inadequate because hcfa does not determine if hmo quality assurance programs are operating effectively , systematically incorporate the results of pro review of hmos or use pro staff expertise in its compliance monitoring , and routinely collect utilization data that could most directly indicate potential quality problems .

we also found that the enforcement processes are still slow when hcfa does find quality problems or other deficiencies at hmos that do not comply promptly with federal standards .

for example , even though one hmo repeatedly did not meet standards during a 7-year period and hcfa received pro reports indicating that the hmo was providing substandard care to a significant number of beneficiaries , hcfa allowed the hmo to operate as freely as a fully compliant hmo .

like large corporate purchasers' analysis of performance indicators , the medicare pro program analyzes hmo performance treating certain diseases or performing selected procedures .

the pro program , however , is substantially changing its approach .

substandard providers were identified ; hcfa officials found this model to be confrontational , unpopular with the physician community , and of limited effectiveness .

therefore , by the end of 1995 , case reviews had been replaced by cooperative projects modeled on continuous quality improvement concepts implemented by mutual agreement between pros and risk contract hmos .

provider participation is voluntary .

typically , these cooperative projects involve establishing joint identification of a problem , appropriate performance indicators , and benchmarks .

the pro then measures current hmo performance on these indicators and disseminates these data to the hmos .

hmos then may choose to participate in the project to improve care .

after implementation of corrective action , the pros again collect data to determine if improvements have been made .

although this process is voluntary , hcfa officials say that they believe most hmos will welcome the opportunity to collaborate on projects that can improve the quality of care .

they do not believe that provider noncooperation will be a significant problem .

hcfa officials told us , however , that they still can take action if they have strong indications that an hmo has significant quality - of - care problems .

if an hmo refuses to cooperate , hcfa can still apply a range of sanctions , including a letter terminating the hmo's participation .

in one state , we talked with hmo and pro officials about this new approach .

the hmos liked it , particularly the fact that the pro provided them with comparative performance data that would be otherwise unavailable to them .

pro officials also felt that this program was more successful than case review because it addressed the care being provided to the majority of beneficiaries rather than the 1 or 2 percent who may be recipients of bad care .

although we think this new approach holds promise , it is too early to evaluate its impact .

but an evaluation of this program as soon as feasible is essential because it is such a major departure from previous pro practice .

performance indicators .

hcfa also plans to collect data on beneficiaries' satisfaction with risk contract hmos .

in june 1995 , hcfa announced that it was joining facct .

according to hcfa , it has played a major role in developing the foundation's performance indicators for depression , breast cancer , and diabetes .

furthermore , hcfa worked with ncqa on its new hedis indicators .

hcfa played a role in identifying and defining seven newly released indicators that measure functional status for enrollees over age 60 , mammography rates , rate of influenza vaccinations , rate of retinal examinations for diabetics , outpatient follow - up after acute psychiatric hospitalization , utilization of certain appropriate medications in heart attack patients , and smoking cessation programs .

hcfa also plans to conduct a survey of medicare beneficiaries enrolled in managed care .

it is developing a survey instrument in cooperation with the agency for health care policy and research .

data collected in this survey will include information on member satisfaction , perceived quality of care , and access to care .

hcfa officials told us that they plan to have an outside contractor perform annual surveys of a statistically valid sample of medicare enrollees in every hmo with a medicare contract .

the contractor will use a standard survey and provide a consistent analysis of the information received from beneficiaries .

some large corporate purchasers are sharing performance assessment information with their employees .

they believe that individual employees can better choose health plans if they have good information on which to base their enrollment decisions .

according to the watson wyatt / wbgh survey , 31 percent of large corporate purchasers give their employees information about accreditation status , 25 percent give their employees information about overall health plan performance , 13 percent give their employees hedis information , and 47 percent distribute consumer satisfaction survey results .

additionally , 32 percent of the large purchasers surveyed offer financial incentives to their employees to choose plans that they have designated as being of “exceptional quality.” years , that information generally featured premium and benefits coverage .

calpers' may 1995 health plan quality / performance report was its first effort to distribute comprehensive information that includes both specific performance indicators about quality and member satisfaction results .

the quality performance data are based on hedis indicators measuring hmo success with providing childhood immunizations , cholesterol screening , prenatal care , cervical and breast cancer screening results , and diabetic eye exams .

employee survey results include employee satisfaction with physician care , hospital care , the overall plan , and the results of a question asking whether members would recommend the plan to a fellow employee or friend .

calpers released a new report providing updated information in 1996 .

although hcfa collects performance information that could be useful to beneficiaries , it does not routinely make such information available to them nor does it have immediate plans to do so .

hcfa does not distribute the results of its hmo qualification program nor does it distribute information it collects about medicare hmo enrollment and disenrollment rates , medicare appeals , beneficiary complaints , plan financial condition , availability of and access to services , and marketing strategies .

however , hcfa officials have told us they are considering ways to provide medicare beneficiaries with information that will help them choose managed care plans .

hcfa is working to make comparative information available on the internet .

phase one of this project , to be implemented in 1997 , will provide comparative data about hmo benefits , premiums , and cost - sharing requirements .

later phases will add information on the results of plan member satisfaction surveys and , eventually , outcome indicators .

no timetable has been established , however , for disseminating the latter information .

in conclusion , large corporate purchasers who rely on experts in the field are the leaders in health care quality assessment .

although hcfa's current quality assessment programs are catching up with those of large corporate purchasers , some areas need further improvement .

most notably , hcfa still lags behind the private sector in disseminating performance assessment information to its beneficiaries .

messrs .

chairmen and madam chairwoman , this concludes my formal remarks .

i will be happy to answer any questions from you and other members of the caucus .

for more information on this testimony , please call sandra k. isaacson , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7174 .

other major contributors include peter e. schmidt .

health care: employers and individual consumers want additional information on quality ( gao / hehs - 95-201 , sept. 29 , 1995 ) .

medicare: increased hmo oversight could improve quality and access to care ( gao / hehs - 95-155 , aug. 3 , 1995 ) .

medicare: enhancing health care quality assurance ( gao / t - hehs - 95-224 , july 27 , 1995 ) .

community health centers: challenges in transitioning to prepaid managed care ( gao / hehs - 95-138 , may 4 , 1995 ) ; testimony on the same topic ( gao / t - hehs - 95-143 , may 4 , 1995 ) .

medicare: opportunities are available to apply managed care strategies ( gao / t - hehs - 95-81 , feb. 10 , 1995 ) .

health care reform: “report cards” are useful but significant issues need to be addressed ( gao / hehs - 94-219 , sept. 29 , 1994 ) .

home health care: hcfa properly evaluated jcaho's ability to survey home health agencies ( gao / hrd - 93-33 , oct. 26 , 1992 ) .

home health care: hcfa evaluation of community health accreditation program inadequate ( gao / hrd - 92-93 , apr .

20 , 1992 ) .

medicare: hcfa needs to take stronger actions against hmos violating federal standards ( gao / hrd - 92-11 , nov. 12 , 1991 ) .

health care: actions to terminate problem hospitals from medicare are inadequate ( gao / hrd - 91-54 , sept. 5 , 1991 ) .

medicare: pro review does not ensure quality of care provided by risk hmos ( gao / hrd - 91-48 , mar .

13 , 1991 ) .

medicare: physician incentive payments by prepaid health plans could lower quality of care ( gao / hrd - 89-29 , dec. 12 , 1988 ) .

medicare: experience shows ways to improve oversight of health maintenance organizations ( gao / hrd - 88-73 , aug. 17 , 1988 ) .

medicare: issues raised by florida health maintenance organization demonstrations ( gao / hrd - 86-97 , july 16 , 1986 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

