we are pleased to be here today to discuss the department of veterans affairs' ( va ) policies concerning its provision of medications , medical supplies , and dietary supplements that are available to the general public as over - the - counter ( otc ) products in private outlets nationwide .

under current law , two groups of medical products are available in the u.s. market: one group has about 65,000 products that are safe for consumers to use only as prescribed by a physician , the other group has over 300,000 products that , according to the u.s. food and drug administration standards , are safe for use on the basis of a manufacturer's labeling alone .

prescription products are available only in licensed pharmacies , whereas other products are available over the counter in a wide variety of settings .

otc products are generally for conditions where users can recognize their own symptoms and levels of relief .

va allows its physicians to prescribe otc products primarily because va physicians and others are concerned that veterans who need such products may lack sufficient resources to purchase them and , as a result , not use them .

va requires prescriptions as a way to control veterans' access to otc products in va pharmacies .

last year , va physicians provided veterans with over 34 million prescriptions for pharmaceuticals , including otc products , to be used on an outpatient basis .

va's 165 pharmacies filled prescriptions more than 65 million times , at a cost of almost $1 billion .

in recent years , va officials have testified that resources are not sufficient to serve all veterans seeking care and that they expect such shortages to worsen in future years .

also , others have expressed concerns about the operating costs of va pharmacies .

specifically , some have questioned whether va pharmacies' provision of otc products represents the most prudent and economical use of va's available resources .

medical care cost recovery office .

at va's pharmacy in baltimore , we observed dispensing and copayment collection practices ; reviewed a wide range of records and documents ; and discussed va's provision of otc products with 20 physicians , pharmacists , and administrators .

we discussed the results of our work with the chief of pharmacy service as well as other va officials .

we plan to provide you with a report later this summer .

in summary , all va pharmacies provide medications and medical supplies to veterans that are available over the counter through other local outlets .

for example , va pharmacies dispensed analgesics such as aspirin and acetaminophen almost 3 million times in fiscal year 1995 .

in other outlets , these analgesics are available through such otc products as excederin , tylenol , bayer aspirin , bufferin , and goody's headache powders .

each pharmacy offers a unique package of otc products and some restrict which veterans may receive otc products or in what quantity they may receive them .

about one - third of va facilities should be commended for taking actions to reduce the number of available otc products in recent years .

while others are considering reducing the available number of otc products , about one - half are reluctant to take such steps .

network directors , to their credit , are working to achieve a level of consistency and cost - containment for facilities within their networks .

unlike va , other public or private health care plans cover few , if any , otc products for beneficiaries .

when covered , otc products are generally made available on a uniform basis to all beneficiaries .

these plans' coverage of otc products is more restrictive than all but a few of va's facilities .

va pharmacies dispensed otc products more than 15 million times last year , at an estimated cost of $165 million , including handling costs of $48 million .

va recovered an estimated $7 million through veterans' copayments , or about 4 percent of its total dispensing costs .

individually , veteran's costs varied , depending on the type of product and the veteran's eligibility status .

although many veterans shared a modest portion of the costs and some paid the full cost , most veterans paid nothing .

copayments .

third , va facilities could further reduce the number of otc products available to veterans on an outpatient basis .

finally , the congress could expand copayment requirements .

va physicians prescribed otc products for veterans more than 7 million times in fiscal year 1995 , accounting for almost one - fifth of all prescriptions .

va pharmacies filled these otc prescriptions over 15 million times , about one - fourth of all prescriptions filled .

va physicians prescribed more than 2,000 unique otc products .

va pharmacies classify these products into three groups: medications such as antacids , medical supplies such as insulin syringes , and dietary supplements such as ensure .

medications account for about 73 percent of the 15 million otc prescriptions filled , medical supplies for 26 percent , and dietary supplements for less than 1 percent .

va's network and facility directors have considerable freedom in developing operating policies , procedures , and practices for va physicians and pharmacies .

they and the pharmacies have taken a number of different actions to limit the number of otc products available through the pharmacies and the quantity of products veterans can receive .

however , little uniformity in the application of limits is evident .

in general , each facility has a pharmacy and therapeutics committee that decides which otc products to provide based on product safety , efficacy , and cost effectiveness .

these products are listed on a formulary and va physicians are generally to prescribe only these products .

of the 2,000 unique otc products dispensed systemwide , individual pharmacies generally handled fewer than 480 , with the number of otc products ranging between 160 and 940 products .

medical supplies account for the majority of unique products , with pharmacies generally dispensing fewer than 10 types of dietary supplements .

however , three facilities' formularies excluded dietary supplements .

the volume of otc products dispensed also varied among facilities .

overall , otc products accounted for about 25 percent of all prescriptions filled systemwide .

but otc products represented between 7 percent and 47 percent of all prescriptions dispensed at individual facilities .

of note , fewer than 100 products were involved in more than 80 percent of the 15 million times that otc products were dispensed .

the most frequently dispensed otc products include ( 1 ) medications such as aspirin , acetaminophen , insulin , and stool softener ; ( 2 ) dietary supplements including sustacal and ensure ; and ( 3 ) supplies such as alcohol prep pads , lancets , and chemical test strips .

facilities have sometimes restricted physicians' prescriptions of otc products to veterans with certain conditions or within certain eligibility categories .

for example , 115 facilities restricted dietary supplements to veterans who required tube feedings or received approval for the supplement from dieticians .

for medical supplies , a facility provided certain supplies only to patients who received them when hospitalized and another provided diapers only to veterans with service - connected conditions .

one facility provided otc medications only to veterans with service - connected disabilities .

facilities have sometimes restricted the quantities of otc products that pharmacies may dispense .

twenty - eight facilities had restrictions , including limits on the quantity of otc products dispensed within prescribed time periods or the number of times a prescription could be refilled .

for example , one facility restricted cough syrup prescriptions to an 8-ounce bottle with one refill .

it had similar quantity restrictions for 15 other otc medications .

another facility had a no - refill policy for certain medical supplies , such as diapers , underpads , and bandages .

the department of defense operates a health care system for military beneficiaries , including active duty members , retired members , and dependents .

this system provides a more restricted number of otc products than most va facilities .

in 1992 , defense eliminated all otc products except for insulin from its formularies to control costs .

however , more expensive prescription medications were being substituted for some otc medications that were no longer available .

subsequently , defense reinstated a few products to its formularies to alleviate such substitution .

all beneficiaries are eligible for otc products without a copayment .

otc medications for its beneficiaries .

like va , medicaid , at the option of the states , can cover otc products for its low - income beneficiaries .

the availability of otc products varies by state , ranging from very few to a substantial array of products .

the federal employees health benefits program offers a range of health insurance plans to federal employees and their dependents .

the program requires plans to meet certain minimal standards , which include prescription medications but no otc products , except for insulin and related supplies .

blue cross and blue shield and kaiser permanente are two of the larger plans and they cover no otc products , other than insulin and related supplies .

both plans require beneficiary payments , with kaiser charging $7 for each prescription provided in its pharmacy and blue cross and blue shield requiring a $50 deductible and 15 to 20 percent of individual prescription costs , depending on whether the beneficiary has a high - or low - option plan .

finally , most private health insurers generally exclude otc products as a benefit for participants , with a few exceptions such as insulin and insulin syringes .

for example , the group health cooperative of puget sound , in seattle , provides insulin with a $5 copayment but no other otc products .

before 1995 , the group health cooperative of puget sound did provide an otc drug benefit .

however , it dropped the otc medication benefit because it found no other similar health plan that provided this benefit .

nationwide , va pharmacies spent an estimated $117 million to purchase otc products and $48 million to dispense them to veterans in fiscal year 1995 .

pharmacies spent about $85 million on medications , with purchasing cost representing about two - thirds of total costs .

by contrast , they spent about $74 million for medical supplies and $6 million on dietary supplements , with purchasing costs accounting for most of these costs , as shown in figure 1 .

purchasing and dispensing costs differ among the product categories for two reasons .

first , va physicians generally provide veterans more prescriptions for medications than supplies , thereby causing pharmacies to handle medications more often .

second , ingredient costs of medications are generally significantly lower than the cost of medical supplies .

va recovered an estimated $7 million of these costs through veterans' copayments .

by law , unless they meet statutory exemption criteria , veterans are to pay $2 for each 30-day supply of otc medications and dietary supplements that va provides .

veterans' copayments are not required for otc products used to treat service - connected conditions .

also , veterans are exempt from the copayment requirement if they have low incomes .

our analysis of veterans' copayments and pharmacy costs at va's baltimore facility shows that copayments offset no more than 12 percent of costs for medications , dietary supplements , and medical supplies , as shown in table 1 .

federal funds financed most of baltimore's otc product costs .

copayments collected cover a relatively small portion of these costs , for several reasons .

first , the $2 copayment collected for a 30-day supply represents only a portion of the ingredient , dispensing , and collection costs of most otc medications and dietary supplements .

second , copayments are not required for medical supplies .

third , most veterans receiving medications and dietary supplements are exempted , and some nonexempt veterans do not pay copayments owed .

for individual otc products , veterans' medication copayments ranged between 4 percent to more than 100 percent of va's costs , depending on the type of otc product and the quantities dispensed .

for example , a veteran's medication copayment of $6 for a 90-day supply of an expensive product , such as the dietary supplement ensure , may cover less than 5 percent of va's costs ( $400 ) .

by contrast , a veteran's copayment of $6 for a 90-day supply of an inexpensive medication , such as aspirin , may cover more than va's total cost .

there is a variety of actions available that could help reduce the level of federal resources devoted to the provision of otc products .

first , if va eligibility rules were more strictly enforced , va pharmacies could dispense considerably fewer otc products .

also , savings could be achieved through more efficient otc dispensing and copayment collection processes .

finally , the congress could expand the copayment requirements to generate additional revenues .

the congress has limited va's authority to provide outpatient medical care to veterans .

only veterans with service - connected conditions rated at 50 percent or higher are eligible for comprehensive outpatient care .

all veterans with service - connected conditions are eligible for treatments related to those conditions ; they are also eligible for hospital - related care of nonservice - connected conditions .

this includes only outpatient services needed to ( 1 ) prepare for a hospital admission , ( 2 ) obviate the need for a hospital admission , or ( 3 ) complete treatment begun during a hospital stay .

most veterans with no service - connected conditions are eligible only for hospital - related outpatient care .

va is required to assess a veteran's eligibility for care based on the merits of his or her unique situation each time that the veteran seeks care for a new condition .

we have identified many instances in which otc products are used for pre - and posthospitalization care .

for example , veterans received otc products , such as phosphate enemas , magnesium citrate , and prep kits needed for barium enemas in preparation for colonoscopies and other diagnostic tests .

following hospital stays , veterans received ostomy supplies after some surgeries , wound - care supplies , aspirin for heart surgery or angioplasties , and decongestants after sinus surgery .

“ .

 .

 .

shall be based on the physician's judgment that the medical services to be provided are necessary to evaluate or treat a disability that would normally require hospital admission , or which , if untreated , would reasonably be expected to require hospital care in the immediate future” in other words , va physicians must determine that a veteran would likely need to be hospitalized soon if otc products are not used .

some otc products may be used to obviate the need for hospital care .

for example , diabetic veterans use insulin to control their blood sugar , spinal cord and parkinson's patients use stool softeners to alleviate fecal impaction , veterans suffering renal failure use sodium bicarbonate tablets to balance their electrolytes , and veterans who have suffered heart attacks or strokes use aspirin to prevent secondary occurrences .

however , whether many veterans' conditions would require hospitalization in the immediate future without the use of other otc products is not clear .

such products include antacids for heartburn , skin preparation products for dry skin , acetaminophen for arthritis pain , and cough medications for common colds .

given that va pharmacies filled prescriptions for such products over 2 million times last year , va facilities may have the opportunity to achieve significant cost reductions if eligibility rules are more strictly enforced .

va pharmacies could more efficiently dispense otc products by reducing the number of times staff handle these items or restricting mail service .

va facilities could also reduce costs by collecting medication copayments at the time of dispensing .

va pharmacies could significantly reduce their otc product dispensing costs of $48 million by providing more economical quantities of medications and supplies .

dispensing larger quantities would reduce the number of times that va pharmacists fill prescriptions for otc products , saving about $3 each time the products would have otherwise been dispensed .

as previously discussed , va physicians generally prescribe otc products to treat acute or chronic conditions or prevent future illness .

prescriptions for acute conditions are generally for periods of 30 days or less .

however , otc products used for chronic or preventative situations are generally prescribed for longer periods .

for example , in fiscal year 1995 , about 1,800 veterans received aspirin at the baltimore pharmacy in quantities sufficient for at least 6 months .

va allows pharmacies to dispense most otc products in quantities sufficient for a 90-day supply .

however , 15 pharmacies currently dispense otc products in 30-day or 60-day supplies .

moreover , limiting pharmacies to dispensing a 90-day supply is uneconomical for certain high - volume otc products used to treat chronic conditions or prevent illness .

otc products used to treat chronic conditions or prevent illnesses seem to provide opportunities to reduce dispensing costs .

for example , we estimate that va's baltimore pharmacy could have saved over $8,000 in dispensing costs if it dispensed 180-day supplies of aspirin to certain veterans in fiscal year 1995 .

assuming a prescribed usage of 1 tablet a day , this supply level of 180 tablets would be more consistent with the quantities available in local outlets , which generally range between 100 and 500 tablets .

va pharmacies could reduce dispensing costs by restricting the availability of mail service to certain situations or requiring veterans to pay shipping charges .

last year , va pharmacies spent about $7.5 million mailing otc products to veterans .

va pharmacies generally encourage veterans to use mail service when having most prescriptions for otc products refilled .

almost all pharmacies mail otc products , and mail service was used for almost 60 percent of the 15 million times that otc products were dispensed last year .

some pharmacies have already transferred most of their otc prescription refills to va's new regional mail service pharmacies and others will do so when additional regional pharmacies become operational .

while mailing costs vary , they can be particularly costly for liquid items or items that are dispensed in large packages or for long periods .

for example , one facility reported that mailing a prescription of liquid antacids from the pharmacy costs $2.88 and mailing a case of adult diapers costs $17.49 .

mailing costs for a year's supply of diapers could exceed $200 .

some va facilities cited high mailing costs as one of the principal reasons for eliminating otc products from their formularies .

several facilities have attempted to reduce mailing costs by prohibiting the mailing of certain otc products , such as cases of liquid dietary supplements and diapers .

in addition , some facilities reported switching from liquid products to powders to reduce the weight — and associated mailing costs — for particular otc products .

months past the end of the fiscal year .

the veterans who had not paid for these products had not applied for waivers and , as a result , va officials view them as able to pay .

va facilities incur additional administrative costs to prepare and mail bills for copayments related to otc products .

va facilities generally send an initial bill and three follow - up bills to veterans who are delinquent in paying .

however , because of the relatively small outstanding balance for most veterans , va officials told us that they are reluctant to continue contacting nonpayers or pursue legal or other actions to collect these debts .

by law , va has the option of not providing otc products if a veteran refuses to make a medication copayment at the time the product is dispensed .

va officials , however , told us that it is not their policy to withhold otc products from nonpayers for this reason .

administrative costs are significant in relation to the total copayment collections .

a va - sponsored study estimated that va facilities spend about 38 cents for every $1 collected to prepare medication copayment bills , mail them , and resolve questions .

if the baltimore facility's costs approximate this rate , it incurred an estimated $26,000 to collect $67,000 for otc products in fiscal year 1995 .

in addition , about 25 percent of the medication copayments that were billed have gone unpaid and would have required additional costs to resolve .

collecting the copayment at the time a product is dispensed could eliminate most administrative costs and increase revenues .

va facilities could adopt less generous policies for otc products , which would be more consistent with other health plans .

this could be achieved by adopting such costs containment measures as ( 1 ) limiting otc products available , ( 2 ) restricting veterans eligibility for otc products , or ( 3 ) limiting quantities dispensed .

as previously discussed , each hospital offers a unique assortment of otc products .

for example , the most generous otc product benefit packages contain about 285 medications , 514 medical supplies , and 14 dietary supplements .

by contrast , the least generous packages include about 124 medications , 114 medical supplies , and 4 dietary supplements .

supplements , such as ensure , multiple vitamins , and mineral supplements ; and medical supplies , such as ostomy products and chemical test strips .

as part of va's ongoing reorganization , the 22 network directors have developed an unduplicated inventory of otc products dispensed by facilities operating in the network .

in general , each network's formulary more closely approximates the more generous otc product benefit packages available in each network rather than the less generous package .

some network directors plan to review their formularies to identify products that could be removed .

recently , 58 facilities told us that they are considering removing some otc products from their formularies .

most are examining fewer than 10 products , although the number of products under review ranges between 1 and 205 .

products most commonly mentioned include dietary supplements , antacids , diapers , aspirin , and acetaminophen .

ninety facilities are not contemplating changes at this time .

interestingly , wide disagreement exists about va's provision of otc products on an outpatient basis .

for example , 22 facilities suggested that all otc products should be eliminated .

by contrast , 57 suggested that all otc products should remain available .

the other 70 facilities provided no opinion regarding whether otc products should be kept or eliminated .

many facilities pointed out that eliminating all otc products could result in greater costs for va health care .

this is because some otc products are relatively cheap or they help prevent significant health problems that could be expensive for va facilities to ultimately treat .

also , facilities said that physicians may substitute higher - cost prescription medications in place of certain otc products that would no longer be available .

facilities reported 21 otc products , which , if removed from their formularies , would result in greater costs to va. those most frequently mentioned were aspirin , acetaminophen , antacids , and insulin .

these facilities also reported that 14 of the 21 products had prescription substitutes .

these include aspirin , acetaminophen , and antacids ( insulin has no prescription substitute ) .

medications would result in a higher use of more expensive prescription medications , it had not found this to be true at its facility .

as otc products are removed from formularies , veterans will have to obtain the products elsewhere .

to facilitate this , some va facilities reported that they are using va's canteen service to provide otc products that have been eliminated from their formularies .

the canteen service operates stores in almost every va facility to sell a variety of items , including some otc products .

for example , the baltimore pharmacy has asked its canteen service store to stock about 13 otc products that were recently eliminated from its formulary .

the baltimore pharmacy has already shifted most of its dispensing of dietary supplements to the store .

va canteen service stores do not use federal funds to operate and generally provide items at a discount , in large part because they do not have the expense of advertising .

by allowing these stores to dispense otc products , va may reduce both dispensing and ingredient costs for its pharmacies .

at the same time , va's canteen service stores can provide many veterans with a convenient and possibly less costly option for obtaining these products than would be available through other local outlets .

the congress could reduce the federal share of va pharmacies' costs for filling veterans' otc prescriptions by expanding copayment requirements .

this could be achieved through ( 1 ) tightening exemption criteria , ( 2 ) requiring copayments for medical supplies , or ( 3 ) raising the copayment amount .

unlike va , other health plans' copayment requirements generally apply equally to all beneficiaries and for all covered products .

as previously discussed , veterans' copayments cover only 7 percent of the baltimore pharmacy's otc costs .

if the copayment remains at $2 for each 30-day supply , changes that expand the number of veterans required to make a copayment could increase veterans' share up to 31 percent and thereby reduce the baltimore pharmacy's share to 69 percent .

a copayment of about $9 would be needed to achieve a comparable sharing rate if existing exemptions are maintained .

for service - connected conditions .

in 1992 , the congress exempted veterans from the copayment requirement for nonservice - connected conditions if their income was below prescribed thresholds .

service - connected veterans received about one - third of the 116,000 prescriptions filled at the baltimore pharmacy .

of these , almost one - half had ratings of 50 percent or higher .

veterans without service - connected conditions received the remaining two - thirds and about one - half of these veterans were exempt because of income below the statutory threshold .

va officials told us that while some low - income veterans may have difficulties with copayments , most veterans did not seem to have such a problem before the 1992 enactment of the low - income exemption .

the baltimore pharmacy could have recovered an additional 7 percent of its costs if all veterans without service - connected conditions were required to make copayments for otc products ; and an additional 11 percent of its costs if veterans were required to make copayments for otc products provided for service - connected and nonservice - connected conditions .

last month , va's general counsel recommended that va facilities should use a more restrictive income threshold , as required by the 1992 low - income exemption .

earlier , we had informed va's counsel that facilities were inappropriately using the higher aid - and - attendance pension rate rather than the lower regular pension rate .

using the lower rate should allow the baltimore facility , as well as other facilities , to collect large amounts of copayments from veterans who would not otherwise have been charged .

when the congress established a copayment requirement for medications and dietary supplements in 1990 , it did not include a requirement for medical supplies .

va officials told us that they know of no reason why medical supplies should be treated differently from other product categories in terms of copayments .

moreover , the legislative history of this 1990 action offers no explanation for why a copayment for medical supplies was not included .

provided for longer - term conditions , including diabetic and ostomy supplies or diapers for those suffering from incontinence .

we estimate that the baltimore facility could have recovered an additional 6 percent of its otc product costs in fiscal year 1995 if veterans were required to make copayments for medical supplies used to treat nonservice - connected conditions .

the baltimore facility would need to charge a higher copayment to recover a larger share of its otc product costs , if the exemptions and collection rates remain unchanged .

for example , recoveries could be raised from 7 percent to 32 percent if the legislatively established copayment amount were $9 for a 30-day supply .

however , if some changes are made to the exemptions , this target share could be achieved with a smaller increase in the copayment rate , as shown in table 2 .

most va facilities offer an otc product benefits package that is more generous than other health plans .

in addition , va facilities provide other features , such as free otc product mail service and deferred credit for copayments owed , that are not commonly available in other plans .

as a result , va facilities have devoted significant resources to the provision of otc products , which other plans have elected not to spend .

va facilities could reduce their pharmacy costs if existing eligibility criteria are more strictly administered for otc products .

less than half of the veterans receiving outpatient care have service - connected conditions .

thus , most veterans must meet the pre - and posthospitalization or obviating - the - need criterion .

in our view , many veterans may be receiving otc products for nonservice - connected conditions unrelated to a va hospital stay or potential hospitalization .

toward this end , va may need to provide better guidance to facilities to achieve an effective and consistent use of otc products within its existing statutory authority .

va should be commended for instructing network directors to consolidate formularies .

this action , which is currently in progress , has not yet achieved an adequate level of consistency or cost - containment systemwide because the networks current formularies approximate the more generous coverage of otc products .

moreover , some networks are allowing facilities to have less generous coverage of otc products than these networks' formularies .

this will likely maintain the uneven availability of otc products .

given the disagreement among networks and facilities regarding the provision of otc products , additional guidance may be needed to ensure that veterans have a consistent level of access to otc products systemwide .

in light of concerns about potential resource shortages at some facilities , tailoring the availability of otc products to be more in line with those less generous facilities would seem desirable .

this would essentially limit otc products to those most directly related to va hospitalizations or those considered most essential to obviate the need for hospitalization , such as insulin for diabetic veterans .

va facilities could also reduce their costs if they restructured otc product dispensing and copayment collection processes .

in general , most facilities handle otc products too many times , mail products too often , and allow veterans to delay copayments too frequently .

although , some facilities have adopted measures to operate more efficiently , all facilities could benefit by doing so .

changes could also act as important incentives for veterans to only obtain the otc products from va facilities that they expect to use .

finally , va facilities have developed ways to provide otc products to veterans outside their pharmacies at costs lower than they are available through other local outlets .

some facilities have had success using the canteen service stores to stock and sell otc products that the facilities had removed from their formularies .

this seems to provide a reasonable alternative to providing otc products to veterans through va pharmacies .

mr. chairman , this concludes my statement .

i will be happy to answer any questions that you or other members may have .

for more information , please call paul reynolds , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7109 .

walter gembacz , mike o'dell , mark trapani , paul wright , deena el - attar , and joan vogel also contributed to the preparation of this statement .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

