we are pleased to be here to discuss our preliminary findings from our ongoing evaluation of personnel readiness in the army's five later - deploying divisions .

these divisions constitute almost half of the army's active combat forces and , according to army officials , are critical to the success of specific war plans and the national military strategy .

this morning , i would first like to summarize our preliminary observations regarding personnel readiness in the later - deploying divisions .

then , i would like to describe in more detail the ( 1 ) extent of personnel shortages in the divisions and the extent to which these shortages are reflected in readiness reports , ( 2 ) key factors contributing to personnel shortages and the impact such shortages have on readiness , ( 3 ) army's plans for correcting such shortages should these divisions be called upon to deploy , and ( 4 ) issues to be considered in dealing with personnel shortages .

unless otherwise indicated , the information provided reflects what we found at the time of our visits to the later - deploying divisions during the period august 1997 through january 1998 .

today's army faces an enormous challenge to balance risks and resources in order to meet its many missions .

since 1990 , active army ranks have been reduced from 770,000 to 495,000 personnel , a reduction of about 36 percent .

simultaneously , world events have dictated that forces be trained and ready to respond to potential high - intensity missions in areas such as korea and the persian gulf while conducting peace enhancement operations around the world .

the army currently has 10 active combat divisions compared to the 18 it had at the start of operation desert storm in 1991 .

four of the 10 divisions are considered contingency divisions and would be the first to deploy in the event of a major theater war .

these units are the 82nd airborne , 101st air assault , 3rd infantry , and 1st cavalry divisions .

the 2nd infantry division , while not a contingency force division , is already deployed in korea .

the remaining five divisions , which are the focus of my testimony , are expected to deploy in the event of a second simultaneous or nearly simultaneous major theater contingency or as reinforcements for a larger - than - expected first contingency .

these units are the 1st armored , 1st infantry , 4th infantry , 10th infantry , and 25th infantry divisions .

also , these divisions have been assigned the bulk of the recent peacekeeping missions in bosnia and haiti , and the 4th infantry division over the last 2 years has been conducting the army's advanced war - fighting experiment .

appendix i provides a list of the army's current active divisions and the locations of each division's associated brigades .

in the aggregate , the army's later - deploying divisions were assigned 66,053 , or 93 percent , of their 70,665 authorized personnel at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 .

however , aggregate numbers do not adequately reflect the condition that exists within individual battalions , companies , and platoons of these divisions .

this is because excess personnel exist in some grades , ranks , and skills , while shortages exist in others .

for example , while the 1st armored division was staffed at 94 percent in the aggregate , its combat support and service support specialties were filled at below 85 percent , and captains and majors were filled at 73 percent .

in addition , a portion of each later - deploying division exists only on paper because all authorized personnel have not been assigned .

all these divisions contain some squads , crews , and platoons in which no personnel or a minimum number of personnel are assigned .

assigning a minimum number of personnel to a crew means having fewer personnel than needed to fully accomplish wartime missions ; for example , having five soldiers per infantry squad rather than nine , tank crews with three soldiers instead of four , or artillery crews with six soldiers rather than nine .

we found significant personnel shortfalls in all the later - deploying divisions .

for example: at the 10th infantry division , only 138 of 162 infantry squads were fully or minimally filled , and 36 of the filled squads were unqualified .

at the 2nd and 3rd brigades of the 25th infantry division , 52 of 162 infantry squads were minimally filled or had no personnel assigned .

at the 1st brigade of the 1st infantry division , only 56 percent of the authorized infantry soldiers for its bradley fighting vehicles were assigned , and in the 2nd brigade , 21 of 48 infantry squads had no personnel assigned .

at the 3rd brigade of the 1st armored division , only 16 of 116 m1a1 tanks had full crews and were qualified , and in one of the brigade's two armor battalions , 14 of 58 tanks had no crewmembers assigned because the personnel were deployed to bosnia .

in addition , at the division's engineer brigade in germany , 11 of 24 bridge teams had no personnel assigned .

at the 4th infantry division , 13 of 54 squads in the engineer brigade had no personnel assigned or had fewer personnel assigned than required .

the significance of personnel shortfalls in later - deploying divisions cannot be adequately captured solely in terms of overall numbers .

the rank , grade , and experience of the personnel assigned must also be considered .

for example , captains and majors are in short supply army - wide due to drawdown initiatives undertaken in recent years .

the five later - deploying divisions had only 91 percent and 78 percent of the captains and majors authorized , respectively , but 138 percent of the lieutenants authorized .

the result is that unit commanders must fill leadership positions in many units with less experienced officers than army doctrine requires .

for example , in the 1st brigade of the 1st infantry division , 65 percent of the key staff positions designated to be filled by captains were actually filled by lieutenants or captains that were not graduates of the advanced course .

we found that three of the five battalion maintenance officers , four of the six battalion supply officers , and three of the four battalion signal officers were lieutenants rather than captains .

while this situation represents an excellent opportunity for the junior officers , it also represents a situation in which critical support functions are being guided by officers without the required training or experience .

there is also a significant shortage of ncos in the later - deploying divisions .

again , within the 1st brigade , 226 , or 17 percent of the 1,450 , total nco authorizations , were not filled at the time of our visit .

as was the case in all the divisions , a significant shortage was at the first - line supervisor , sergeant e - 5 level .

at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 , the 5 later - deploying divisions were short nearly 1,900 of the total 25,357 ncos authorized , and as of february 15 , 1998 , this shortage had grown to almost 2,200 .

in recent years , in reports and testimony before the congress , we discussed the status of resources and training system ( sorts ) , which is used to measure readiness , and reported on the need for improvements .

sorts data for units in the later - deploying divisions have often reflected a high readiness level for personnel because the system uses aggregate statistics to assess personnel readiness .

for example , a unit that is short 20 percent of all authorized personnel in the aggregate could still report the ability to undertake most of its wartime mission , even though up to 25 percent of the key leaders and personnel with critical skills may not be assigned .

using aggregate data to reflect personnel readiness masks the underlying personnel problems i have discussed today , such as shortages by skill level , rank , or grade .

compounding these problems are high levels of personnel turnover , incomplete squads and crews , and frequent deployments , none of which are part of the readiness calculation criteria .

yet , when considered collectively , these factors create situations in which commanders may have difficulty developing unit cohesion , accomplishing training objectives , and maintaining readiness .

judging by our analysis of selected commanders' comments submitted with their sorts reports and other available data , the problems i have just noted are real .

however , some commanders apparently do not consider them serious enough to warrant a downgrade in the reported readiness rating .

for example , at one engineer battalion , the commander told us his unit had lost the ability to provide sustained engineer support to the division .

his assessment appeared reasonable , since company - and battalion - level training for the past 4 months had been canceled due to the deployment of battalion leaders and personnel to operations in bosnia .

as a result of this deployment , elements of the battalion left behind had only 33 to 55 percent of its positions filled .

the commander of this battalion , however , reported an overall readiness assessment of c - 2 , which was based in part on a personnel level that was over 80 percent in the aggregate .

the commander also reported that he would be able to achieve a c - 1 status in only 20 training days .

this does not seem realistic , given the shortages we noted .

we found similar disconnects between readiness conditions as reported in sorts and actual unit conditions at other armor , infantry , and support units .

many factors have contributed to shortfalls of personnel in the army's later - deploying divisions , including ( 1 ) the army's priority for assigning personnel to units , commands , and agencies ; ( 2 ) army - wide shortages of some types of personnel ; ( 3 ) peacekeeping operations ; and ( 4 ) the assignment of soldiers to joint and other army command , recruiting , and base management functions .

the army uses a tiered system to allocate personnel and other resources to its units .

the army gives top priority to staffing dod agencies ; major commands such as the central command , the european command , and the pacific command ; the national training center ; and the army rangers and special forces groups .

these entities receive 98 to 100 percent of the personnel authorized for each grade and each military occupational specialty .

the 2nd infantry division , which is deployed in korea , and the four contingency divisions are second in priority .

although each receives 98 to 100 percent of its aggregate authorized personnel , the total personnel assigned are not required to be evenly distributed among grades or military specialties .

the remaining five later - deploying divisions receive a proportionate share of the remaining forces .

unlike priority one and two forces , the later - deploying units have no minimum personnel level .

army - wide shortages of personnel add to the shortfalls of later - deploying divisions .

for example , in fiscal year 1997 , the army's enlistment goal for infantrymen was 16,142 .

however , only about 11,300 of those needed were enlisted , which increased the existing shortage of infantry soldiers by an additional 4,800 soldiers .

as of february 15 , 1998 , army - wide shortages existed for 28 army specialties .

many positions in squads and crews are left unfilled or minimally filled because personnel are diverted to work in key positions where they are needed more .

also , because of shortages of experienced and branch - qualified officers , the army has instituted an officer distribution plan , which distributes a “fair share” of officers by grade and specialty among the combat divisions .

while this plan has helped spread the shortages across all the divisions , we noted significant shortages of officers in certain specialties at the later - deploying divisions .

since 1995 , when peacekeeping operations began in bosnia - herzegovina , there has been a sustained increase in operations for three of the later - deploying divisions: the 1st armored division , the 1st infantry division , and the 10th infantry division .

for example , in fiscal year 1997 , the 1st armored division was directed 89 times to provide personnel for operations other than war and contingency operations , training exercises , and for other assignments from higher commands .

more than 3,200 personnel were deployed a total of nearly 195,000 days for the assignments , 89 percent of which were for operations in bosnia .

similarly , the average soldier in the 1st infantry division was deployed 254 days in fiscal year 1997 , primarily in support of peacekeeping operations .

even though the 1st armored and 1st infantry divisions have had 90 percent or more of their total authorized personnel assigned since they began operations in bosnia , many combat support and service support specialties were substantially understrength , and only three - fourths of field grade officers were in place .

as a result , the divisions took personnel from nondeploying units to fill the deploying units with the needed number and type of personnel .

as a further result , the commanders of nondeploying units have squads and crews with no , or a minimal number of , personnel .

unit commanders have had to shuffle personnel among positions to compensate for shortages .

for example , they assign soldiers that exist in the largest numbers — infantry , armor , and artillery — to work in maintenance , supply , and personnel administration due to personnel shortages in these technical specialties ; assign soldiers to fill personnel shortages at a higher headquarters or to accomplish a mission for higher headquarters ; and assign soldiers to temporary work such as driving buses , serving as lifeguards , and managing training ranges — vacancies , in some cases , which have resulted from civilian reductions on base .

at the time of our visit , the 1st brigade of the 1st infantry division had 372 , or 87 percent , of its 428 authorized dismount infantry .

however , 51 of these 372 soldiers were assigned to duties outside their specialties to fill critical technical shortages , command - directed positions , and administrative and base management activities .

these reassignments lowered the actual number of soldiers available for training to 75 percent daily .

in germany , at the 2nd brigade of the 1st infantry division , 21 of 48 infantry squads had no personnel assigned due to shortages .

from the remaining 27 squads that were minimally filled , the equivalent of another 5 squads of the brigade's soldiers were working in maintenance , supply , and administrative specialties to compensate for personnel shortages in those specialties .

the end result is that the brigade only had 22 infantry squads with 7 soldiers each rather than 48 squads with 9 soldiers each .

according to army officials , the reduction of essential training , along with the cumulative impact of the shortages i just outlined , has resulted in an erosion of readiness .

readiness in the divisions responsible for peacekeeping operations in bosnia has been especially affected because the challenges imposed by personnel shortages are compounded by frequent deployments .

universally , division officials told us that the shortage of ncos in the later - deploying divisions is the biggest detriment to overall readiness because crews , squads , and sections are led by lower - level personnel rather than by trained and experienced sergeants .

such a situation impedes effective training because these replacement personnel become responsible for training soldiers in critical skills they themselves may not have been trained to accomplish .

at one division , concern was expressed about the potential for a serious training accident because tanks , artillery , and fighting vehicles were being commanded by soldiers without the experience needed to safely coordinate the weapon systems they command .

according to army officials , the rotation of units to bosnia has also degraded the training and readiness of the divisions providing the personnel .

for example , to deploy an 800-soldier task force last year , the commander of the 3rd brigade combat team had to reassign 63 soldiers within the brigade to serve in infantry squads of the deploying unit , strip nondeploying infantry and armor units of maintenance personnel , and reassign ncos and support personnel to the task force from throughout the brigade .

these actions were detrimental to the readiness of the nondeploying units .

for example , gunnery exercises for two armor battalions had to be canceled and 43 of 116 tank crews became unqualified on the weapon system , the number of combat systems out of commission increased , and contractors were hired to perform maintenance .

according to 1st armored and 1st infantry division officials , this situation has reduced their divisions' readiness to the point of not being prepared to execute wartime missions without extensive training and additional personnel .

if the later - deploying divisions are required to deploy to a second major theater contingency , the army plans to fill personnel shortfalls with retired servicemembers , members of the individual ready reserve , and newly trained recruits .

the number of personnel to fill the later deploying divisions could be extensive , since ( 1 ) personnel from later deploying divisions would be transferred to fill any shortages in the contingency units that are first to deploy and ( 2 ) these divisions are already short of required personnel .

the army's plan for providing personnel under a scenario involving two major theater contingencies includes unvalidated assumptions .

for example , the plan assumes that the army's training base will be able to quadruple its output on short notice and that all reserve component units will deploy as scheduled .

army officials told us that based on past deployments , not all the assumptions in their plans will be realized , and there may not be sufficient trained personnel to fully man later - deploying divisions within their scheduled deployment times .

finally , if retired personnel or individual ready reserve members are assigned to a unit , training and crew cohesion may not occur prior to deployment because army officials expect some units to receive personnel just before deployment .

finding solutions to the personnel problems i have discussed today will not be easy , given the army's many missions and reduced personnel .

while i have described serious shortfalls of personnel in each of later - deploying divisions , this condition is not necessarily new .

what is new is the increased operating tempo , largely brought about because of peacekeeping operations , which has exacerbated the personnel shortfalls in these divisions .

however , before any solutions can be discussed , the army should determine whether it wants to continue to accept the current condition of its active force today , that is , five fully combat - ready divisions and five less than fully combat - capable divisions .

the army has started a number of initiatives that ultimately may help alleviate some of the personnel shortfalls i have described .

these initiatives include targeted recruiting goals for infantry and maintenance positions ; the advanced war - fighting experiment , which may reduce the number of personnel required for a division through the use of technology ; and better integration of active and reserve forces .

efforts to streamline institutional forces may also yield personnel that could be used to fill vacancies such as these noted in my testimony .

if such efforts do not yield sufficient personnel or solutions to deal with the shortages we have noted in this testimony , we believe it is important that the army , at a minimum , review its current plans for rectifying these shortfalls in the event of a second major theater war .

in particular , if the army expects to deploy fully combat - capable divisions for such a war , it should review the viability of alleviating shortfalls predominately with reservists from the individual ready reserve .

this concludes my testimony .

i will be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time .

1st cavalry division - headquarters and three brigades at fort hood , tex .

3rd infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at fort stewart , ga. , and one brigade at fort benning , ga. 82nd airborne division - headquarters and three brigades at fort bragg , n.c. 101st airborne division - headquarters and three brigades at fort campbell , ky. 2nd infantry division - headquarters and two brigades in korea , and one brigade at fort lewis , wash. 1st infantry division - headquarters and two brigades in germany , and one brigade at fort riley , kans .

1st armored division - headquarters and two brigades in germany , and one brigade at fort riley , kans .

4th infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at fort hood , tex. , and one brigade at fort carson , colo. 10th mountain division - headquarters and two brigades at fort drum , n.y. 25th infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at schofield barracks , hawaii , and one brigade at fort lewis , wash .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

