i am pleased to have this opportunity to provide this statement for the record for your hearing on june 17 , 1998 .

i would like to offer some observations on the people's republic of china's negotiations to join ( accede to ) the world trade organization ( wto ) .

today's hearing is about the president's recent decision to extend china's waiver and continue to grant most - favored - nation ( mfn ) status to china .

you requested that we explain the relationship between china's mfn status and wto membership .

my statement will explain ( 1 ) the wto accession process and ( 2 ) the legal framework affecting china's mfn status , its implications for wto membership , and the role congress plays in the process .

my observations are based on our past and ongoing work ; our review of wto and executive branch documents ; u.s. law ; and related literature ; the economic literature ; and our discussions with u.s. government , wto , and foreign government officials .

before getting into the specifics of these topics , let me provide a brief summary of my statement .

since the late 1970s , china has introduced a variety of market reforms to liberalize its centrally planned economy .

today , china is much more developed , open , and market oriented , such that now almost all sectors of its economy have elements of both free markets and state planning .

however , china still lacks considerable transparency in its trade regime and intervenes in its economy in ways that can distort trade .

for example , china restricts its imports by applying high tariffs to specific sectors , using import quotas , requiring import licenses , imposing other import barriers , and promoting and supporting its exports .

in combination with macroeconomic forces , these trade practices have fostered a chinese balance of trade surplus with the world and a rapid buildup in foreign reserves .

in addition to these factors , the u.s. trade deficit with china has recently grown because u.s. demand for goods from china has grown more rapidly than chinese demand for u.s. goods .

over the past 4 years this bilateral u.s. trade deficit has risen from $30 billion to $50 billion .

top u.s. exports to china tend to consist of high - technology goods , such as aircraft , while the top u.s. imports from china include many low - technology products such as toys and apparel .

u.s. imports from china also include products such as electrical machinery .

the united states has negotiated with china to open its markets through numerous bilateral trade agreements , including a 1979 agreement that approved reciprocal mfn status between the two countries ( for more information on u.s. - china bilateral trade agreements , see app .

i ) .

since 1986 , china has been negotiating to join the wto and its predecessor , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

china will have to make significant changes to its economy to be able to meet wto commitments ( for a brief discussion of china's economy , see app .

ii ) .

existing wto members and countries that agree to join the wto must abide by a set of rules and obligations that promote trade and increase transparency and fairness in the world trading system .

nondiscrimination toward other wto members is a fundamental principle in the wto agreements and is embodied in the granting of mfn status and providing national treatment .

generally wto members are obligated under the mfn principle to grant each other trade privileges as favorable as they give to any other foreign country .

national treatment requires that they treat other member's products no less favorably than they treat their own , once foreign goods have crossed their borders .

china , like other wto members , will also have to commit to reduce tariffs for industrial and agricultural products and to follow rules designed to limit the use of trade - distorting nontariff barriers ( such as subsidies and import licensing requirements ) .

additional wto rules cover financial and other services , trade - related investment measures , market access , and trade - related intellectual property rights .

wto members have access to dispute settlement procedures designed to help them more quickly address other members' trade practices that appear to violate wto rules .

china has sought to join the wto as a developing country , which would allow it to benefit from longer transition periods given these countries to implement wto obligations .

however , the united states and other countries have maintained that china should be treated as a developed country because of its size and status as a major world exporter .

while there is debate about the true size and growth rate of china's economy , there is no doubt that it is very large and has grown rapidly .

the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) estimates that china's gross domestic product ( gdp ) was the second largest in the world in 1997 .

despite its size , however , china's economy still is considered “developing” by world bank estimates .

according to u.s. and foreign government officials , negotiations on transition periods and other special treatment for china will be considered on a case - by - case basis since china does not fit neatly into either of these categories of development .

overall , a major objective of the administration has been to negotiate a wto accession agreement that is “commercially meaningful to u.s. business. .

china is currently negotiating with wto members , including the united states , to join , that is , to “accede” to , the wto .

after joining , china will be bound by the commitments it makes both in the accession negotiations and in the underlying wto agreements .

a successful accession requires the applicant to make the necessary concessions to meet the commercial and trade requirements of the wto agreements .

thus , the outcome of this process is , to some degree , already determined by the existing agreements , in contrast to traditional trade negotiations ; the primary issue for debate is agreeing to what measures a country like china needs to take to assure wto members that it can meet the requirements .

also , the applicant must negotiate the levels at which it will bind its tariffs with wto members .

any special provisions granted to the applicant are counterbalanced by greater obligations that the applicant must fulfill .

for instance , although members might allow the applicant time to phase in tariff reductions , the applicant might be required to meet additional reporting and transparency commitments during the phase - in process .

the accession process begins when the applicant submits a letter of application to the wto director - general .

china began this process in 1986 when it applied to the gatt , and renewed its application in 1995 upon the creation of the wto .

this process , diagrammed in figure 1 , is comprised of four phases: ( 1 ) fact - finding , ( 2 ) negotiation , ( 3 ) wto decision , and ( 4 ) implementation .

china is currently in the negotiation phase of the accession process .

fact - finding: as figure 1 illustrates , in the first phase of fact - finding the wto working party , assisted by the secretariat , collects and synthesizes information on the applicant's trade regime .

the applicant submits a detailed outline of its trade policies and practices and answers questions until the working party has sufficient information to begin negotiations .

negotiation: figure 1 shows that the second phase of the process follows a two - track approach , involving both bilateral and multilateral negotiations .

on a bilateral basis , each working party member negotiates with the applicant on its specific commitments on goods and services under the wto agreements .

the applicant submits an overall market access offer as the starting point for the negotiations , detailing how the country will lower barriers to trade .

although these negotiations are conducted bilaterally , any agreement reached between two countries will apply to all wto members , as the principle of mfn requires .

in the multilateral negotiations , the working party and the applicant negotiate terms for how the applicant will adhere to wto's principles and technical guidelines , so that the applicant will meet the normal obligations and responsibilities of membership .

for example , a country might be asked where and when it would publish new laws , in order to comply with a wto transparency requirement .

the negotiation phase results in four documents , which detail the results of the negotiations and make up the applicant's final accession package: ( 1 ) the consolidated schedules: these detail the applicant's specific market access commitments under various wto agreements , primarily covering individual tariff lines for goods and services .

they are annexed to the protocol as an integral part of the agreement .

 ( 2 ) the protocol: this is usually a brief document containing the terms of accession and affirming the applicant's adherence to wto guidelines and principles .

 ( 3 ) the working party report: this provides a narrative on the results of the negotiations .

frequently , the report includes specific commitments made by the applicant regarding how it will meet wto requirements .

commitments detailed in either the report or the protocol carry the same legal weight for the applicant , according to wto and ustr officials .

 ( 4 ) the draft decision: written by the working party , this document affirms the working party's consensus decision on the applicant's bid for accession .

after the working party members conclude all the negotiations and reach consensus on language detailing the terms and conditions for the applicant's membership , they will forward the package to the general council .

wto decision: the third phase in figure 1 is the formal decision process , in which the general council ( comprised of all wto members ) approves ( or rejects ) the terms and conditions of the applicant's package .

traditionally , the general council reaches decisions by consensus .

however , if consensus cannot be reached , the draft decision can be approved by a two - thirds majority .

any country that decides to forgo normal wto obligations and benefits ( “non - application” ) , including mfn , must notify the council before the council approves the accession package .

implementation: finally , the last phase in figure 1 is implementation of the applicant's wto commitments .

the applicant's wto obligations enter into force 30 days after the general council's approval and the applicant subsequently files its acceptance of membership .

the accession package is part of the applicant's wto agreement , and the acceding country is equally bound by the provisions of the wto agreements and the commitments in the accession package .

in some cases , the applicant's parliament or other legislative body must pass legislation to allow for accession before the applicant submits its acceptance .

applicants must also make the necessary internal adjustments as required by the accession package before the 30-day period begins .

the general council approves the draft decision , and then the applicant becomes a member .

the most recent countries to join — ecuador , mongolia , bulgaria , and panama — were required to eliminate or begin to phase out most trade practices incompatible with wto rules immediately upon accession .

at this point , my statement will discuss ( 1 ) ustr's requirement to consult with congress before a u.s. vote on china's wto membership , ( 2 ) presidential determinations on china's state trading enterprises , ( 3 ) provisions in u.s. law affecting china's mfn status , ( 4 ) the potential use of wto's non - application provision if china joins the wto , and ( 5 ) implications for the united states if non - application is invoked .

under u.s. law , ustr is required to report to and consult with appropriate congressional committees before any wto general council vote on an applicant's membership when a vote would either substantially affect u.s. rights or obligations under the wto agreement or potentially entail a change in federal law .

in view of china's importance to u.s. foreign trade and the mfn issue described in our later comments , it is clear that this consultation requirement would apply to a vote on china's membership in the wto .

before china joins the wto , another united states law requires the president to make certain determinations about china's state trading enterprises .

specifically , the president must decide ( 1 ) whether china's state trading enterprises account for a significant share either of china's exports , or china's goods that are subject to competition from goods imported into china ; and ( 2 ) whether these enterprises adversely affect u.s. foreign trade or the u.s. economy .

if both determinations are affirmative , the wto agreement cannot apply between the united states and china until either china enters into an agreement that addresses the operations of state trading enterprises , or legislation is enacted approving application of the wto agreements to china .

a key legislative action congress will face before china becomes a wto member is whether to remove china from coverage under title iv of the trade act of 1974 .

specifically , section 401 generally requires the president to deny mfn to products from a number of countries , including china .

section 402 , better known as the “jackson - vanik amendment,”permits a 1-year exception when the president determines that a country , such as china , substantially complies with certain freedom of emigration objectives .

the president can recommend renewal of these waivers for successive 12-month periods if he determines that further extensions will substantially promote these objectives .

these recommendations must be made 30 days before the end of the previous year's waiver period , that is , by june 3 .

congress has up to 60 days from the end of the waiver period to pass a joint resolution disapproving the waiver .

if necessary , congress has an additional 15 days to override any presidential veto of such a resolution .

china first received a waiver in 1980 , and u.s. presidents have renewed the waiver from 1981 to most recently , on june 3 , 1998 .

since the jackson - vanik amendment provision only allows a 1-year waiver of title iv restrictions and congress can disapprove the waiver , the administration plans to ask congress to enact legislation that would remove china from title iv's coverage .

the administration believes that temporary , that is , conditional mfn under jackson - vanik conflicts with the wto obligation to provide unconditional mfn to wto members .

in the past , congress has passed legislation removing certain wto / gatt members from title iv's coverage and granting them permanent mfn .

for example , in 1996 , congress enacted legislation providing the president with discretionary authority to grant permanent mfn to bulgaria , which the president did on september 27 , 1996 .

this approach appears to increase the administration's leverage to obtain final commitments .

at least one bill , s. 737 , currently pending in congress takes the same approach for china .

other pending bills , s. 1303 and h. r. 1712 , for example , do not provide the president this kind of discretionary authority .

instead , they provide that on the day china becomes a wto member title iv shall no longer apply , and china's products shall receive mfn .

if china becomes a wto member and congress has not passed legislation removing china from title iv's coverage , the administration plans to invoke the “non - application clause” of article xiii of the wto agreement .

the “non - application clause” permits either a wto member or an incoming member to refuse to apply wto commitments to each other .

in the past , the united states has invoked non - application when countries have joined the wto ( or gatt ) and congress had not repealed title iv of the trade act for the incoming member .

table 1 lists these instances .

i would like to point out four important characteristics of the wto non - application clause .

a member ( and , when appropriate , an incoming member ) : ( 1 ) must notify the wto of its intent to invoke non - application before the new member's terms of accession are approved by the general council ; ( 2 ) may invoke non - application and still vote to have the new member admitted to the wto ; the united states did this for mongolia's accession in 1997 ; ( 3 ) cannot invoke non - application selectively , because the clause covers all wto obligations .

for example , the united states cannot choose to withhold its wto mfn obligation and then apply other wto provisions to china such as dispute settlement procedures ; and ( 4 ) may later rescind non - application , resulting in both parties applying all wto rights and obligations to each other .

for example , the united states did this for romania and hungary .

if china joins the wto and the united states invokes non - application , any mfn rights between the united states and china will come from the 1979 u.s. - china bilateral agreement on trade relations .

although neither we nor ustr have compared in detail the scope of mfn under the 1979 agreement and that provided in the wto agreements , the coverage under the former does not appear to be as comprehensive .

for example , the 1979 agreement does not establish clear mfn obligations for services and service suppliers , nor does it provide for compulsory dispute settlement procedures .

for instance , if the united states believes that china has violated its wto commitments , the united states would be unable to bring china to wto's dispute settlement body .

an important consequence of the united states invoking wto non - application is that if china becomes a member , it does not have to grant the united states all the trade commitments it makes to other wto members , both in the negotiated accession package or in the underlying wto agreements .

because u.s. businesses compete with business from other wto members for china's markets , this could potentially put u.s. business interests at a considerable competitive disadvantage .

for example , the united states may not benefit from chinese concessions regarding services , such as the right to establish distribution channels in china .

while the united states would continue to benefit from chinese commitments made in bilateral agreements concluded with the united states , the commitments are not as extensive as those in the wto agreements .

in summary , the size of the chinese economy and the extent of its reform efforts create challenges for negotiators and policymakers trying to integrate china into the wto .

as part of any congressional deliberation to remove china from coverage of title iv of the trade act , it will be important to evaluate china's accession package , and the advantages and disadvantages of providing china permanent mfn .

this would include determining if the accession package has met the administration's objective of producing a “commercially meaningful” agreement .

congress will be evaluating an agreement that covers a wider array of issues than those of other new wto members with mfn restrictions .

as requested , we will be working with your staff to help evaluate this agreement when it is finalized .

this concludes my statement for the record .

thank you for permitting me to provide you with this information .

the framework for current u.s. trade relations with china is based upon the agreement on trade relations that was signed on july 7 , 1979 .

the agreement established reciprocal most - favored - nation ( mfn ) status between the two countries and committed both parties to protect intellectual property .

since then , the united states has attempted to increase market access and reduce trade barriers and other trade distorting policies and practices by entering into numerous bilateral trade agreements with china ( see table i.1 ) .

nevertheless , china's implementation of these agreements has been uneven , according to the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) .

china still restricts imports , subsidizes chinese exports , and maintains significant barriers to foreign business penetration , according to ustr .

for example , the united states has entered into a series of agreements with china regarding china's protection of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) .

under the memorandum of understanding on the protection of intellectual property rights signed in 1992 , china amended its patent law , issued copyright regulations , joined international copyright conventions , and enacted protection for trade secrets .

however , u.s. officials subsequently determined that china did not establish an adequate and effective mechanism for ipr enforcement .

as a result of a special 301investigation , the two parties signed an additional ipr agreement in 1995 in which china committed to ( 1 ) provide improved protection for copyrights , ( 2 ) strengthen border controls , ( 3 ) institute trademark law modernization , and ( 4 ) intensify a “special enforcement period” aimed at cracking down on piracy .

however , china's continued insufficient implementation of the 1995 ipr agreement led the united states to threaten to impose sanctions in may 1996 ; the two parties avoided sanctions with the signing of an agreement in june 1996 , which confirmed china's most recent attempts to enforce the 1995 agreement .

in addition , the united states and china have signed a series of bilateral trade agreements to improve the regulation and pricing of satellite launch services .

in 1995 , the united states and china renewed the bilateral agreement on international trade in commercial space launch services for the period between 1995 and 2001 .

to further clarify the agreement's provisions on low earth orbit satellites ( leo ) , the two countries signed an annex containing specific leo pricing guidelines in 1997 .

china is undergoing a historic transformation , as market reforms and integration with the world economy create growth and increased trade and investment .

in 1997 , china's second largest export market after hong kong was the united states ; china's bilateral trade surplus with the united states has more than doubled since 1993 to about $50 billion in 1997 .

however , substantial trade and investment impediments remain .

according to u.s. government and foreign officials , the size of the chinese economy and the extent of its reform efforts create challenges to negotiators and policymakers trying to integrate china into the world trade organization ( wto ) .

at the end of this appendix , we provide a table with some statistics on the chinese economy .

according to our review of the economic literature , china , for almost 30 years prior to 1979 , had a rural , developing economy with relatively few connections to the rest of the world .

the chinese communists ruled over a centrally planned economy in which prices were set by the state .

in late 1978 , china's leaders introduced market reforms into the agricultural sector , where 71 percent of china's labor force worked .

as agriculture yield increased , market reforms were introduced into other specific sectors and locales and then gradually expanded to other regions and sectors of the economy .

today , almost all sectors of the economy are a mix of market - oriented reforms and state planning .

experts generally credit these reforms and china's high rates of investment and saving as principal reasons for china's high growth rates during the last 20 years .

they also credit these reforms for making china's economy much more developed , open to international trade and investment , and market - oriented .

china's economy appears to be very large and growing quite quickly , although not as fast as indicated by the widely publicized chinese official figures .

according to official chinese figures , in 1997 the gross domestic product ( gdp ) was $900 billion , per capita gdp was $724 , and growth since 1986 averaged almost 10 percent per year .

the most recent data from the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) suggest that china is the second - largest economy worldwide .

in 1997 , china was the world's 10th largest exporter , 12th largest importer , and the largest trading nation that is not a wto member .

according to the economic literature , china has become increasingly open to international trade and investment since 1978 , although it retains significant trade and investment barriers .

china has been negotiating to join the wto and its predecessor , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , since 1986 .

despite substantial reforms , china will have to make significant changes to its economy to meet wto rules and obligations .

today , china still restricts imports , promotes and supports chinese exports , and maintains significant barriers to foreign business penetration , according to ustr and commerce department reports .

they report that china's import restrictions include high tariffs for specific sectors and other taxes on imports ; nontariff barriers such as import licenses , import quotas , limitations on which enterprises can import , and limitations on access to foreign exchange .

they also report that china promotes exports by providing exporters with access to funds , freight services , and inputs on noncommercial terms .

china also provides exporters with income tax reductions and imposes foreign exchange earning and export requirements on foreign corporations in china .

according to these reports , significant barriers or impediments to foreign business operating in china include guiding foreign investment to certain sectors ; protecting state - owned enterprises from competition by law , regulation , and / or custom ; restricting the opening of branches of foreign banks , insurance companies , accounting , and law firms to selected companies and particular locales ; and prohibiting representative offices of foreign firms from signing sales contracts or billing customers .

they also report on problems from excessive bureaucracy and corruption in china , especially regarding government procurement practices .

the corruption problem is confirmed by private studies ; one ranked china as the fifth most corrupt among 54 countries surveyed in 1996 .

from 1980 until 1994 , china's trade and current account balance ( its goods , services , income , and current transfers ) were more often in deficit than surplus .

current account deficits generally were financed by capital inflows , particularly foreign direct investment , which grew relatively slowly until 1992 , and by borrowing from the world bank .

the chinese government's holding of foreign exchange , the main component of its international reserves , fluctuated moderately .

beginning in 1993 , china has had large capital inflows , due to substantial and growing levels of foreign direct investment .

china's goods surplus grew to $7.3 billion in 1994 from a $10.7 billion deficit in 1993 .

it then grew to $18 billion in 1995 , and then jumped to $46.2 billion in 1997 .

goods exports rose steadily from $102.6 billion in 1994 to $182.7 billion in 1997 .

china's goods imports increased more slowly from $95.3 billion in 1994 to $136.5 billion in 1997 .

china's goods and services balance grew steadily from $7.6 billion in 1994 to $17.6 billion in 1996 , then rose to $40.5 billion in 1997 ( see fig .

ii.1 ) .

year at the beginning of 1994 , china devalued its official exchange rate to that on the private market , and then rapidly gained foreign exchange under a managed float system at the rate of $22 billion to $35 billion per year .

at the end of 1997 , china's foreign currency reserves were second only to japan's , at $139.9 billion .

china's surplus in goods trade with the united states has continued to increase for more than a decade .

the bilateral surplus rose from $2.8 billion in 1987 , to $29.5 billion in 1994 ( the year china last devalued its currency ) , to $49.8 billion in 1997 , according to u.s. commerce department figures .

u.s. goods imports from china have rapidly grown from $6.3 billion in 1987 , to $38.8 billion in 1994 , to $62.6 billion in 1997 .

u.s. goods exports to china grew more slowly from $3.5 billion in 1987 , to $9.3 billion in 1994 , to $12.8 billion in 1997 .

by 1997 , the u.s. goods deficit with china was second to that of japan for the third straight year .

in 1997 , goods imports from china were 7.2 percent of all u.s. goods imports , with leading imports of electrical machinery and equipment ; toys , games , and sports equipment ; footwear ; boilers and machinery ; and clothing accessories and apparel , much of which tend to be labor intensive .

in 1997 , u.s. goods exports to china were 1.9 percent of all u.s. goods exports , with leading u.s. exports to china consisting of customs categories of nuclear reactors , boilers , and machinery ; aircraft and spacecraft ; electrical machinery and equipment ; and fertilizers .

in 1997 , the united states was china's second - largest goods export market after hong kong , and third - largest source of goods imports after japan and taiwan .

 ( see table ii.1. ) .

table ii.1: economic data of china: 1987-97 billions of current u.s. dollars , unless otherwise noted $ ( 1.7 ) $ ( 5.3 ) $ ( 5.6 ) $ ( 10.7 ) ( 36.4 ) ( 46.4 ) ( 48.8 ) ( 42.4 ) ( 50.2 ) ( 64.4 ) ( 86.3 ) ( 95.3 ) ( 110.1 ) ( 131.5 ) ( 136.5 ) ( 4.1 ) ( 4.9 ) ( 11.5 ) ( 38.9 ) ( 50.0 ) ( 52.8 ) ( 46.7 ) ( 54.3 ) ( 73.8 ) ( 98.3 ) ( 111.6 ) ( 135.3 ) ( 154.1 ) ( 166.8 ) ( 3.8 ) ( 4.3 ) ( 11.6 ) ( 0.2 ) ( 0.5 ) ( 2.1 ) ( 3.5 ) ( 5.0 ) ( 5.8 ) ( 4.8 ) ( 6.3 ) ( 7.5 ) ( 8.8 ) ( 9.3 ) ( 11.7 ) ( 12.0 ) ( 12.8 ) f.a.s .

= free - alongside - ship ( a method of export and import valuation whereby the seller's price includes charges for delivery of goods up to the port of departure ) .

china: u.s. european union arms sales since the 1989 embargoes ( gao / t - nsiad - 98-171 , apr .

28 , 1998 ) .

agricultural exports: u.s .

needs a more integrated approach to address sanitary / phytosanitary issues ( gao / nsiad - 98-32 , dec. 11 , 1997 ) .

hong kong's reversion to china: effective monitoring critical to assess u.s. nonproliferation risks ( gao / nsiad - 97-149 , may 22 , 1997 ) .

export controls: sensitive machine tool exports to china ( gao / nsiad - 97-4 , nov. 19 , 1996 ) .

export controls: sale of telecommunications equipment to china ( gao / nsiad - 97-5 , nov. 13 , 1996 ) .

international trade: challenges and opportunities for u.s .

businesses in china ( gao / t - nsiad - 96-214 , july 29 , 1996 ) .

national security: impact of china's military modernization in the pacific region ( gao / nsiad - 95-84 , june 6 , 1995 ) .

export controls: some controls over missile - related technology exports to china are weak ( gao / nsiad - 95-82 , apr .

17 , 1995 ) .

u.s. - china trade: implementation of the 1992 prison labor memorandum of understanding ( gao / ggd - 95-106 , apr .

3 , 1995 ) .

u.s. - china trade: implementation of agreements on market access and intellectual property ( gao / ggd - 95-61 , jan. 25 , 1995 ) .

international trade: u.s. government policy issues affecting u.s. business activities in china ( gao / ggd - 94-94 , may 4 , 1994 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

