we appreciate the opportunity to testify on competition in the domestic airline industry .

in april 1996 , we reported that the deregulation of the industry in 1978 , as intended , has led to lower fares and better service for most air travelers .

deregulation's benefits stem largely from increased competition spurred by the entry of new airlines into the industry and established airlines into new markets .

nevertheless , some airports , primarily in the east and upper midwest , have not experienced such entry and thus have not experienced the lower fares and better service that deregulation has brought to other markets .

in october 1996 , we reported that certain industry practices , such as restrictive gate - leasing arrangements , impeded entry , particularly at a number of major airports in the east and upper midwest .

based on our findings , we made a number of recommendations to the department of transportation ( dot ) aimed at addressing these barriers to entry and identified potential actions the congress might wish to consider .

our october 1996 report was the latest in a series of studies we have conducted over the past decade on domestic airline competition .

as requested , our testimony discusses ( 1 ) our findings and recommendations concerning barriers to entry in the airline industry and ( 2 ) dot's response to the recommendations in our october 1996 report .

in our october 1996 report , we stated that little progress has been achieved in lowering the barriers to entry since we first reported on these barriers in 1990 .

as a result , the full benefits of airline deregulation have yet to be realized .

in particular , operating limits in the form of slot controls , restrictive gate leasing arrangements , and perimeter rulescontinue to block entry at key airports in the east and upper midwest .

likewise , several marketing strategies , including special incentives for travel agents and frequent flier programs , give advantages to the established carriers .

these strategies , taken together , continue to deter new as well as established airlines from entering those markets where an established airline is dominant .

the effect of these strategies tends to be greatest — and airfares the highest — in markets where the dominant carrier's position is protected by operating barriers .

as a result , we recommended in october 1996 that dot take actions that we had previously suggested in 1990 to lower the operating barriers .

moreover , we suggested that , absent action by dot , the congress may wish to consider revising the legislative criteria that governs dot's granting slots to new entrants .

we also suggested that the congress consider granting dot the authority to allow exemptions to the perimeter rule at national airport to increase competition .

in responding to our recent report , dot concurred with our findings and expressed concern about “overly aggressive” attempts by established airlines to thwart new entry .

to make it easier for new entrants to obtain slots , the agency indicated that it would revise its restrictive interpretation of the legislative criteria governing the granting of new slots .

while this is a positive step , additional action will likely be needed because the number of new slots that dot can grant is very limited .

in our report , we also recommended that dot create a pool of available slots by periodically withdrawing a small percentage from the major incumbents at each airport and distribute those slots in a fashion that increases competition .

dot indicated that it is still considering this action .

the agency did not agree with our recommendation that faa consider an airport's efforts to make gates available to nonincumbents when making federal airport grant decisions .

instead , dot said that it would rather address this issue on a case by case basis as problems are brought to its attention .

in light of the lack of progress over the past 7 years , however , we believe that our recommendations , combined with our suggestions for potential congressional action , offer prudent steps to promote competition in regions that have not experienced the benefits of airline deregulation .

operating barriers continue to limit competition and contribute to higher airfares in several key markets in the upper midwest and east .

in some cases , these barriers have grown worse .

as a result , our october 1996 report recommended that dot take actions that we originally suggested in 1990 and highlighted areas for potential congressional action .

the report specifically addressed the effects of slots , perimeter rules , exclusive - use gate leases , and marketing strategies developed by the established airlines since airline deregulation .

to reduce congestion , faa has since 1969 limited the number of takeoffs and landings that can occur at o'hare , national , laguardia , and kennedy .

by allowing new airlines to form and established airlines to enter new markets , deregulation increased the demand for access to these airports .

such increased demand complicated faa's efforts to allocate takeoff and landing slots equitably among the airlines .

to minimize the government's role in the allocation of slots , dot amended its rules in 1985 to allow airlines to buy and sell them to one another .

under this “buy / sell rule,” dot grandfathered slots to the holders of record as of december 16 , 1985 .

emphasizing that it still owned the slots , however , dot randomly assigned each slot a priority number and reserved the right to withdraw slots from the incumbents at any time .

in august 1990 , we reported that a few established carriers had built upon the favorable positions they inherited as a result of grandfathering to such an extent that they could limit access to routes beginning or ending at any of the slot - controlled airports .

in october 1996 , we reported that this level of control over slots by a few established airlines had increased even further ( see app .

i ) .

as a result , little new entry has occurred at these airports , which are crucial to establishing new service in the heavily traveled eastern and midwestern markets .

recognizing the need for new entry at the slot - controlled airports , the congress in 1994 created an exemption provision to allow for entry at o'hare , laguardia , and kennedy in cases where dot “finds it to be in the public interest and the circumstances to be exceptional.” however , the exemption authority , which in effect allows dot to issue new slots , has resulted in little new entry because dot has interpreted the “exceptional circumstances” criterion very narrowly .

dot has only approved applications to provide service in markets not receiving nonstop service , even if the new service would result in substantial competitive benefits .

we found no congressional guidance , however , to support this interpretation .

as a result , we suggested in our october 1996 report that the congress may wish to revise the extraordinary circumstance provision so that consideration of competitive benefits is a key criterion .

nevertheless , we indicated that action by the congress would be needed only if dot did not act .

in our 1990 report , we had suggested several options to dot aimed at promoting entry at the slot - controlled airports .

these options included keeping the buy / sell rule but periodically withdrawing a portion of slots that were grandfathered to the major incumbents and reallocating them by lottery .

because dot had not acted on any of our suggestions and the situation had continued to worsen , we recommended in our october 1996 report that dot hold periodic slot lotteries .

at laguardia and national airports , perimeter rules prohibit incoming and outgoing flights that exceed 1,500 and 1,250 miles , respectively .

the perimeter rules are designed to promote kennedy and dulles airports as the long - haul airports for the new york and washington metropolitan areas .

however , the rules limit the ability of airlines based in the west to compete because those airlines are not allowed to serve laguardia and national — airports that are generally preferred by more lucrative business travelers — from markets where they are strongest .

for example , the rules keep the second largest airline started after deregulation — america west — from serving those airports from its hub in phoenix .

by contrast , because of their proximity to laguardia and national , each of the seven largest established carriers is able to serve those airports from their principal hubs .

while the limit at laguardia was established by the port authority of new york & new jersey , national's perimeter rule is federal law .

thus , we suggested that the congress consider granting dot the authority to allow exemptions to the perimeter rule at national when proposed service will substantially increase competition .

we did not recommend that the rule be abolished because removing it could have unintended negative consequences , such as reducing the amount of service to smaller communities in the northeast and southeast .

this could happen if major slot holders at national shift their service from smaller communities to take advantage of more profitable , longer - haul routes .

as a result , we concluded that a more prudent course to increasing competition at national would be to examine proposed new services on a case by case basis .

opportunities for establishing new or expanded service also continue to be limited at other airports by restrictive gate leases .

these leases permit an airline exclusive rights to use most of an airport's gates over a long period of time , commonly 20 years .

such long - term , exclusive - use gate leases prevent nonincumbents from securing necessary airport facilities on equal terms with incumbent airlines .

to gain access to an airport in which most gates are exclusively leased , a nonincumbent must sublet gates from the incumbent airlines — often at non - preferred times and at a higher cost than the incumbent .

since our 1990 report , some airports , such as los angeles international , have attempted to regain more control of their facilities by signing less restrictive , shorter - term leases once the exclusive - use leases expired .

nevertheless , our 1996 report identified several airports in which entry was limited because most of the gates were under long - term , exclusive use leases with one airline .

although the development , maintenance , and expansion of airport facilities is essentially a local responsibility , most airports are operated under federal restrictions that are tied to the receipt of federal grant money from faa .

in our 1990 report , we suggested that one way to alleviate the barrier created by exclusive - use gate leases would be for faa to add a grant restriction that ensures that some gates at an airport would be available to nonincumbents .

because many airports have taken steps since then to sign less restrictive gate leases , we concluded in our 1996 report that such a broad grant restriction was not necessary .

however , to address the remaining problem areas , we recommended that when disbursing airport improvement grant monies , faa give priority to those airports that do not lease the vast majority of their gates to one airline under long - term , exclusive - use terms .

figure 1 shows the six gate - constrained airports that we identified and the four slot - controlled airports .

all of them are located in the east or upper midwest , and as a result , affect competition throughout those regions .

in 1995 , these 10 airports accounted for approximately 22 percent of the nation's 517 million scheduled passenger enplanements .

even where airport access is not a problem , airlines sometimes choose not to enter new markets because certain marketing strategies of incumbent airlines make it extremely difficult for them to attract traffic .

taken together , these strategies have created strong loyalties among passengers and travel agents and have made it much more difficult for competing airlines to enter new markets .

in particular , they deter new as well as established airlines from entering those markets where an established airline is dominant .

two strategies in particular — booking incentives for travel agents and frequent flier plans — are targeted at business flyers , who represent the most profitable segment of the industry , and encourage them to use the dominant carrier in each market .

because about 90 percent of business travel is booked through travel agencies , airlines strive to influence the agencies' booking patterns by offering special bonus commissions as a reward for booking a targeted proportion of passengers on their airline .

our discussions with representatives of the nation's largest travel agencies confirmed the importance of these booking incentives .

for example , a senior travel agency executive told us that when one established airline attempted to enter a number of markets dominated by another established airline , the nonincumbent complained that the travel agency was not booking passengers on its flights in those markets .

the travel agency , according to the executive , told the nonincumbent that it could not support it in those markets because the agency had an incentive agreement with the incumbent airline involving those markets .

as a result , the nonincumbent later pulled out of those markets .

similarly , frequent flier programs solidify the dominant carrier's position in a market .

since their inception in the early 1980s , these programs have become an increasingly effective tool to encourage customers' loyalty to a particular airline .

the travel agencies with whom we spoke noted that business travelers often request to fly only on the airline with which they have a frequent flier account .

as such , entry by new and established airlines alike into a market dominated by one carrier is very difficult , particularly since a potential entrant must announce its schedule and fares well in advance of beginning service , thus giving the incumbent an opportunity to adjust its marketing strategies .

in many cases , we found that airlines have chosen not to enter , or quickly exit , markets where they do not believe they can overcome the combined effect of booking incentives and frequent flier programs and attract a sufficient amount of business traffic .

in our 1996 report , we found that the effect of these marketing strategies tends to be the greatest — and fares the highest — in markets where the dominant carrier's position is protected by operating barriers .

overall , fares were 31 percent higher in 1995 at the 10 airports affected by the operating barriers than at the other 33 airports that comprise faa's large hub classification .

moreover , the highest fares were at charlotte , cincinnati , pittsburgh , and minneapolis — markets where a single airline accounts for over 75 percent of passengers and operating barriers persist .

however , we also noted that the marketing strategies produced consumer benefits , such as free frequent flier trips , and concluded that short of an outright ban , few policy options existed that would mitigate the marketing strategies' negative impact on new entry .

in its january 1997 response to our report , dot stated that it shared our concerns that barriers to entry limit competition in the airline industry .

the agency indicated that it would include competitive benefits as a factor when determining whether to grant slots to new entrants under the exceptional circumstances criterion .

while this is a positive step , additional action will likely be needed because the number of new slots that dot can grant is very limited .

recognizing this , dot committed to giving careful consideration to our recommendation that it hold periodic slot lotteries .

dot also agreed with our position that action may be needed at some airports to ensure that nonincumbents are able to obtain competitive access to gates .

however , dot did not concur with our recommendation that faa make an airport's efforts to have gates available to nonincumbents a factor in its decisions on awarding federal grants to airports .

according to dot , the number of airports that we identified as presenting gate access problems is sufficiently small that the agency would prefer to address those problems on a case by case basis .

the agency emphasized that in cases where incumbent airlines are alleged to have used their contractual arrangements with local airport authorities to block new entry , the agency will investigate to determine whether the behavior constituted an unfair or deceptive practice or an unfair method of competition .

if so , the agency noted , it will take appropriate action .

finally , dot expressed concern about potentially overly aggressive attempts by some established carriers to thwart new entry .

according to dot officials , since our report , several smaller carriers have complained to dot that larger carriers are employing anticompetitive practices , such as predatory pricing — the practice of setting fares below marginal cost in an effort to drive competitors out of markets .

according to dot officials , the agency has expressed its concern to the established carriers involved and has notified them that it is investigating the allegations .

mr. chairman , this concludes our prepared statement .

we would be glad to respond to any questions that you or any member of the subcommittee may have .

airline deregulation: barriers to entry continue to limit competition in several key domestic markets ( gao / rced - 97-4 , oct. 18 , 1996 ) .

changes in airfares , service , and safety since airline deregulation ( gao / t - rced - 96-126 , apr .

25 , 1996 ) .

airline deregulation: changes in airfares , service , and safety at small , medium - sized , and large communities ( gao / rced - 96-79 , apr .

19 , 1996 ) .

airline competition: essential air service slots at o'hare international airport ( gao / rced - 94-118fs , mar .

4 , 1994 ) .

airline competition: higher fares and less competition continue at concentrated airports ( gao / rced - 93-171 , july 15 , 1993 ) .

airline competition: options for addressing financial and competition problems , testimony before the national commission to ensure a strong competitive airline industry ( gao / t - rced - 93-52 , june 1 , 1993 ) .

computer reservation systems: action needed to better monitor the crs industry and eliminate crs biases ( gao / rced - 92-130 , mar .

20 , 1992 ) .

airline competition: effects of airline market concentration and barriers to entry on airfares ( gao / rced - 91-101 , apr .

26 , 1991 ) .

airline competition: weak financial structure threatens competition ( gao / rced - 91-110 , apr .

15 , 1991 ) .

airline competition: fares and concentration at small - city airports ( gao / rced - 91-51 , jan. 18 , 1991 ) .

airline deregulation: trends in airfares at airports in small and medium - sized communities ( gao / rced - 91-13 , nov. 8 , 1990 ) .

airline competition: industry operating and marketing practices limit market entry ( gao / rced - 90-147 , aug. 29 , 1990 ) .

airline competition: higher fares and reduced competition at concentrated airports ( gao / rced - 90-102 , july 11 , 1990 ) .

airline deregulation: barriers to competition in the airline industry ( gao / t - rced - 89-65 , sept. 20 , 1989 ) .

airline competition: dot's implementation of airline regulatory authority ( gao / rced - 89-93 , june 28 , 1989 ) .

airline service: changes at major montana airports since deregulation ( gao / rced - 89-141fs , may 24 , 1989 ) .

airline competition: fare and service changes at st. louis since the twa - ozark merger ( gao / rced - 88-217br , sept. 21 , 1988 ) .

competition in the airline computerized reservation systems ( gao / t - rced - 88-62 , sept. 14 , 1988 ) .

airline competition: impact of computerized reservation systems ( gao / rced - 86-74 , may 9 , 1986 ) .

airline takeoff and landing slots: department of transportation's slot allocation rule ( gao / rced - 86-92 , jan. 31 , 1986 ) .

deregulation: increased competition is making airlines more efficient and responsive to consumers ( gao / rced - 86-26 , nov. 6 , 1985 ) .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

