we are pleased to be here today to summarize our past work on concession issues and discuss the need for concession reform .

my remarks today are based on over 30 reports and testimonies we have issued on concessions over the past 20 years — much of which has focused on the concession activities at the national park service .

our most recent report on concessions , which we issued in april 1996 , discussed the rates of returns from concessioners operating in civilian agencies throughout the federal government .

this report provided a comparison of the park service's concessions programs with those of other federal agencies .

the findings of that report as well as the others continues to demonstrate the need for concessions reform in the park service as well as in other land management agencies .

in summary , our work has shown the following: concession activities on federal lands is a large industry that generates billions of dollars .

our most recent work showed that over 11,000 concession agreements were managed by civilian agencies throughout the federal government .

concessioners operating under these agreements generated about $2.2 billion in gross revenues .

over 90 percent of concession agreements and the concession gross revenues were from concessioners in the six land management agencies — with many of the largest concessioners operating in the park service .

for agreements that were either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 , concessioners in all of the land management agencies paid the government an average of about 3 percent of their gross revenues .

in the case of the park service , the average return was about 3.5 percent .

in contrast , concessioners in nonland management agencies paid fees of about 9 percent of their gross revenues .

the key factors affecting the rate of return to the government were ( 1 ) whether the fee was established through competition ( 2 ) whether the agency was permitted to retain most of the concessions fees it generated , and ( 3 ) whether an incumbent concessioner had a preferential right in renewing its concession agreement with the government .

throughout the federal government , rates of return from concessioners were higher when established through competition .

in addition , agencies which had authority to retain fees and which did not grant preferential rights of renewal generally obtained higher rates of return to the government from concessioners .

in previous reports , we noted that as the congress considers reforming concessions in the park service , it may want to consider ( 1 ) encouraging greater competition by eliminating preferential rights of renewal and ( 2 ) providing opportunities for the park service to retain at least a portion of concession fees .

in addition , some concession reform proposals have suggested removing possessory interest — the concessioners right to be compensated for facilities constructed or acquired on federal lands .

at issue are the long - term costs of acquiring concessioner - owned facilities relative to the benefits realized by having greater control through government ownership of facilities .

mr. chairman , before i discuss our most recent report on concession issues and the need for concession reform , i would like to note that concessioners play a vital role in enhancing the public's enjoyment of the national parks and other recreation areas .

at the same time , the park service has an obligation to ensure not only that these concessioners provide healthy and safe services to the public , but also that the government receives a fair return for the use of its lands so that the nation's natural and cultural resources can be adequately preserved and enjoyed by future generations .

our work has shown that concession activities on federal lands are a large industry that generates billions of dollars .

in april 1996 , we issued a report on governmentwide concessions activities .

unlike our past work , which examined concession activities within the six land management agencies , this report reviewed concession operations throughout the civilian agencies of the federal government and included concession activities at agencies such as nasa , the u.s .

postal service , the department of justice , and the department of veterans affairs — just to name a few .

in the report , we found that in fiscal year 1994 , there were 11,263 concession agreements managed by 42 different federal agencies .

concessioners operating under these agreements generated about $2.2 billion in revenues , and paid the government about $65 million in fees and about $23 million in other forms of compensation .

the average total rate of return to the government from concessioners that had their concession agreement initiated or extended in fiscal year 1994 was about 3.6 percent of concession revenues .

while 42 different federal agencies have concession agreements , 93 percent of these agreements and revenues are managed by the six land management agencies .

however , in spite of having the largest programs , the rate of return from concessioners operating in the land management agencies is significantly less than the return generated from concessioners in other federal agencies .

we found that for concession agreements that were either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 , the average return to the government from concessions in the land management agencies was about 3 percent — in the case of the park service it was about 3.5 percent .

in contrast , the return from concessions in the other nonland management agencies averaged about 9 percent .

 ( see app .

i for a list of rates of return from concessioners for agreements initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 for each federal agency in our review. ) .

our analysis of rates of return throughout the federal government indicated that there are three key factors that affect the rate of return to the government .

these are ( 1 ) whether the return from a concession agreement was established through a competitive bidding process , ( 2 ) whether the incumbent concessioner had a preferential right of renewal in the award of a follow - on concession agreement , and ( 3 ) whether the agency had the authority to retain a majority of the fees generated from the concession agreement .

our work indicated that when concession agreements are awarded through a competitive process , the rate of return to the federal government was higher .

specifically , for concession agreements initiated during fiscal year 1994 , the return to the government from concession agreements that were competed averaged 5.1 percent of the concessioners' gross revenues .

when competition was not used in establishing concession agreements , the return to the government averaged about 2.0 percent .

while the return to the government is higher for concessions that are competitively selected , very few concessions agreements have fees established through competition — especially among concessions in the land management agencies .

for concession agreements that were entered into during fiscal year 1994 , only 8.6 percent of over 2,100 agreements in the land management agencies were established through competition .

in contrast , for concession agreements in the nonland management agencies , about 96 percent of 101 concession agreements were established through competition during this time period .

another factor affecting the return to the government from concessioners is the existence of preferential rights of renewal .

these rights primarily affect concessioners in the park service .

under the concessions policy act of 1965 , park service concessioners that have performed satisfactorily have a preferential right of renewal when their concession agreements expire .

this preference has generally meant that when a concession agreement expires , an incumbent concessioner has the right to match or better the best competing offer to win the award of the next concession agreement .

this preference tends to put a chilling effect on competition because qualified businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely to go to the incumbent concessioners .

with fewer bidders , there is less competitive pressure to increase the return to the government .

our analysis of park service concession agreements showed that in fiscal year 1994 , new concession agreements that were awarded with a preferential right of renewal resulted in a return to the government of about 3.8 percent .

in contrast , park service concession agreements that were competed in the same year without any preference resulted in an average return to the government of 6.4 percent .

a third factor that affects the rate of return to the government from concessioners is the agencies' authority to retain fees .

our analysis of federal concessions showed that when agencies are permitted to retain over 50 percent of the fees from concessions , the return to the government is over 3 times higher than agencies that are not authorized to retain this level of fees .

in addition , five nonland management agencies that had authority to retain most of their fees managed 5 percent of the concession agreements throughout the government .

these agreements generated about 3 percent of the total revenues from concessioners , but generated 18 percent of the total concession fees .

in contrast , the six land management agencies , which have not had authority to retain concession fees , have over 90 percent of the total concession agreements and concession revenues , but generate only 73 percent of the total concession fees .

thus , our work showed that agencies authorized to retain fees obtained more fees in proportion to their concessioners' revenue than agencies that were not authorized to retain fees .

for over 20 years , we have issued reports and testimonies that highlighted the need for reform of federal concession laws and policies .

our most recent work , which i have just summarized , is further evidence of the need for reform .

based on this body of work , it is our view that any efforts at reforming concessions should consider ( 1 ) encouraging greater competition in the awarding of concession agreements , including eliminating preferential rights of renewal , and ( 2 ) under what circumstances it would be appropriate to provide opportunities for the land management agencies to retain at least a portion of their concession fees .

in addition , some concession reform proposals have suggested removing possessory interest — the right of concessioners in the park service to be compensated for facilities constructed or acquired on federal lands .

at issue are the costs of acquiring concessioner - owned facilities relative to the benefits realized by having greater control through government ownership of facilities .

encouraging greater competition in awarding concession agreements , and eliminating preferential rights of renewal , should be a primary goal of reforming concessions .

using a competitive bid process to award concession agreements has several benefits .

our april 1996 report presents evidence that where there is competition in awarding concession agreements the rate of return to the government is significantly higher .

competition among qualified bidders would also likely result in improving the level or quality of services provided to the public .

finally , using competition to establish fees would eliminate much of the need for elaborate and at times cumbersome fee systems used by the land management agencies .

a significant impediment to competition is preferential rights of renewal granted to park service concessioners by the concessions policy act of 1965 .

thus , in our view , any legislative effort to reform existing concessions law should consider including the elimination of preferential rights of renewal .

our april 1996 report on concessions indicated that when agencies are authorized to retain most of their concession fees , the return to the government from its concessioners is significantly higher .

however , permitting agencies to retain a portion of the fees from concessioners has both costs and benefits .

our work has shown that retaining fees for use in agencies' operations serves as a powerful incentive in managing concessioners .

however , if the congress decides to use increased fees to supplant rather than supplement existing appropriations , this incentive would be diminished .

in addition , our past work in the park service indicated that the agency has a multibillion dollar backlog of unmet maintenance and infrastructure needs .

furthermore , in recent years , the agency has had to cutback on the level of visitor services provided to the public .

one option to help address these issues , which we have raised in the past , might be to provide additional financial resources through fees — including entrance fees , user fees , and concession fees .

while retaining fees will not resolve such problems as multibillion dollar backlogs , it will nonetheless provide some assistance to parks units across the nation .

it is important to note that permitting the land management agencies to retain concession fees is a form of “backdoor” spending authority , and as such raises questions of oversight and accountability .

in addition , earmarking revenues reduces congressional flexibility to shift budget priorities .

furthermore , permitting the land management agencies to retain fees could also raise scoring and compliance issues under the budget enforcement act .

these issues need to be weighed in considering whether to permit the land management agencies to retain fees .

one issue that is frequently discussed as part of park service concession reform is possessory interest — the concessioners right to be compensated for improvements constructed or acquired on federal lands .

possessory interest was established by the concessions policy act of 1965 and is unique to the park service .

bills to reform concessions law have often differed in their treatment of possessory interest .

some proposals have sought to get rid of possessory interests while others would allow it to remain .

there are some costs and benefits of removing possessory interest which i would like to discuss .

bills which have proposed to remove possessory interest have suggested it be done over time .

as existing concession contracts expired , the new contracts would contain language directing the concessioner to depreciate the value of its possessory interest over an extended period of time .

once the possessory interest was fully depreciated , the structure would be owned by the government .

removing possessory interest in concession facilities would provide the park service with greater control over these facilities and would allow greater flexibility in managing concessioners .

for example , when possessory interest is provided for , the park service would have to use appropriations to buy out the possessory interest of a nonperforming concessioner .

if possessory interest were eliminated , the park service could terminate the contract of a nonperforming concessioner without having to use appropriations to acquire concession facilities .

in addition , government ownership of concessions facilities has the potential of expanding competition for concession contracts .

if the concession facilities are government owned , prospective bidders for concession contracts would not be required to expend capital to acquire facilities .

as such , the park service may receive more bids for the award of concession contracts which has the potential of increasing the return to the government .

however , in the near - term , acquiring these facilities could be costly .

if the park service acquired a concession facility during the term of the contract , the fees it received would likely be lower because the concession would probably not give up its ownership interest in a park facility without some form of compensation in return .

this result becomes more significant if , as the administration proposes , concession fees are returned to the parks .

while the park service would gain ownership of the facilities , it would be getting less , and possibly substantially less , in fees during the acquisition period .

in addition , once the park service owns these facilities , it is responsible for maintaining them .

the park service currently has a multibillion dollar backlog of deferred maintenance .

if the concessions' possessory interest is eliminated and the park service acquires additional facilities that need to be maintained , its workload will increase .

while the park service could require the facilities to be maintained as part of a concession contract , such a requirement may lead to some reduction in the fees it receives .

mr. chairman , in recent years , an understanding has emerged that the federal government needs to be run in a more businesslike manner than in the past .

it is clear that agencies such as the park service can learn some lessons about competition and incentives from nonland management agencies .

however , if the congress proceeds with reforming concessions , it should consider ( 1 ) changing existing concessions law to encourage greater competition and eliminating preferential rights of renewal , and ( 2 ) providing opportunities for the park service to retain at least a portion of its concession fees .

this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have .

total ( fees + special accounts ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

