we are pleased to be here to summarize the results of our recent review of the recreational fee demonstration program .

the testimony we are providing today is based on a report we prepared for this committee and others last november .

the report's overall message is clearly positive: the program has provided hundreds of millions of dollars to improve visitor services and address backlogs of unmet needs .

in addition , those who pay the fees are generally supportive of the program , and it has not adversely affected visitation rates .

nonetheless , it is appropriate to focus today on several areas in which changes or improvements may be needed .

these issues are important because the demonstration program is still at a stage where experimentation is encouraged .

most of our observations relate to doing just that — more experimentation to determine what works best .

the four issues i will focus on today involve the following: ( 1 ) ensuring that future revenues can be applied to the agencies' highest priority unmet needs , ( 2 ) coordinating fees between agencies at demonstration sites that are close to each other , ( 3 ) being more innovative in setting fees , and ( 4 ) assessing the effect of fees on specific segments of the population .

before discussing each issue in turn , i will provide some general information from our report about the program's implementation .

the demonstration program gives opportunities to collect new and increased fees to the major agencies that provide the public with recreational opportunities on federal land — the park service , bureau of land management , and fish and wildlife service ( all within the department of the interior ) , and the forest service ( within the department of agriculture ) .

each agency can experiment with new or increased fees at up to 100 sites .

by september 1998 , such fees were in place at 312 sites — 100 administered by the park service , 77 by the fish and wildlife service , 68 by the bureau of land management , and 67 by the forest service .

the four agencies reported that , because of the program , their combined recreational fee revenues have nearly doubled , from about $93 million in fiscal year 1996 ( the last year before the demonstration program was implemented ) to about $180 million in fiscal year 1998 .

the park service collected 80 percent of the fee revenue , the forest service 15 percent , the bureau of land management 3 percent , and the fish and wildlife service about 2 percent .

putting the money to work took some time .

our report , as well as more recent data provided by the agencies , shows that about two - thirds of the fee revenues still remain to be spent as of september 1998 .

this occurred for a variety of reasons , including the time the agencies spent developing financial systems and internal processes for managing and controlling collections and expenditures .

at the time of our review , most expenditures had been used on either repairs and maintenance or on setting up fee collection activities at the sites .

each of the agencies expects to make significant expenditures in fiscal year 1999 .

at the sites we visited , expenditures appeared to be consistent with the purposes authorized in the law .

 ( app .

i lists the demonstration sites we visited , by agency. ) .

now , i would like to discuss several issues where we think improvements can be made to the demonstration program .

the demonstration program required the agencies to spend at least 80 percent of the fee revenues at the site where these revenues were generated .

some demonstration sites are generating so much revenue as to raise questions about their long - term ability to spend these revenues on high - priority items .

by contrast , sites outside the demonstration program , as well as demonstration sites that do not collect much in fee revenues , may have high - priority needs that remain unmet .

as a result , some of the agencies' highest - priority needs may not be addressed .

for many sites in the demonstration program — particularly in the park service — the increased fee revenues equal 20 percent or more of the sites' annual operating budgets .

this extensive new revenue allows such sites to address past unmet needs in maintenance , resource protection , and visitor services .

the park service has set a priority on using fee revenues to address its repair and maintenance backlog .

some sites with high fee revenues may be able to address these needs within a few years .

however , the 80-percent requirement will preclude the agencies from using fee revenues for more pressing needs at other sites .

two of the sites we visited — zion and shenandoah national parks — are examples of how this issue may surface in the near future .

at zion , park officials told us that the park expected to receive so much new fee revenue in fiscal year 1998 ( about $4.5 million ) that the park's operating budget would double .

the park's current plans call for using this additional money to begin a $20 million alternative transportation system .

however , park officials said that if for some reason this particular project did not move forward , they might have difficulty preparing and implementing enough projects to use the available funds in a manner consistent with the program's objectives .

at shenandoah , fee revenues for fiscal year 1998 were expected to be about $2.9 million — enough money , the park superintendent said , to eliminate the park's estimated $15 million repair and maintenance backlog in a few years .

the park service and the department of the interior recognize that certain sites may be able to quickly fix all of the problems that meet the demonstration program's criteria .

the assistant secretary of the interior for policy , management , and budget has testified that setting aside some of the fee revenues for broader agency priorities is important and has cautioned that permanent legislation giving collecting sites a high percentage of the revenues could “create undesirable inequities” within an agency .

we found support for this view among some managers at higher - revenue sites we visited , who supported more flexibility in splitting revenues between sites .

our reviews at individual sites indicate that this is a significant and sensitive issue that involves balancing the most efficient use of the fee revenues against the need to maintain incentives to collect fees at local sites .

our report stated that as the congress decides on the future of the fee demonstration program , it may wish to consider modifying the current requirement .

providing some further flexibility in the spending of fee revenues would give agencies more opportunities to address their highest - priority needs among all of their field units .

at the same time , however , any change in the requirement would need to be done in such a way that ( 1 ) fee - collecting sites would continue to have an incentive to collect fees and ( 2 ) visitors who pay the fees will continue to support the program .

visitor surveys show that putting fees to work where they are collected is a popular idea .

the demonstration program was authorized with the expectation that the four agencies would coordinate their fee collection efforts , both among themselves and with state and local agencies , where it made sense to do so .

during our review , we did find examples of such coordination , with demonstrated benefits for the public .

in utah , for example , where the park service's timpanogos cave national monument is surrounded by a recreation area in the forest service's uinta national forest , the two agencies decided to charge a single entrance fee for both .

such coordination can reduce agencies' operating costs , strengthen resource management activities , and provide more agency personnel to assist visitors .

we also found , however , that agencies were not taking full advantage of this flexibility .

for example , the park service and the fish and wildlife service manage sites with a common border on the same island in maryland and virginia .

the two sites are assateague island national seashore and chincoteague national wildlife refuge .

administratively , the two agencies cooperate on law enforcement matters and run a joint permit program for off - road vehicles , and the park service provides staff to operate and maintain a ranger station and bathing facilities on refuge land .

however , when the agencies selected the two sites for the demonstration program , they decided to charge separate , nonreciprocal $5 per vehicle entrance fees .

officials at the refuge told us that visitors are sometimes confused by this lack of reciprocity .

our report discusses other cases in which greater coordination among the agencies would either improve the service to the public or permit greater efficiency in implementing a fee program .

these cases included ( 1 ) backcountry fees in olympic national park and olympic national forest in washington state , and ( 2 ) a proposed fee at park service and blm lands located in the el malpais area of new mexico .

demonstration sites may be reluctant to coordinate on fees partly because the program's incentives are geared towards increasing their revenues .

by contrast , because joint fee arrangements may potentially reduce revenues to specific sites , there may be a disincentive among these sites to coordinate .

however , at sites such as assateague and chincoteague , the increase in service to the public may be worth a small reduction in revenues .

that is why our report recommends that the agencies perform a site - by - site review of their demonstration sites to identify opportunities for greater coordination .

in commenting on our report , the agencies generally agreed that more can be done in this area .

in addition , there is currently no formal mechanism or entity within these agencies charged with pursuing opportunities for more and better coordination .

as a result , our review showed that coordination among the agencies occurs infrequently .

furthermore , when disputes arise between sites regarding potential coordination opportunities , as we found in el malpais , the issues remain unresolved because no one person or group at the agency or department level gets involved .

in our view , without such a person or group pursuing opportunities for better coordination , this lack of coordination among the fee sites is likely to continue .

the demonstration program also encouraged the four agencies to be innovative in setting and collecting their own fees .

such improvements take two main forms: making it as convenient as possible for visitors to pay , and making fees more equitable .

we found many examples of agencies experimenting with ways to make payment more convenient , including selling entrance passes using machines like automated teller machines , selling hiking permits over the internet , and selling entrance or user permits through vendors such as gas stations , grocery stores , and convenience stores .

however , we found fewer examples of the agencies experimenting with different pricing structures that could make the fees more equitable such as basing fees on ( 1 ) the extent of use , or ( 2 ) whether the visit occurred during a peak visitation period .

most of the experiments with pricing have been done by the forest service or the bureau of land management .

these two agencies have experimented with setting fees that vary on the basis of ( 1 ) how long the visitor will stay or ( 2 ) whether the visit occurs during a peak period ( such as a weekend ) or an off - peak period ( such as midweek or during the off - season ) .

for example , a 3-day visit to a recreational area might cost $3 per car , compared to $10 per car for a 2-week visit .

such pricing has resulted in greater equity to the visitors , in that visitors who use the area for greater lengths of time pay higher fees .

it would appear to have broader applicability in the other agencies as well .

by contrast , the park service has done little to experiment with different pricing structures .

visitors generally pay the same fee whether they are visiting during a peak period ( such as a weekend in the summer ) or an off - peak period ( such as midweek during the winter ) , or whether they are staying for several hours or several days .

a more innovative fee system would make fees more equitable for visitors and might change visitation patterns somewhat to enhance economic efficiency and reduce overcrowding and its effects on parks' resources .

furthermore , according to the four agencies , reducing visitation during peak periods can lower the costs of operating recreation sites by reducing ( 1 ) the staff needed to operate a site , ( 2 ) the size of facilities , ( 3 ) the need for maintenance and future capital investments , and ( 4 ) the extent of damage to a site's resources .

because it was one of the goals of the program , and because it could result in more equitable fees to the public , our report recommends that two agencies — the park service and fish and wildlife service — look for further opportunities to experiment and innovate with new and existing fees .

visitation appears largely unaffected by the new and increased fees , according to surveys conducted by the four agencies .

in fiscal year 1997 , visitation at the demonstration sites increased overall by 5 percent , compared with 4 percent at other sites .

effects varied somewhat from location to location .

of the 206 sites in the demonstration program in fiscal year 1997 , 58 percent had increases in visitation , 41 percent had decreases , and 1 percent were unchanged .

however , with data from only 1 year , it is difficult to draw definitive conclusions , either about the lack of a negative effect on visitation at most sites or about whether fees had an impact at sites where visitation declined .

agency surveys also found that visitors generally support the program and the amount of the entrance or user fees charged .

for example , a park service survey at 11 demonstration sites found that 83 percent of the respondents either were satisfied with the fees they paid or thought the fees were too low .

as mentioned earlier , surveys indicate that visitors especially endorse the retention of the fees at the sites where they were collected , so that they can be used to fund the sites' needs .

these positive results notwithstanding , some interest groups and recreation fee experts have identified gaps in the survey data .

for example , while the surveys provide information about users in general , they may not be able to address the impact of fees on certain groups , such as backcountry users and low - income users .

these survey efforts may also not provide information about potential visitors who may have chosen not to enter because of the fee .

all four agencies plan additional surveys of visitors .

as the four continue with the demonstration program by adding sites and trying new types of fees or means for collecting them , it is important to continue to assess the support of site visitors and consider addressing identified gaps in their visitor research .

in closing mr. chairman , while our testimony today has focused on improvements that could be made to the fee demonstration program , it is important to remember that this program appears to be working well and meeting many of the law's intended objectives .

the demonstration has brought millions of additional dollars to recreation areas across the country with little or no impact on visitation patterns .

the program has created opportunities for the agencies — particularly the park service — to address , and in some cases resolve , their past unmet repair and maintenance needs .

there are now more than two years remaining in this demonstration program .

these two years represent an opportunity for the agencies to further the goals of the program by making more efforts to coordinate their programs , innovate their fees , and understand the reactions of the visitors .

this concludes my statement .

i would be happy to answer any questions you or the other members of the committee may have .

washington , d.c .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

