we appreciate the opportunity to share our views on the recommendations contained in the recently released report of the white house commission on aviation safety and security .

the commission's 57 recommendations broadly cover safety , security , air traffic control , and disaster response .

as you know , 1996 was a bad year for aviation safety .

last year , 380 people died in air accidents involving large u.s. air carriers , the highest number in 11 years .

the crashes of twa flight 800 off new york and valujet flight 592 in florida accounted for most of those deaths .

although the nation's air transportation system remains the safest in the world and the federal aviation administration ( faa ) the model for other nations , these tragic events have served to raise the congress's , the administration's , the aviation industry's , and the flying public's consciousness of the need to continuously increase the existing margin of safety .

during the past several years , we have reported to the congress on the status of a wide range of programs and initiatives intended to expand that margin of safety .

our testimony this morning , based on this prior work and on an analysis of the commission's recommendations , will focus on the implementation issues relating to three areas addressed by the commission: aviation safety , air traffic control modernization , and aviation security .

we believe that the commission's recommendations are a good start toward an evolutionary process of making real the commission's vision of ensuring greater safety and security for passengers , restructuring the relationships between the government and the industry , and maintaining america's position of global leadership in aviation .

however , key questions remain about how and when the recommendations will be implemented , how much it will cost to implement them , and who will pay the cost .

our message this morning focuses on the challenges that lie ahead in taking the next steps to convert the commission's recommendations from concepts to realities .

the commission made 14 recommendations in the general area of aviation safety .

foremost among these is establishing a national goal to reduce the fatal accident rate by 80 percent within 10 years .

this is a very challenging goal , particularly in the light of the projected increases in the amount of air traffic in the coming decade .

we applaud the commission's adopting such a goal for accident reduction and endorse many of its recommendations for improving safety .

these recommendations include , for example , expanding faa's inspection program to cover not only aging aircraft's structural integrity but also such areas as electrical wiring , fuel lines , and pumps .

a number of these recommendations resonate with safety and efficiency improvements that we and others , including faa , have suggested over the years .

however , we believe that , as faa tries to fundamentally reinvent itself as the commission contemplates through some of its recommendations , faa and the aviation industry will be challenged in three areas: ( 1 ) faa's organizational culture and resource management , ( 2 ) faa's partnerships with the airline industry , and ( 3 ) the costs of and sources of funding to implement the recommendations .

a number of recent studies and the faa itself have pointed to the importance of culture in the agency's operations .

last year , our review of faa's organizational culture found that it had been an underlying cause of the agency's persistent acquisition problems , including substantial cost overruns , lengthy schedule delays , and shortfalls in the performance of its air traffic control modernization program .

furthermore , the lack of continuity in faa's top management , including the administrator and some senior executive positions , has fostered an organizational culture that has tended to avoid accountability , focus on the short term , and resist fundamental improvements in the acquisitions process .

similarly , a 1996 report issued by the aviation foundation and the institute of public policy stated that the recent actions taken to reorganize faa have done nothing to change the long - term structural problems that plague the organization .

the study concluded that faa does not have the characteristics to learn and that its culture does not recognize or serve any client other than itself .

as faa's own 1996 report entitled challenge 2000 points out , it will take several years to overcome the many cultural barriers at faa , determine the skill mix of the workforce of the 21st century , and recruit the necessary talent in a resource - constrained environment .

in the light of these studies' results , we would caution that the organizational and cultural changes envisioned by the commission may require years of concerted effort by all parties concerned .

in connection with resource management , faa's fiscal year 1998 budget request reveals some difficult choices that may have to be made among safety - related programs .

for example , faa proposes increasing its safety inspection workforce by 273 persons while decreasing some programs for airport surface safety , including a program designed to reduce runway incursions .

the national transportation safety board has repeatedly included runway incursions on its annual lists of its “most wanted” critical safety recommendations .

faa's budget request includes a reduction in the runway incursion program from $6 million in fiscal year 1997 to less than $3 million in fiscal year 1998 .

although faa set a goal in 1993 to improve surface safety by reducing runway incursions by 80 percent by the year 2000 from the 1990 high of 281 , the results have been uneven ; there were 186 runway incursions in 1993 and 246 in 1995 .

as was shown by the november 1994 runway collision in st. louis , missouri , between a commercial carrier and a private plane , such incidents can have fatal consequences — 2 people lost their lives .

it is unclear what progress will be made in this area , given the proposed budget cuts .

similarly , we have reported since 1987 that the availability of complete , accurate , and reliable faa data is critical to expanding the margin of safety .

however , funding for faa's national aviation safety data analysis center , a facility designed to enhance aviation safety by the rigorous analysis of integrated data from many aviation - related databases , is slated to be reduced from $3.7 million in fiscal year 1997 to $2 million in fiscal year 1998 .

the commission's report stresses that safety improvements cannot depend solely on faa's hands - on inspections but must also rely on partnerships with the aviation industry in such areas as self - monitoring and certification .

several programs for the airlines' self - disclosure of safety problems have already contributed to identifying and resolving some of these types of problems .

for example , one airline's program for reporting pilot events or observations — a joint effort by the airline , the pilot union , and faa — has identified safety - related problems , the vast majority of which would not have been detected by relying solely on faa surveillance .

the discovery of these problems has resulted in safety improvements to aircraft , to the procedures followed by flight crews , and to air traffic patterns .

as the commission has recognized , however , such information will not be provided if its disclosure threatens jobs or results in punitive actions .

however , faa's role in some broader partnerships with industry has also raised some questions .

for example , faa's cooperative process working with boeing on the 777 aircraft helped enable the manufacturer to meet the planned certification date , but faa was also criticized by some faa engineers and inspectors for providing inadequate testing of the aircraft's design .

in the case of self - disclosure programs , decisions will have to be made on which aviation entities are best suited to such partnership programs , how to monitor these programs and make effective use of the data they offer , how to balance the pressure for public disclosure against the need to protect such information , and how to standardize and share such information across the aviation industry .

with broader cooperation between faa and the aviation industry , the congress and faa need to be on guard that the movement toward partnerships does not compromise the agency's principal role as the industry's regulator .

finally , it is important to point out that the costs associated with achieving the accident reduction goal and who should pay for these costs have not yet been determined .

in accordance with the commission's call for more government - industry partnerships , government , the industry , and the traveling public would likely share in these costs .

for example , faa's partnership programs involve significant costs for both the agency and the industry .

in the case of equipping the cargo holds of passenger aircraft with smoke detectors , the cost would fall initially on the industry , while the costs associated with the recommendation that children under the age of 2 be required to have their own seats on airplanes would fall more directly on the traveling public .

regardless of who bears the cost of the proposed improvements , the commission has correctly recognized that additional safety improvements may sometimes be difficult to justify under the benefit - cost criteria applied to regulatory activities .

the commission recommended that cost not always be the determining factor or basis for deciding whether to put new aviation safety and security rules into effect .

specifically , the commission notes that the potential reduction in the fatal accident rate merits a careful weighing of the options for improving safety in terms of the benefits that go beyond those traditionally considered in benefit - cost analyses .

however , we also believe that it is important to recognize that the recommendation ( 1 ) represents a significant departure from traditional processes , ( 2 ) could result in significant cost increases for relatively modest increases in the safety margin , and ( 3 ) could rest on a limited empirical justification .

in effect , this recommendation may increase the number of instances in which the primary factor determining whether or not to go forward with a safety or security improvement is what might be referred to as a public policy imperative rather than the result of a benefit - cost analysis .

one instance of such a decision is the commission's recommendation to eliminate the exemption in the federal aviation regulations that allows children under 2 to travel without the benefit of an faa - approved restraint .

the commission also reviewed the modernization of the air traffic control ( atc ) system .

faa is in the midst of a $34 billion dollar , mission - critical capital investment program to modernize aging atc equipment .

this program includes over 100 projects involving new radars , automated data processing , and navigation , surveillance , and communications equipment .

we believe this modernization is also important for attaining the next level of safety by replacing aging equipment and providing controllers and pilots with enhanced communication and better information .

recognizing that new technology , such as satellite - based navigation and new computers in atc facilities and in aircraft cockpits , offers tremendous advances in safety , efficiency , and cost - effectiveness for users of the atc system and for faa , the commission recommended accelerating the deployment of this new technology .

according to faa's current plan , many of these elements would not be in place until the year 2012 and beyond .

however , the commission has recommended that these technologies be in place and operational by the year 2005 — 7 years ahead of faa's planned schedule .

the commission's goal is commendable , but given faa's past problems in developing new atc technology and the technical challenges that lie ahead , there is little evidence that this goal can be achieved .

we have chronicled faa's efforts to modernize the air traffic control system for the past decade .

because of the modernization effort's size , complexity , cost , and past problems , we designated it as a high - risk information technology initiative in 1995 and again in 1997 .

many of faa's modernization projects have been plagued by cost - overruns , schedule delays , and shortfalls in performance that have delayed important safety and efficiency benefits .

we reported last year that the agency's culture was an underlying cause of faa's acquisition problems .

faa's acquisitions were impaired because employees acted in ways that did not reflect a strong commitment to , among other things , the focus on and the accountability to the modernization mission .

more recently , we have identified other important factors that have contributed to faa's difficulty in modernizing the atc system .

for example , faa's lack of effective cost - estimating and - accounting practices forces it to make billion - dollar investment decisions without reliable information .

also , the absence of a complete systems architecture , or overall blueprint , to guide the development and evolution of the many interrelated atc systems forces faa to spend time and money to overcome system incompatibilities .

we agree with the commission's recommendations to integrate the airports' capacity needs into the atc modernization effort and to enhance the accuracy , availability , and reliability of the global positioning system .

however , we have two concerns about accelerating the entire modernization effort that focus on the complexities of the technology and the integrity of faa's acquisition process .

first , the complexity of developing and acquiring new atc technology — both hardware and software — must be recognized .

the commission contends that new atc technology to meet faa's requirements is available “off - the - shelf.” however , faa has found that significant additional development efforts have been needed to meet the agency's requirements for virtually all major acquisitions over the past decade .

more recently , two new major contracts for systems — the standard terminal automation replacement system and the wide area augmentation system — called for considerable development efforts .

second , requiring faa to spend at an accelerated rate could prove to be inconsistent with the principles of the agency's new acquisition management system , established on april 1 , 1996 , in response to the legislation freeing it from most federal procurement laws and regulations .

faa's acquisition management system calls for faa to go through a disciplined process of ( 1 ) defining its mission needs , ( 2 ) analyzing alternative technological and operational approaches to meeting those needs , and ( 3 ) selecting only the most cost - effective solutions .

until faa goes through this analytical and decision - making process , it is premature to predict what new technology faa should acquire .

for example , faa itself points out that while satellite communications that link the communication and navigation functions offer tremendous potential benefits , the technology is not yet mature enough for civil aviation — significant development is needed to determine the requirements and operational concepts of the technology .

in this particular case , accelerating the atc modernization too much could increase the risk that faa will make poor investment decisions .

overall , our message in this area is one of caution — accelerating the entire modernization effort will have to overcome a long history of problems that faa's new acquisition management system was designed to address and a number of obstacles .

aviation security is another component of ensuring the safety of passengers .

it rests on a careful mix of intelligence information , procedures , technology , and security personnel .

the commission strongly presented aviation security as a national security priority and recommended that the federal government commit greater resources to improving it .

many of the commission's 31 recommendations on security are similar to those that we have made in previous reports .

for example , the commission urged faa to deploy commercially available systems for detecting explosives in checked baggage at u.s. airports while also continuing to develop , evaluate , and certify such equipment .

similarly , the commission echoed our recommendation that the government and the industry focus their safety and security research on the human factors associated with using new devices , especially on how operators will work with new technology .

the committee's recommendations address a number of long - standing vulnerabilities in the nation's air transportation system , such as ( 1 ) the screening of checked and carry - on baggage , mail , and cargo and ( 2 ) unauthorized individuals gaining access to an airport's critical areas .

many of the 20 initial security recommendations that the commission made on september 9 , 1996 , are already being implemented by the airlines or by government agencies .

we found , however , that in the past faa has had difficulty in meeting some of the time frames for implementing the safety improvements recommended by gao and the department of transportation ( dot ) inspector general .

similarly , in the security area , faa has also had problems meeting the implementation time frames .

for example , faa is just beginning to purchase explosives - detection systems to deploy at u.s. airports , although the aviation security improvement act of 1990 set an ambitious goal for faa to have such equipment in place by november 1993 .

this delay was due primarily to the technical problems slowing the development and approval of the explosives - detection devices .

but we also found that faa did not develop an implementation strategy to set milestones and realistic expectations or to identify the resources to guide the implementation efforts .

it is important that faa sustain the momentum generated by the commission's report and move forward systematically to implement its recommendations .

finally , although the commission concluded that many of its proposals will require additional funding , it did not specifically recommend funding levels for new security initiatives over the long term .

instead , the commission recommended that the federal government devote at least $100 million annually to meet security capital requirements — leaving the decision on how to fund the remaining security costs to the national civil aviation review commission .

the national civil aviation review commission is charged with looking at faa funding issues , and we do not want to preempt its report and recommendations .

but , for example , the $144.2 million appropriated by the congress in 1997 for new security technology represents a fraction of the estimated billions of dollars required to enhance the security of air travel .

to improve aviation security , the congress , the administration , and the aviation industry need to agree on what to do and who will pay for it — and then to take action .

in closing , mr. chairman , we face a turning point .

the public's concern about aviation safety and security has been heightened .

the congress and the administration have a renewed commitment to addressing this urgent national concern .

the commission's work is a good start toward an evolutionary process of reaching agreement on the goals and steps to improve aviation safety and security .

to guide the implementation of the commission's recommendations , dot and faa will need a comprehensive strategy that includes ( 1 ) clear goals and objectives , ( 2 ) measurable performance criteria to assess how the goals and objectives are being met , and ( 3 ) a monitoring , evaluation , and reporting system to periodically evaluate the implementation .

this strategy could serve as a mechanism to track progress and establish the basis for determining funding trade - offs and priorities .

in addition , successful implementation will require strong , stable leadership at dot and at faa .

although several complex questions remain unanswered , we hope that the commission's work can serve as a catalyst for change and a strengthened commitment to resolving these challenges to improving safety .

this concludes my prepared statement .

we would be glad to respond to any questions that you and members of the committee might have .

the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free .

additional copies are $2 each .

orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .

visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .

orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent .

u.s. general accounting office p.o .

box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .

nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .

each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .

to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .

a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .

