this report examines how ( 1 ) u.s. basel iii capital may affect u.s. banking organizations , including smaller banking organizations , and ( 2 ) implementation of basel iii's capital and other standards by different jurisdictions may affect the ability of u.s. banking organizations to compete internationally .
because of capital's role in absorbing losses , promoting confidence , and protecting depositors , federal banking regulations require banking organizations to maintain adequate capital , and regulators set minimum capital levels to help ensure that institutions do so .
the 2007-2009 financial crisis revealed that many banking organizations lacked capital of sufficient quality and quantity to absorb substantial capital reassures an institution's depositors , creditors , and losses.counterparties that unanticipated losses or decreased earnings will not impair the institution's ability to protect the savings of depositors , repay creditors , or fulfill their obligations to counterparties .
in response to the crisis , banking regulators around the world moved to strengthen requirements for capital adequacy .
in the united states , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( dodd - frank act ) introduced , among other things , new capital requirements for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies .
to assess how the u.s. basel iii capital regulation may impact u.s. banking organizations , including smaller organizations , we used data from the consolidated financial statements for holding companies – form fr y - 9c ( y - 9c ) and from the consolidated reports of condition and income ( call reports ) as of march 31 , 2014 , to estimate ( 1 ) the number of bank holding companies and depository institutions with capital ratios greater than or equal to basel iii minimum capital ratios ; ( 2 ) the amount of capital bank holding companies and depository institutions would need to meet the u.s. basel iii minimum capital requirements ; and ( 3 ) the change in funding costs for bank holding companies and depository institutions associated with the amount of capital they would need to meet the minimum capital requirements .
they also said that the eu has been adopting similar stress tests for eu banks .
for the treasury's office of comptroller of the currency and the federal reserve board: regulatory capital rules: regulatory capital , implementation of basel iii , capital adequacy , tradition provisions , prompt corrective action , standardized approach for risk - weighted assets , market discipline and disclosure requirements , advanced approaches risk - based capital rule , and market risk capital rule ; final rule , 78 fed .
62018 ( oct. 11 , 2013 ) and for the federal deposit insurance corporation: regulatory capital rules: regulatory capital , implementation of basel iii , capital adequacy , tradition provisions , prompt corrective action , standardized approach for risk - weighted assets , market discipline and disclosure requirements , advanced approaches risk - based capital rule , and market risk capital rule ; interim final rule , 78 fed .
some market participants we interviewed ( eight community banks and 10 g - sibs ) generally expected the u.s. capital requirements to increase compliance costs but have a limited effect on the cost and availability of credit .