at the international level , in december 2010 the basel committee on banking supervision ( basel committee ) issued the basel iii framework — a comprehensive set of reforms to strengthen global capital and liquidity standards — with the goal of promoting a more resilient banking sector . 55340 ( september 10 , 2013 ) . banking organizations in most other industrialized countries are subject to the basel ii capital standards . the vast majority of banks and bank holding companies already would likely be able to meet the new minimum capital requirements and capital conservation buffer at the fully phased - in levels required by 2019 . some market participants we interviewed ( eight community banks and 10 g - sibs ) generally expected the u.s. capital requirements to increase compliance costs but have a limited effect on the cost and availability of credit . quantity of loans . in this case , lending rates would increase by less than the amount that funding costs increase . according to officials from all eight community banks we interviewed , they did not anticipate any difficulties in meeting the u.s. basel iii capital requirements but expect to incur additional compliance costs . more specifically , two g - sibs said the capital requirements will have some effect on the mortgage market , but one also noted that other factors may have a greater effect on the market ( because it is a highly competitive market ) . differences in regulatory capital requirements across jurisdictions could affect competition between internationally active banks . at the same time , there are limitations to full harmonization . in addition to the risk - based capital standards , the basel committee monitors implementation of the additional loss absorbency requirements for g - sibs and domestic systemically important banks , liquidity coverage basel committee members generally reported ratio , and leverage ratio.that they have not yet adopted regulations to implement these requirements . the basel committee's assessments of basel iii implementation found that the jurisdictions reviewed to date have adopted rules generally consistent with the basel iii standards but identified some inconsistencies in regulator - approved bank models across countries . the basel capital standards have no legal force ; rather , the basel committee members developed and agreed to the standards , with the expectation that each member will implement them . if basel iii regulations are more stringent in the united states than in other countries , internationally active u.s. banks could be required to hold higher levels of regulatory capital than their foreign counterparts , and banks and some law firms have noted that this could potentially put internationally active u.s. banks at a competitive disadvantage . although basel iii implementation is ongoing and will not be completed for years , some banks , regulators , and law firms ( in publications we reviewed ) have identified a number of implementation differences between jurisdictions that may create competitive disparities . while differences exist in the implementation of basel iii between jurisdictions , the extent to which these differences collectively will affect competition among internationally active banks is unclear . in addition to regulatory capital requirements , other factors can affect the competitive position of internationally active banks , such as differences in accounting treatment , cost of capital , tax rules , and other regulations from one country to another . we provided a draft of this report to fdic , federal reserve , and occ for their review and comment . fdic , the federal reserve , and occ provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . to assess how the u.s. basel iii capital regulation may impact u.s. banking organizations , including smaller organizations , we used data from the consolidated financial statements for holding companies — form fr y - 9c ( y - 9cs ) and from the consolidated reports of condition and income ( call reports ) as of march 31 , 2014 , to estimate ( 1 ) the number of bank holding companies and depository institutions with capital ratios that are greater than or equal to basel iii minimum capital ratios ; ( 2 ) the amount of capital bank holding companies and depository institutions would need to take actions to meet the u.s. basel iii minimum capital requirements ; and ( 3 ) the change in funding costs for bank holding companies and depository institutions associated with the amount of capital they would need to meet the minimum capital standards . 9 , no .