the electrical grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems that bring power to end - use customers . the `` grid '' also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and power companies in different states and regions of the united states . however , with changes in federal law , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system , accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy among regions of the united states . the modernization of the grid to accommodate today 's more complex power flows , serve reliability needs , and meet future projected uses is leading to the incorporation of electronic intelligence capabilities for power control purposes and operations monitoring . the `` smart grid '' is the name given to this evolving intelligent electric power network . the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) describes the smart grid as `` an intelligent electricity grid — one that uses digital communications technology , information systems , and automation to detect and react to local changes in usage , improve system operating efficiency , and , in turn , reduce operating costs while maintaining high system reliability . . in 2007 , congress passed the energy independence and security act ( p.l . 110-140 ) . title xiii of the act described characteristics of the smart grid and directed doe to establish a smart grid investment matching grant ( sgig ) program to help support the modernization of the nation 's electricity system . in 2014 , doe concluded that the adoption of smart grid technologies was accelerating but at varying rates `` depending largely on decision - making at utility , state , and local levels . . doe noted that the nation 's electricity system is in the midst of `` potentially transformative change , '' with challenges for smart grid deployment remaining with respect to grid - connected renewable and distributed energy sources and adaptability to current and future consumer - oriented applications . costs of deploying the smart grid remains an issue , and study estimates vary . while some doe programs have supported grid modernization , congress has not explicitly appropriated funding for deployment of the smart grid since the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) . in its 2014 study , doe estimated historical and forecast investment in the smart grid as approximately $ 32.5 billion between 2008 and 2017 , averaging $ 3.61 billion annually in the period . if this level of investment remains constant , it would put spending well below levels the electric power research institute ( in 2011 ) and the brattle group ( in 2008 ) estimated were needed to fully build the smart grid by approximately 2030. from 2010 to 2015 , $ 3.4 billion in sgig grants supported 99 projects resulting in $ 8 billion in grid modernization . congress could provide funding to help bridge the funding gap if it chooses to accelerate adoption of the smart grid . a number of near - term trends — including electric vehicles , environmental concerns , and the ability of customers to take advantage of real - time pricing programs to reduce consumer cost and energy demand — would benefit from investments in smart grid enabled technologies . while concerns such as cybersecurity and privacy exist , most electric utilities appear to view smart grid systems positively . costs could be reduced and system resiliency improved by further integration of automated switches and sensors , even considering the cost of a more cybersecure environment . but with the potentially high costs of a formal transition , some see the deployment of the smart grid continuing much the same as it has , with a gradual modernization of the system as older components are replaced .