smart meters have run into cost and performance issues and resistance to the technology ( generally from concerns of some customers over potential health impacts of radio wave emissions ) .
the electrical grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems that bring power to end - use customers .
however , with changes in federal law , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system , accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy among regions of the united states .
the "grid" also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and power companies in different states and regions of the united states .
technical solutions at the transmission and distribution levels ( such as the increased ability to monitor the system for problems and incorporate intermittent renewable energy sources ) can provide some benefits to both utilities and customers ( through passed through savings ) , and the efficiency benefits associated with real - time pricing and demand response enabled by smart - grid technologies can be significant .
present both technical and policy challenges and opportunities for the delivery of energy services .
the modernization of the grid to accommodate today's power flows , serve reliability needs , and meet future projected uses is leading to the incorporation of electronic intelligence capabilities for power control purposes and operations monitoring .
the bill would have required doe to develop an energy security plan and to report on smart meter security concerns .
the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) describes the smart grid as "an intelligent electricity grid — one that uses digital communications technology , information systems , and automation to detect and react to local changes in usage , improve system operating efficiency , and , in turn , reduce operating costs while maintaining high system reliability. .
in the 115 th congress , the "distributed energy demonstration act of 2017" ( s. 1874 ) , introduced in september 2017 , would direct the secretary of energy to establish demonstration grant programs related to the smart grid and distributed energy resource technologies that are likely dependent on its deployment .
the legislation included provisions to capitalize on the enabling nature of the smart grid for new energy efficient technologies .
in the 114 th congress , the "north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2015" ( h.r .
the smart grid is viewed as a modernization of the nation's power grid by the edison electric institute ( eei ) , the trade association of the u.s. investor - owned utilities , which serve approximately 68% of u.s. electricity customers .
now , with increasing two - directional power flows ( as illustrated in figure 2 ) , the grid is being augmented with new technologies to manage an evolving system with many potential points for electricity generation , demand response , and energy storage .
8 ) was passed by the house in december 2015 .
while other potential issues exist , most electric utilities appear to view the intelligence and communications capabilities of smart grid systems positively with regard to the potential benefits of smart grid adoption discussed earlier in this report .