the united states is currently experiencing the longest economic expansion in its history .
although short - term forecasts are predicting continued economic expansion , some economists have expressed uncertainty over how long the expansion will continue .
countercyclical fiscal policy refers to short - term tax and spending adjustments to stimulate consumer and business demand in an effort to counteract economic contraction and return the economy to its potential .
however , congress has a range of options it could consider when designing a stimulus package should a recession occur and automatic stabilizers are not sufficient to counteract it .
if the next slowdown is significant , the economy could enter a recession , which is typically characterized by falling output and rising unemployment .
history has shown that economic expansions inevitably give way to economic slowdowns .
countercyclical fiscal policy may help to stabilize the economy when it enters a recession .
effective fiscal stimulus does not always require contemporaneous legislative action by congress .
predicting when the economy may transition from expansion to recession , however , is notoriously difficult , as the ebb and flow of the economy is determined by many different factors , including a number that lie outside the country's borders .
the analysis begins by reviewing the features effective countercyclical fiscal policies are commonly thought to have , and then distinguishes between countercyclical and growth - oriented policies .
there are certain "automatic stabilizers" that work without congressional action to lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens .
as a result , an economic slowdown or recession does not necessarily warrant a policy response .
this report identifies and summarizes options congress may consider in response to a recession .
next , the report summarizes and evaluates potential fiscal policy options that congress could consider .
the report concludes with a brief discussion about enacting fiscal stimulus in the context of the country's long - run budget outlook .
all of the estimates presented below ( and elsewhere ) are based on models that rely on a set of assumptions about how individuals and businesses may react to policy changes , and on assumptions about how the federal reserve may adjust monetary policy to accommodate or to offset a fiscal policy change .
temporary stimulus can help to contain the budgetary impact of tax reductions and spending increases , which , in turn , can increase the effectiveness of the stimulus by mitigating the adverse effect large deficits can have on long - term growth .
the options presented are drawn from those policies considered during the great recession for which estimates of their potential economic impact exist .
timely implementation of fiscal policy is made inherently difficult by three well - known lags: the lag in recognizing a recession , the lag in negotiating and implementing a policy response , and the lag between policy implementation and when the economy is affected .
spending on infrastructure , while believed to have a significant impact on the economy given enough time , can take many months to take effect due to the length of time it takes to plan and complete such projects .
effective fiscal policy in response to recessions of average duration and severity is usually considered to have three general features: it is timely , targeted , and temporary .