the united states is currently experiencing the longest economic expansion in its history . history has shown that economic expansions inevitably give way to economic slowdowns . if the next slowdown is significant , the economy could enter a recession , which is typically characterized by falling output and rising unemployment . predicting when the economy may transition from expansion to recession , however , is notoriously difficult , as the ebb and flow of the economy is determined by many different factors , including a number that lie outside the country's borders . there are certain "automatic stabilizers" that work without congressional action to lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens . however , congress has a range of options it could consider when designing a stimulus package should a recession occur and automatic stabilizers are not sufficient to counteract it . this report identifies and summarizes options congress may consider in response to a recession . the options are drawn from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and moody's analytics , both of which estimated the impact of specific policies or approaches in response to the great recession . while a general approach to stimulating a weakened economy with reduced taxes and increased spending is often advocated , specific policies have different impacts on the economy and differing administrative complexities . cbo's and moody's estimates provide insight into which specific policy options may be most worthwhile to implement during the next downturn . the policy options presented—or variations of them—are ones commonly considered when designing a fiscal stimulus package and are not unique to either cbo or moody's . however , policymakers may consider that the economy has the potential to return to full employment without intervention . as such , one policy option is to allow the economy to correct itself . the united states' recent budget deficits and the country's long - run budget outlook could influence the size of any stimulus package . large and persistent budget deficits can hamper economic growth by lowering the rate of capital formation via reduced national saving , and can potentially offset short - term economic stimulus . at the same time , high levels of debt relative to gdp can constrain a country's borrowing capacity . there are no signs that federal borrowing capacity will be exhausted in the short term . however , congress may consider the consequences of exhausted fiscal space in designing the next potential stimulus package since it would increase both deficits and the debt .