although the united states is currently experiencing its longest economic expansion , history has shown that economic expansions inevitably give way to economic slowdowns . if the next slowdown is significant , the economy could enter a recession , which is typically characterized by falling output and rising unemployment . short - term forecasts are predicting continued economic expansion , but predicting when the economy may transition from expansion to recession is notoriously difficult , as the ebb and flow of the economy is determined by many different factors , including a number that lie outside the country 's borders . this report identifies and summarizes options congress may consider in response to a possible recession . recognizing that the economy has the potential to return to full employment without intervention , one policy option is simply to allow the economy to correct on its own with the support of certain `` automatic stabilizers '' already in place . automatic stabilizers work without congressional action to lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens . examples include the progressive structure of the income tax system and unemployment compensation ( uc ) benefits , among others . congress also has a range of other options it could consider when designing a stimulus package should a recession occur and automatic stabilizers are not sufficient to counteract it . the options presented in this report are drawn from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and moody 's analytics , both of which estimated the impact of specific policies or approaches in response to the great recession . while a general approach to stimulating a weakened economy with reduced taxes and increased spending is often advocated , specific policies have different impacts on the economy and differing administrative complexities . cbo 's and moody 's estimates provide insight into which specific policy options may be most worthwhile to implement during the next downturn . the policy options presented—or variations of them—are ones commonly considered when designing a fiscal stimulus package and are not unique to either cbo or moody 's . the united states ' recent budget deficits and the country 's long - run budget outlook could influence the size of any stimulus package . large and persistent budget deficits can hamper economic growth by lowering the rate of capital formation via reduced national saving , and can potentially offset short - term economic stimulus . at the same time , high levels of debt relative to gross domestic product can constrain a country 's borrowing capacity . there are no signs that federal borrowing capacity will be exhausted in the short term . however , the consequences of exhausted fiscal space may be worth considering in designing the next stimulus package since it would increase both deficits and the debt .