specifically , we obtained the best available information on the ( 1 ) frequency of foodborne illness , ( 2 ) health consequences and economic impacts of foodborne illnesses , and ( 3 ) adequacy of knowledge about foodborne illnesses to develop effective control strategies . between 6.5 million and 81 million cases of foodborne illness and as many as 9,100 related deaths occur each year , according to the estimates provided by several studies conducted over the past 10 years . the table also identifies the data on which these estimates are based . first , the food supply is changing in ways that can promote foodborne illnesses . fourth , bacteria already recognized as sources of foodborne illnesses have found new modes of transmission . finally , according to cdc officials , virulent strains of well - known bacteria have continued to emerge . while foodborne illnesses are often brief and do not require medical treatment , they can also result in more serious illnesses and death . productivity losses included expenses such as lost wages from long - term disabilities and deaths caused by foodborne illnesses . more uniform and comprehensive data on the number and causes of foodborne illnesses could form the basis of more effective control strategies . according to public health and food safety officials , the current voluntary reporting system does not provide sufficient data on the prevalence and sources of foodborne illnesses . the project consists of three parts: a survey of the local population in the five locations and interviews with local health professionals to estimate the number of diarrheal illnesses and determine the number of illnesses for which medical attention was sought and laboratory samples were taken ; a survey of laboratories to determine the microbiological testing procedures and processes used to identify foodborne illnesses and an audit of the participating laboratories' test results to determine what proportion of cases were detected ; and statistical studies to determine , among other things , the risks associated with different foods .