continuing appropriations acts , commonly known as continuing resolutions ( crs ) , have been an integral component of the annual appropriations process for decades .
when congress and the president do not reach final decisions about one or more regular appropriations acts , they often negotiate and enact a cr .
if interim or full - year appropriations are not enacted , a funding gap and government shutdown occur for affected agencies and programs .
an "interim" cr provides agencies with stopgap funding for a period of time until final appropriations decisions are made , or until enactment of another interim cr .
crs have become commonplace in the federal budget process , with crs occurring in some form in all but four years out of a 61-year period from fy1952 to fy2012 .
this report analyzes potential impacts that interim crs might have on agency operations .
it is possible , however , to identify some potential impacts of interim crs prospectively , utilizing several approaches .
two general types of crs are used .
a "full - year" cr , by contrast , provides final funding amounts for the remainder of a fiscal year in lieu of one or more regular appropriations acts .
however , studies of the impacts of interim crs are quite limited aside from mostly anecdotal accounts .
given the nature of budget deliberations and the potential for changes in the budget process to change power relationships among participants , the ways in which the impact of an interim cr may be framed might be viewed as similarly significant .
another issue relates to interim crs as a product of high - stakes negotiation over major issues of fiscal and substantive policy .
an implication of this involvement is that congress typically does not solely determine what the impacts of an interim cr will be , because the president , omb , and agencies may influence the nature and extent of potential impacts .
claims about positive or negative impacts of crs may be used to argue that changes in cr language , budget priorities , or the budget process are necessary .
first , the report discusses how an interim cr's provisions and requirements may impact directly upon an agency , based on what an interim cr explicitly is formulated to do .
furthermore , interim crs are formulated differently from time to time , and may affect highly diverse agencies and programs in varying ways .
the ways in which such claims are framed , however , typically rest on implicit assumptions about what would have happened in the absence of the interim cr ( e.g. , a government shutdown , on one hand , or agreement on final appropriations , on the other ) .
without in - depth analysis of specific circumstances , therefore , it may be difficult , or in many cases impossible , to make generalizable statements about the impacts of interim crs on particular agencies at particular times .
in any case , full - year crs effectively become regular appropriations acts for the fiscal year , complete with the certainty of final funding decisions .
second , the report analyzes office of management and budget ( omb ) and agency documents that have provided guidance or requirements for how an agency should navigate through periods of interim crs .