continuing appropriations acts , commonly known as continuing resolutions ( crs ) , have been an integral component of the annual appropriations process for decades . when congress and the president do not reach final decisions about one or more regular appropriations acts , they often negotiate and enact a cr . two general types of crs are used . an "interim" cr provides agencies with stopgap funding for a period of time until final appropriations decisions are made , or until enactment of another interim cr . a "full - year" cr , by contrast , provides final funding amounts for the remainder of a fiscal year in lieu of one or more regular appropriations acts . if interim or full - year appropriations are not enacted , a funding gap and government shutdown occur for affected agencies and programs . this report analyzes potential impacts that interim crs might have on agency operations . without in - depth analysis of specific circumstances , therefore , it may be difficult , or in many cases impossible , to make generalizable statements about the impacts of interim crs on particular agencies at particular times . second , the report analyzes office of management and budget ( omb ) and agency documents that have provided guidance or requirements for how an agency should navigate through periods of interim crs . an implication of this involvement is that congress typically does not solely determine what the impacts of an interim cr will be , because the president , omb , and agencies may influence the nature and extent of potential impacts . full - year crs occur less frequently than interim crs . in any case , full - year crs effectively become regular appropriations acts for the fiscal year , complete with the certainty of final funding decisions . some related terms also are highlighted , in order to distinguish between interim cr - related provisions and other provisions that sometimes appear in the context of crs . if impacts were viewed in more general categories , an interim cr might be characterized as having several types of potential impacts on the operations of agencies . a potential explanation for the rarity of anomalies is that the granting of too many anomalies would reduce incentives to negotiate seriously and come to final agreement on full - year appropriations . in situations when an agency expects a higher level of funding in an upcoming fiscal year , or if an agency needs authority to undertake new projects or activities in order to achieve a task , the agency could request an anomaly . because agencies and their employees are "in the trenches" implementing and formulating public policy , they may have considerable access to information about the potential impacts of an interim cr . therefore , the extent to which information and views flow from agencies and their personnel to congress about the potential impacts of interim crs , both formally and informally , may vary .