by a vote of 5-4 , the court held that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in 2003 had improperly denied a petition asking the agency to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles under the clean air act ( caa ) .
i n 2007 , the supreme court issued its decision in massachusetts v. epa , its first pronouncement on climate change and still one of the most important environmental law decisions in the past decade .
the supreme court decision did not compel epa to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles , but it did limit the range of options available to the agency so that doing so was its most defensible course of action .
circuit majority had not ruled on the key issue of whether caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) authorizes regulation of ghg emissions .
this report confines itself to the massachusetts v. epa litigation and leaves to other crs reports the numerous epa actions taken as a result of the supreme court decision .
contrary to epa's position , the court said that the caa definition of "air pollutant" was unambiguously broad enough to include ghgs .
the report traces the events leading up to the court's decision , describes the decision itself , notes some general implications , and then comments on the decision's continuing force .
on the merits , he found that epa has authority under section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) to regulate ghg emissions .
accordingly , the court reversed the lower court decision upholding the petition denial .
the availability of state common law claims for reducing ghg emissions remains an open question .
petitioners were 12 states ( california , connecticut , illinois , massachusetts , maine , new jersey , new mexico , new york , oregon , rhode island , vermont , and washington ) ; three cities ( new york , baltimore , and washington , dc ) ; two u.s. territories ( american samoa and northern mariana islands ) ; and several environmental groups .
the holding of massachusetts was used by a 2011 supreme court decision to bar federal common law claims ( such as nuisance ) against entities on the basis of their contribution to climate change .
in that year , 19 environmental and energy organizations petitioned epa to regulate emissions of ghgs ( carbon dioxide [co 2 ] , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) from new motor vehicles .
he further concluded that epa's 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) discretion does not extend to policy considerations , as judge randolph held , but relates exclusively to whether the emissions cause harmful air pollution .
the court's decision left epa with three options for responding to the petition: ( 1 ) find that new motor vehicle ghg emissions may "endanger public health or welfare," the prerequisite to limiting them under section 202 , then issue emission standards ; ( 2 ) find that they do not satisfy that prerequisite , or ( 3 ) decide that climate change science is so uncertain as to preclude making either finding ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) .