i n 2007 , the supreme court issued its decision in massachusetts v. epa , its first pronouncement on climate change and still one of the most important environmental law decisions in the past decade . by a vote of 5-4 , the court held that the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in 2003 had improperly denied a petition asking the agency to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from new motor vehicles under the clean air act ( caa ) . contrary to epa's position , the court said that the caa definition of "air pollutant" was unambiguously broad enough to include ghgs . accordingly , the court reversed the lower court decision upholding the petition denial . this report confines itself to the massachusetts v. epa litigation and leaves to other crs reports the numerous epa actions taken as a result of the supreme court decision . circuit seeking review of the denial . the court's decision left epa with three options for responding to the petition: ( 1 ) find that new motor vehicle ghg emissions may "endanger public health or welfare," the prerequisite to limiting them under section 202 , then issue emission standards ; ( 2 ) find that they do not satisfy that prerequisite , or ( 3 ) decide that climate change science is so uncertain as to preclude making either finding ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) . given the state of climate change science by 2007 , it was widely believed at the time that option ( 1 ) was the only legally defensible one for epa . this is the option that epa took . the massachusetts ruling remains in full effect . its holding that the caa authorizes epa to regulate ghg emissions from new motor vehicles is the governing law , barring supreme court reversal or congressional amendment . so far , the finding of standing in massachusetts generally has not proved helpful to non - state plaintiffs seeking to establish standing in other climate change litigation . the holding of massachusetts was used by a 2011 supreme court decision to bar federal common law claims ( such as nuisance ) against entities on the basis of their contribution to climate change . in 2014 , in utility air regulatory group v. epa ( uarg ) , the supreme court held that epa cannot regulate a power plant under these authorities solely due to its ghg emissions , but affirmed the agency's authority under the caa to regulate ghg emissions from power plants if the source is already regulated for other air pollutants . the massachusetts ruling upholding caa coverage of section 202 ghg emissions contributed to a 2010 litigation settlement that committed epa to establishing new source performance standards ( nspss ) for ghg emissions from new fossil fuel fired power plants , and emission guidelines for existing fossil fuel fired power plants , under caa section 111 . while some amici curiae supporting the challenges to the clean power plan in that litigation object to the "endangerment findings" that epa has issued since massachusetts , the petitioners and intervenors challenging the clean power plan do not dispute or , for the most part , reference the decision . massachusetts may continue to have further reverberations not only in the clean power plan litigation but also in other elements of epa's clean air program , given its discussion of caa terms found not only in the caa sections that epa has used so far to regulate ghgs .