additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . how can the congress express its perspectives and priorities on governmentwide performance goals , especially with respect to areas of fragmentation and overlap ? how can the congress best stimulate development of common performance measures within fragmented mission areas and programs , especially for those that cut across jurisdictions of specific committees ? these questions suggest continuing challenges for the congress as it seeks to address crosscutting performance issues in the context of its current institutions and processes . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the house minority leader and the ranking minority members of your committees ; the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on appropriations , committee on the budget , and committee on governmental affairs ; and other interested members of the congress . we will also send copies to the director , office of management and budget , and will make copies available to others upon request . this role can be particularly important in areas of uncoordinated and fragmented missions . for example , assessing the outcomes of science - related programs can be extremely difficult because a wide range of factors determine if and how a particular research and development project will result in commercial or other benefits , and the challenge of this type of assessment is heightened by the involvement of multiple federal agencies . recently , the research roundtable , a consortium of federal research and development agencies , has been considering the extent to which its member agencies can and should adopt a common approach to measuring performance . the roundtable is one of about 25 interagency groups , many of which were recently formed on an ad hoc basis to discuss common concerns in crosscutting issues , including goal setting and performance measurement . the congress could work with these types of interagency coordinating groups to ensure that congressional data needs are met within any common performance measurement model . moreover , this consultation will also reinforce earlier strategic planning consultations intended to clarify and harmonize missions . for the results act to achieve its objective of improved federal performance and accountability , the performance information made available must be used . of course , different users will have different needs . agency managers should use performance information to ensure that programs meet intended goals , to assess the efficiency of processes , and to promote continuous improvement . the congress needs information on whether and in what respect a program is working well to support its oversight of agencies and their appropriations .