additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . formal risk assessments should be performed for such significant changes . the director of aac also told us that management would perform a risk assessment later in 1999 to comply with va policy . one reason that aac had not formally assessed risks when these significant changes occurred was that the center had not developed a framework for assessing and managing risk on a continuing basis . in march 1999 , the director of aac told us that a risk assessment framework would be developed and added to the aac security handbook . according to the director , this planned risk assessment framework will define the types of changes that require a risk assessment ; specify risk assessment procedures that can be adapted to different indicate who should conduct the assessment , preferably a mix of individuals with knowledge of business operations , security controls , and technical aspects of the computer systems involved ; and describe requirements for documenting the results of the assessment . in addition to assessing risk to identify appropriate controls , it is also important to determine if the controls in place are operating as intended to reduce risk . our may 1998 study of security management best practices found that an effective control evaluation program includes processes for ( 1 ) monitoring compliance with established information system control policies and guidelines , ( 2 ) testing the effectiveness of information system controls , and ( 3 ) improving information system controls based on the results of these activities . aac had not established a program to routinely monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of information system controls . such a program would allow aac to ensure that policies remain appropriate and that controls accomplish their intended purpose . although aac had substantially corrected previously identified computer security weaknesses , we tested additional access and system software controls and found weaknesses that posed risks of unauthorized modification , disclosure , or destruction of financial and sensitive veteran medical and benefit information . these weaknesses included inadequately limiting access of authorized users to sensitive data and programs , maintaining the system software environment , and reviewing network security . several of these weaknesses could have been identified and corrected if aac had been monitoring compliance with established procedures .