additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . problems such as these are long - standing . in 1989 , we recommended that the navy's financial records and navfac's central inventory of real property be reconciled to identify errors and help ensure accuracy . the naval audit service has consistently reported similar problems in its audits of navy dbof financial statements under the cfo act . for example , these audits found that the failure to reconcile navy dbof records and navfac records resulted in a $134 million understatement of real property in navy dbof fiscal year 1992 financial statements . differences were found between these records in fiscal years 1991 and 1994 as well . most recently , in march 1996 , we recommended that the navy and dfas place a high priority on implementing basic required financial controls , including reconciliations of accounts and records . the dod deputy chief financial officer agreed with our recommendation and said that the dod comptroller's november 1995 guidance specifies the roles and responsibilities of dfas and its customers with respect to reconciliations and resolution of discrepancies . additionally , the september 1995 dfas director's guidance addresses dfas's responsibility for performing reconciliations of account balances . the navy's fiscal year 1994 accounting and reporting for plant property were highly unreliable . accurately reporting the navy's plant property account balance is especially important to help ensure the reliability of the consolidated financial statements dod is statutorily required to prepare , beginning with those for fiscal year 1996 . the recommendations we made in march 1996 were directed at avoiding the mistakes made in preparing the navy's fiscal year 1994 consolidated financial reports and overarch many of the basic control weaknesses discussed in this report . these weaknesses underscore the need for the navy and dfas to fully and effectively implement the improvements that we recommended and that are required by the dod comptroller's and the dfas director's recent guidance . additional specific actions are also necessary to improve plant property accounting and reporting . we recommend that the navy assistant secretary for financial management and comptroller and the dfas director require that by september 30 , 1996 , the navy comptroller manual provision that lists the navy's activities engaged in general fund operations and dbof operations be updated and accurately maintained ; the navy and dfas , cleveland center , use this listing as one analytical procedure to help ensure that the plant property account balances reported in the navy's financial reports are complete and include information from only general fund activities ; navy activities and dfas routinely monitor plant property work - in - progress accounts and promptly review and resolve large balances ; navy activities promptly request , and dfas expeditiously provide , information to assist in transferring plant property work - in - progress items to on - hand accounts and in correcting errors ; and navy activities and dfas personnel be trained to identify and resolve work - in - progress and other plant property problems . in written comments on a draft of this report , dod generally concurred with our findings and recommendations .