state has no information security plan . instead , the department's irm strategic and performance management plan includes several pages of text on information security and its implementation . this discussion highlights the development of computer security and privacy plans for each system containing sensitive information , as required by the computer security act . however , when we requested copies of these individual plans , we were told that they could not be located and that even if they were found , they would be virtually useless because they were drafted in the late 1980s , never updated , and are now obsolete . the strategic plan also references other efforts underway within the department , including assessments of various software applications to identify vulnerabilities and evaluations of antivirus software products . however , this discussion is insufficient . it merely lists a set of ad hoc and largely unrelated programs and projects to improve information security . it does not relate these programs to any risk - based analysis of threats to and vulnerabilities of the department's networks or systems . furthermore , this discussion mentions the existence of but does not endorse or discuss planned efforts to implement any key recommendations identified in the internet risk analysis . a companion document to the strategic plan , the department's february 1997 tactical information resources management plan , indicates the lack of emphasis that information security receives . according to this plan , the department should closely monitor and centrally manage all information resource management initiatives that “are critical to the department missions ; will cost more than $1 million through their life cycle ; have schedules exceeding one year ; and cut across organizational lines.” however , the plan acknowledges that “at this time the department has no security projects that meet the criteria” above . in addition , the plan ignores the need for centralized management for information technology projects and , instead , requires individual offices to fund and manage their own security requirements . internet security was the only area in which we found that state's controls were currently adequate . we attempted to gain access to internal state networks by going through and around state's internet gateways or exploiting information servers from the outside via the internet , but we were not able to gain access to state's systems . state's protection in this area is adequate , in part , because the department has limited its use and access to the internet . these policies are deficient in several respects . first , they fail to acknowledge some important security responsibilities within the department . for example , while the security manual details responsibilities of system managers and information systems security officers , it does not address the information security responsibilities of the department's chief information officer ( cio ) . the cio's authority and ability to operate effectively would be enhanced with departmental policy recognition of the legislatively prescribed security responsibilities . state's foreign affairs manual was updated in february 1997 to describe the cio position , but it does not discuss any information security responsibilities . second , the foreign affairs manual does not require and consequently provides no mandate for , or guidance on , the use of risk assessments .