we disagree with dod's comments . as shown in the following discussion , most of our responses to them can be traced to this fundamental disagreement over the role of financial management in supporting the agency's operations . first , with respect to our concern that its plan lacks critical elements relative to asset accountability and control , or to budget formulation , dod stated that the plan was explicitly limited to accounting and finance functions and that the department considers both asset accountability and budget formulation to be outside the scope of accounting and finance functions . dod's response further stated that the department does not perform accountability for its nonfinancial resources through its finance and accounting systems and that to do so would , among other things , require an investment of hundreds of millions , perhaps billions , of dollars in new systems or system changes . moreover , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) in his opening statement stated that the plan “addresses both its financial systems and program feeder systems that originate and provide the majority of the financial source data.” the biennial plan itself explicitly refers to feeder systems and includes initiatives that are intended to address the need for feeder systems to be fully integrated with accounting and finance systems . for example , the plan included information on initiatives to improve cbsx and remis — two systems that provide data on mission critical assets of the army and air force , respectively . because financial information in such systems includes data on units and condition of assets , those feeder systems must ensure data integrity and be easily reconciled with the accounting and finance systems . our concern is that the biennial plan does not explain how the feeder systems will meet accounting and internal control requirements , such as those related to asset accountability and budget formulation . among the specific requirements of the cfo act is that each agency cfo ensure that agency accounting and financial management systems include adequate financial reporting and internal controls . such systems are to comply with applicable principles and standards and provide complete , reliable , consistent , and timely information that is responsive to the agency's financial information needs . in addition , if the plan were limited to a narrow view of accounting and finance functions , it could not be used to meet additional regulatory requirements , as dod intended . for example , ffmia requires agencies to implement and maintain financial management systems that substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements , applicable accounting standards , and the standard general ledger . ffmia defines financial management systems to include the financial systems and financial portions of mixed systems ( feeder systems ) necessary to support financial management . omb reinforced these concepts in its june 1998 federal financial management status report and five - year plan , where it stated a goal of providing high quality financial information on federal government operations which fully supports financial and performance reporting . further details on our scope and methodology are in appendix i . the primary objective of the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 public law ( 101-576 ) is improving the financial management of federal agencies .