that is not always the case . for example , the provisions of the military retirement system are substantially the same as those of the separate coast guard military retirement system , public health service commissioned corps retirement system , and the national oceanic and atmospheric corps retirement system . because the administrators of each plan described some provisions of the plan differently , the fact that the provisions are actually the same may not always be apparent . similarly , the extent of financial and cost information provided by the plans varied . for example , the retirement annuity plan for employees of the army and air force exchange ( exchange service plan ) provides substantially the same benefits as the civil service retirement system , except that exchange service plan benefits are reduced by a “social security offset.” the normal cost reported for the csrs is 25.14 percent of salary , whereas the exchange service plan reported normal cost of 9.81 percent of salary . part of the difference in normal cost may be caused by differing economic assumptions used by the plans' actuaries , but the primary reason for the difference is that employees in the exchange service plan are also covered by social security while csrs employees are not . thus , the offset provision cuts plan benefits and reduces plan costs accordingly . however , in order to compare the total costs of all benefits provided to participants covered by these two programs , additional details would be needed . for example , an erroneous conclusion might result unless the costs of providing social security benefits to exchange service employees were added to the reported plan costs ; similarly , detailed information about the social security benefits to exchange service employees would be required in order to compare the benefits under these programs . the scope of this report did not include analyzing and comparing the provisions of the various plans . however , we have been asked by the chairman of the senate committee on governmental affairs to compare , in detail , the provisions of retirement programs for federal personnel . we will provide each of you a copy of the report on the results of that work when it is completed . we conducted our review from april 1995 through august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on drafts of each plan profile from the applicable plan officials . we incorporated those comments in the plan profiles as appropriate . annual normal cost for an individual for an equal unit of benefits each year increases because the period to the employee's retirement continually shortens and the probability of reaching retirement increases . for a mature employee group , the normal cost would tend to be the same each year as older employees are replaced by younger ones . the actuarial present value of pension benefits attributed by the pension benefit formula to employee service rendered before a specified date and based on service and compensation prior to that date . benefits that are attributable under the provisions of a pension plan to employees' service rendered up to the benefit information date .