2 requirements . staff from gao , omb , and credit agencies are currently working together to develop approaches to improve cash flow estimates . although the basic function of the csm — to discount cash flows to the year of disbursement — is conceptually straightforward , use of the csm can be complex because of the various options available and types of data to be entered . consequently , proper use of the csm requires sufficient , clear guidance from omb on what the csm options are and how best to use them to reflect the characteristics of credit agency loan programs . also , credit agency officials must recognize that use of the csm requires not only adequate knowledge of credit agency loan programs but familiarity with the concepts contained in fcra and sffas no . moreover , given the complexity inherent in developing cash flow spreadsheets and using them with the csm in subsidy calculations , agency management must exercise proper oversight to ensure that cash flow data is of high quality , the csm is used properly , and controls surrounding the preparation of cash flows and the calculation of subsidies are adequate and operating as intended . finally , given the role assigned to it by fcra , omb must oversee agencies' credit reform implementation even though responsibility for preparing cash flows is with the credit agencies . we recently had the opportunity to illustrate the need for adequate oversight by credit agencies and omb . in our july 16 , 1997 , testimony before the house committee on small business , we reported on the estimates of credit subsidy for the small business administration's ( sba ) guaranteed business loan and certified development company programs — more commonly called the “7 ( a ) ” and “504” programs , respectively . we reported on an error in sba's cash flow spreadsheet that we had uncovered in the calculation of the fiscal year 1997 subsidy costs for the 7 ( a ) program . fcra and sffas no . 2 contain several requirements about the budgetary and financial accounting treatment of direct loans and loan guarantees . however , the primary requirement pertinent to the calculation of the subsidy is the definition of cost . fcra and sffas no . 2 define the cost of a direct loan or loan guarantee as the net present value of estimated future cash flows at the time when the loan is disbursed . this calculation incorporates cash flows to and from the government , excluding administrative costs and any incidental effects on governmental receipts or outlays . the csm's calculation of subsidies complies with this definition in that the csm computes a subsidy cost by calculating the net present value of agency - generated cash flows of expected payments to and from the government by discounting these cash flows to the fiscal year when they are disbursed . for loans that disburse in more than 1 year , the csm allocates the cash flows to each disbursement year and discounts the associated cash flows to the appropriate year of disbursement . fcra and sffas no .