this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on these recommendations . you should send your statements to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on governmental reform and oversight within 60 days after the date of this letter . a written statement also must be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made over 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of the treasury and the director of the office of management and budget . we are also sending it to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on appropriations and its subcommittee on treasury and general government ; senate committee on finance and its subcommittee on taxation and irs oversight ; senate committee on governmental affairs ; senate committee on the budget ; house committee on appropriations and its subcommittee on treasury , postal service , and general government ; house committee on ways and means ; house committee on government reform and oversight and its subcommittee on government management , information and technology ; house committee on the budget ; and other interested congressional committees . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9505 or steven j. sebastian , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-9521 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . the following is gao's comment on the internal revenue service's letter dated october 29 , 1998 . these receipts were stored overnight in a locked cabinet . at this district office , access to the cabinet was limited to two people in the unit . the use of unsecured containers to store receipts , or the failure to limit storage container accessibility to employees designated to open such containers , increases the potential for theft . to ensure proper access to and accountability for resources , the comptroller general's standards for internal controls in the federal government specifies that periodic comparisons should be made between resources and records and that the frequency of such comparisons be determined by the vulnerability of the asset . however , at all three district offices we visited , receipts were not recorded in control logs or transmittal sheets until a few hours after receipt or even the following day . additionally , no one reconciled the receipts against the control logs prior to or after overnight storage and prior to submitting them to the district office teller unit or to the service centers for processing . given the weaknesses in securing receipts discussed above , the failure to immediately record receipts in control logs and to reconcile these control logs to receipts on hand decreases the likelihood of the timely detection of theft of receipts . under current practices , incidents of theft may not come to irs' attention until taxpayers receive erroneous default notices or identify anomalies in their cancelled checks or bank statements and contact irs .