for example , the u.s . fish and wildlife service is more recognizable an entity than the various accounts , such as resource management , migratory bird conservation , and sport fish restoration , that make up the agency . in two cases the bureau designation does not correspond with a single entity . revolving funds include public enterprise and trust revolving funds . the federal communications commission's salaries and expenses account had a limitation on spending authority from offsetting collections for fiscal year 1996 . what are the best ways of presenting user fees in a unified budget that will be inclusive and consistent ? finally , recognizing that not all activities are alike , what treatment will provide the most appropriate oversight and control for a particular fee - reliant activity ? fee - reliant agencies face management issues not faced by those that depend primarily on general fund appropriations . agencies' reliance on fees may raise expectations that these agencies will be self - supporting , thereby prompting questions about the applicability of market or business - like principles to their funding and operations . for example , dependence on fees may cause these programs to become more vulnerable to cyclical swings in demand and fee income . this in turn raises questions about how to respond to such downturns in income , such as whether general appropriations should be used to subsidize operations if fees decline . if these agencies are expected to operate in a market environment — especially without an appropriations “safety net” — pressures to provide exemptions from government rules and regulations on procurement and personnel may arise . balancing these with other issues , such as accountability to the congress and the general taxpayer , will be a continuing challenge . increasingly , agencies are being asked to provide greater accountability . where the congress and fee payers agree on priorities , there may be no conflict between oversight and accountability to the congress and accountability to fee payers . however , where congressional and fee payer priorities differ , the agency may be under greater pressure to satisfy the demands of fee payers , particularly if the exchange of fee for service is voluntary . even where there may be agreement in principle that fees should be charged for an activity , there is the possibility of increased conflict between different payers about the allocation among them . moreover , few agencies provide purely business - type services . to the extent that fee - reliant agencies also provide services to the general public and do not receive general fund appropriations , fees may have to be set to subsidize non - fee - related costs and activities , which can prompt further conflict between the fee payers and those receiving these broader benefits . in addition , agencies with some fee - funded activities will have to redefine relationships between fee - funded and appropriated activities . agencies will be faced with the inequities , real or perceived , that different funding sources may create . in addition to any perceived funding imbalances between fee and appropriations supported programs , management challenges can arise from differences in their funding status .