this contract was canceled . as of august 2 , 1996 , ntis officials stated they still had not received formal notification to terminate the contracts identified in the july 17 , 1996 , letter . since these contracts were not canceled shortly after the may 13 , 1996 , letter from ntis to irs , unnecessary rental costs for july and august of about $60,000 have been incurred . if it is determined that these costs are appropriate charges for the cyberfile project , then these costs would also appear subject to ntis' 10 percent management fee . either irs or ntis could have prevented these costs . for example , irs could have clearly documented its understanding of the actions that ntis would take to avoid additional costs . as discussed above , irs clearly instructed ntis to cancel a support services contract and the contract was promptly terminated . on the other hand , ntis could have clearly documented its understanding of irs' desire to retain these contracts much earlier than the july 17 , 1996 , letter . irs did not structure its agreement with ntis to minimize its costs . our review of the agreement disclosed that it allowed ntis to assess a management fee for items which irs could have readily obtained directly and provided to ntis , and costs associated with ntis' mismanagement , such as interest costs associated with paying vendors late . ntis procured over $5.5 million in equipment and services using existing contracts held by other government agencies , which are then subject to ntis' 10 percent management fee . irs could have reduced its costs by either ( 1 ) stating in the agreement that certain costs , such as the costs of items procured under existing contracts , were not subject to the ntis management fee or ( 2 ) procuring the items itself , based on ntis requirements , and providing them to ntis . if irs had exercised either of these options , it could have significantly reduced the costs subject to the management fee . for example , ntis purchased computers costing almost $300,000 under a contract administered by another federal agency . in this case , ntis simply placed an order . irs could have avoided about $30,000 for ntis management fees if it had placed the order itself . ntis purchased items costing over $886,000 under an existing treasury contract which is administered by irs . if irs had purchased these items directly and provided them to ntis , it could have avoided ntis management fees totaling about $89,000 . the prompt payment act of 1982 requires agencies to pay interest penalties to compensate vendors when agencies do not pay their bills on time . ntis records show that it incurred about $2,100 in penalties through june 27 , 1996 , because it did not pay cyberfile bills on time . even though the late payments were ntis' fault , they were included in cyberfile's costs and subject to the 10 percent management fee . examples of these recurring costs follow . $10,404 per month for internet service , $7,954 per month for a mail sorting machine , and $5,172 per month for rental and maintenance of a high speed printing machine .