sffas no . 2 states that the actual and expected costs of federal credit programs should be fully recognized in both budgetary and financial reporting . to accomplish this , agencies first predict or estimate the future performance of direct and guaranteed loans when preparing their annual budgets . the data used for these budgetary estimates are generally reestimated after the fiscal year end to reflect any changes in actual loan performance since the budget was prepared , as well as any expected changes in assumptions and future loan performance . this reestimated data is then used to report the cost of the loans disbursed under the direct or guaranteed loan program as a “program cost” on the agencies' statement of net costs after loans are disbursed . agency management is responsible for accumulating sufficient , relevant , and reliable data on which to base the estimates . further , sffas no . 2 states that agencies should use the historical experience of the loan programs when estimating future loan performance . to accomplish this , agencies use cash flow models based on various assumptions , often referred to as cash flow assumptions , such as the number and amount of loans that will default in a given year — known as the default assumption . those assumptions that have the greatest impact on the credit subsidy vary by program and are often referred to as key cash flow assumptions . statement on auditing standards no . 57 states that auditors should evaluate the reasonableness of estimates in the context of the financial statements taken as a whole . as part of the annual financial statement audits , agency cash flow models and assumptions are assessed to determine if management has a reliable basis for its credit subsidy estimates . in 1997 , the credit reform task force of the accounting and auditing policy committee was formed in order to address key issues surrounding the implementation of fcra and the related federal accounting standard . this task force developed a technical release , preparing and auditing direct loan and loan guarantee subsidies under the credit reform act , which has been approved by fasab and is expected to be issued by omb during fiscal year 1999 . this technical release identifies specific practices that , if fully implemented by credit agencies , will enhance their ability to reasonably estimate loan program costs . these practices include the following: accumulating sufficient , relevant , and reliable supporting data that provides a reliable basis for agencies' estimates of future loan performance . for example , to make reasonable projections of future loan defaults , recoveries , prepayments , or other key cash flows , agencies should use reliable records of historical experience and take into consideration current and forecasted economic conditions . conducting periodic comparisons of estimated loan performance to actual cash flows in the accounting system . this comparison allows agencies to identify and research significant differences and determine whether assumptions related to expected future loan performance need to be revised . calculating timely reestimates , based on the most recently available data , of the loan program's cost and including the reestimates in the current year's financial statements and budget submissions .