additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . they stated that the baseline should be established by september 1997 . training of key staff is critical to achieving level 2 repeatability . according to sei's technical report entitled , best practices within the software engineering industry , best training practices include defining a process for software engineering education . although vba has provided process improvement training to many of the managers in its software engineering process group and management steering group , key software personnel — software developers , project managers , and line managers — have not been trained in the process improvement methodology , the principles behind it , and the key process areas . vba's software process improvement project manager explained that these key people had not yet been trained because vba did not want to train them too long before implementing the process improvement projects . the project manager said that vba plans to train these staff during fiscal years 1998 and 1999 . however , vba does not have a documented training plan to help ensure that these personnel receive training . unless these individuals are trained in the process improvement methodology , its principles , and the key process areas , it will be difficult for them to implement the new policies and procedures required to reach the repeatable level . at the conclusion of our review , vba officials stated that a training plan is now under development and will be made part of the software process improvement initiative action plan . in responding to our recommendation that it ensure that contractors have a repeatable software development capability , vba intends to use a new provision in future software development contracts . this provision , however , does not require potential contractors to submit supporting documentation to vba certifying their level of maturity . software development is a critical component of this modernization effort . also , a mature software development capability will provide added assurance that software developers will be able to effectively make changes to the software needed to address the year 2000 computing problem . to evaluate vba's software development processes , in 1996 , we applied the software engineering institute's ( sei ) software capability evaluation methodology to those projects identified by vba as using the best development processes . this evaluation compares agencies' and contractors' software development processes against sei's five - level software capability maturity model , with 5 being the highest level of maturity and 1 being the lowest . in june 1996 , we reported that vba was operating at a level 1 capability . at this level , vba cannot reliably develop and maintain high - quality software on any major project within existing cost and schedule constraints , which places vba software development projects at significant risk . accordingly , vba must rely on the various capabilities of individuals rather than on an institutional process that will yield repeatable , or level 2 , results .