copies will be provided to others on request . if you have any questions about this report , please call christopher w. hoenig , director , information management resources / policies and issues , on ( 202 ) 512-6208 . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . as federal agencies expand their use of information technology , they face an increasing challenge to protect the integrity , confidentiality , and availability of information that is vital to their missions . like the nation as a whole , our government is becoming increasingly dependent on widely interconnected computer systems and the electronic data they maintain . these systems and data are essential to carry out critical operations , such as tax collections ; safeguard billions of dollars in assets , such as military equipment and accounts receivable ; and deliver basic services , such as social security payments and other benefits . reliance on these systems and on electronic data is revolutionizing the way that agencies collect , process , store , and disseminate information . however , without effective controls , such reliance also can increase the risks of financial loss , unauthorized access to sensitive information , and devastating interruptions in service . to provide a governmentwide overview , this report summarizes the results of our reviews of information security at individual agencies and of similar assessments performed by others . the report also describes omb's oversight of federal agency practices regarding information security and identifies opportunities for improvement . we performed this review in response to a request from senator john glenn , ranking minority member , senate committee on governmental affairs , that we examine a broad range of federal information security issues . subsequently , senator ted stevens , committee chairman , also expressed interest in these issues . information security is a growing concern because the federal government , like the nation as a whole , is becoming increasingly dependent on computerized information systems and electronic records . these systems and records are fast replacing manual procedures and paper documents , which in many cases are no longer available as “backup” if automated systems should fail . the potential risks associated with reliance on electronic systems and records are exacerbated because more and more systems are being interconnected to form networks or are accessible through public telecommunication systems , making the systems themselves and the data they maintain much more difficult to protect from unauthorized users or outside intruders . all major agencies rely on computer systems to provide critical support for their operations , and even greater reliance is planned for the future . in addition , agencies are increasing their use of interconnected systems and electronically transmitted data in order to streamline operations , make federally maintained data more accessible , and reduce paperwork . most notably , the department of defense has a vast information infrastructure that includes 2.1 million computers , 10,000 local networks , and 100 long - distance networks . the majority of the information maintained on defense's computers is sensitive but nonclassified data essential to daily operations , such as commercial transactions ; payroll , personnel , and health records ; operational plans ; and weapons systems maintenance records .