this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the committee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . coordination to ensure that those responsibilities are being effectively managed . the next phases of the results act implementation continue to offer a structured framework to address crosscutting issues . for example , the act's emphasis on results - based performance measures as part of the annual performance planning process should lead to more explicit discussions concerning the contributions and accomplishments of crosscutting programs and encourage related programs to develop common performance measures . as agencies work with omb to develop their annual performance plans , they can consider the extent to which agency goals are complementary and the need for common performance measures to allow for cross - agency evaluations . the results act's requirement that omb prepare a governmentwide performance plan that is based on the agencies' annual performance plans also can be used to facilitate the identification of program overlap , duplication , and fragmentation . if agencies and omb use the annual planning process to highlight crosscutting program issues , the individual agency performance plans and the governmentwide performance plan should provide congress with the information needed to identify agencies and programs addressing similar missions . once these programs are identified , congress can consider the associated policy , management , and performance implications of crosscutting program issues . this information should also help identify the performance and cost consequences of program fragmentation and the implications of alternative policy and service delivery options . these options , in turn , can lead to decisions concerning department and agency missions and the allocation of resources among those missions . provide important information about why the program did or did not succeed as planned and suggest ways to improve it . we have cited a 1994 survey that reported on the widespread absence of a program evaluation capacity within the federal government . therefore , it is not surprising that agencies did not consistently discuss in their september plans how they intended to use program evaluations to help develop those plans .