defense concurred with all of our recommendations . however , defense expressed concern that the body of the draft report may lead the reader to believe that defense has done nothing to implement or enforce its own long - haul telecommunications policies . in its response , the department notes that it has: ( 1 ) established the defense information systems database ( disd ) as a comprehensive inventory of long - haul telecommunications networks throughout defense , ( 2 ) clarified existing policy by issuing an asd / c3i memorandum dated may 5 , 1997 , that reaffirms disa's role as the sole manager and provider of long - haul telecommunications systems and services , ( 3 ) developed a process for determining how individual telecommunications requirements can best be satisfied , ( 4 ) developed a process for granting temporary waivers , and ( 5 ) begun the process of establishing performance metrics for disn . we incorporated additional information in the report to more clearly reflect actions disa has initiated . however , while these plans are a necessary first step , they must be effectively implemented to bring about real improvements in telecommunications management , which is the focus of the body of our report . defense recognizes this in its discussion and expresses its commitment to effectively implementing our recommendations . defense's comments are presented in appendix ii . detailed gao responses follow in the same appendix . we will send copies of this report to the chairman of your committee ; the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on government reform and oversight , the house and senate appropriations committees , the house national security committee , the senate armed services committee , and other interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . naval education & training management systems network ( netmsn ) navsea enterprise wide area network ( newnet / smart link ) puget sound metropolitan area network ( man ) tidewater metropolitan area network ( man ) naval facilities engineering command wide area network ( navfac wan ) pensacola metropolitan area network ( man ) corpus christi metropolitan area network ( man ) nctams lant det . appendix i details the results of our survey . to assess progress in reporting on telecommunications services acquired , trends , and costs , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums and discussed defense's implementation of these requirements with officials from asd / c3i and disa . we analyzed information on costs maintained by disa and reviewed a recent contractor evaluation of disa business processes . to assess defense's progress in enforcing its policy mandate that defense components acquire services from common - user networks , we reviewed applicable defense directives , instructions , and memorandums and met with officials from asd / c3i , disa , and the defense components .