if not , goals were adjusted . another headquarters official thought that the park strategic plans would minimize arguments about budget priorities in the parks — the goals in each park's plan now represent the park's priorities for the next 5 years . park officials also mostly agreed with the importance of the budgetary link . some park staff said that the strategic planning process , by focusing on outcomes to be achieved , had led them to question assumptions about their operations and may help identify more effective and efficient ways to accomplish park service missions and make resource allocation decisions . parks had to answer the question: can these goals be realistically achieved with existing resources ? for example , the requirement to assume constant , inflation - adjusted resources over the 5-year period of the strategic plan led a number of parks to develop more realistic goals after considering budgetary constraints . for example , officials at one park proposed a boundary study to address the protection of historical resources currently located outside the park's boundaries , which had been arbitrarily established . however , staff decided to scale back their initial plans because a sufficient level of funding would not be available without a budgetary increase . this contrasts with an experience described to us prior to implementing the results act , in which managers described a long - term management plan they developed that was not realistic because there was no way to achieve the goals in the plan without additional funding . while generally agreeing about the importance of a budgetary link for internal planning purposes , several park officials had concerns about how such data would be used by the park service or by congress to make budgetary decisions . some questioned whether estimated spending for each goal was sufficiently precise to be used to challenge a park's budget . park officials had fewer concerns about using budget data at the park level to aid internal decision - making . such views are not unique in the executive branch . in our recent report on the use of performance information in the budget process , executive branch officials we interviewed said that the principal value of the results act was internal and management oriented , stemming from its ability to clarify missions and performance expectations . they also said that current budgetary pressures and apprehension about the use of results act information could increase levels of defensiveness among agency staff . the park service's intention to hold upper - level park managers accountable for achieving the goals in their strategic and annual performance plans lent greater importance to the strategic planning effort , but it raised concerns for some park managers . headquarters officials generally agreed that holding managers accountable for achieving their goals was important for successful implementation of the results act . for example , one official said that holding managers accountable for results would have a particularly strong influence if managers believed that the results would affect their performance evaluations and budgets . however , at the park level , officials from half of the eight parks we interviewed agreed that holding managers accountable for achieving the goals in their plans reinforced the importance of strategic planning .