security plan not developed . until recently , fda had not conducted a risk assessment or developed a disaster recovery plan for eeps , as required by federal guidelines . in 1992 , fda declared oasis a “record system” subject to the requirements of the privacy act of 1974 . thereafter , fda considered oasis a critical - sensitive system . also , the computer security act of 1987 requires agencies to establish security plans and perform vulnerability assessments for all computer systems that contain sensitive information . in february 1995 , fda issued a risk assessment of eeps at fda headquarters and a contingency plan to address backup procedures for the pacific region , which runs the regional computer facility in the seattle district office . however , we found that the risk assessment was incomplete and did not address major portions of eeps . in addition , the contingency plan was not viable because fda moved the oasis processing function from seattle to the larger processing facility in its headquarters in rockville , maryland . fda does not have a contingency plan for ora's headquarters computer center . however , it plans to obtain a risk assessment of ora's information systems and contents through an interagency agreement with the department of transportation . as of may 1995 , fda could not tell us when a risk assessment and contingency plan would be performed at fda headquarters to address security concerns for this mission - critical system . no cost - benefit analysis conducted . at the beginning of our review , we learned that no one had performed a cost - benefit analysis for the oasis project . this deficiency was also later reported by the self - assessment team . a cost - benefit analysis describes the development and operational costs of each alternative , and of nonrecurring ( improved system operations and resource utilization ) and recurring ( operations and maintenance , including personnel ) benefits that could be attained through the development of each proposed alternative . such an analysis is useful to managers , users , and designers for analyzing alternative systems and will be essential to any decisions for further development of an automated import system . ora officials told us that they did not ask for such an analysis in the past . in february 1995 , the current contractor was tasked with conducting a cost - benefit analysis , which was completed in june 1995 . we did not independently verify these estimates . in addition , the agency did not properly account for or match oasis costs with outcomes to determine if oasis would meet fda's needs within its budget allocation . accurate accounting of all project costs will be crucial since fda is supportive of legislation that would allow the agency to collect user fees for imports processed through the automated system to offset the costs of developing , deploying and supporting the system . also , the importance of an import screening system to fda's operations and the import community warrants the maintenance of reliable cost and performance information to keep congressional appropriations and oversight committees informed of the status of any systems development effort .