additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . hud has been working to implement the 1997 fsi strategy . the cfo stated that a large number of fsi systems or system modules have been deployed and are being used to manage and monitor the department's programs . according to the cfo , the status of the nine 1997 systems integration projects as of october 1998 is as follows: in addition to the work completed under the 1993 fsi plan , the office of community planning and development has also deployed the integrated disbursement and information system ( idis ) in nine states and the district of columbia.in addition to the work completed under the 1993 fsi plan , the office of public and indian housing has developed and deployed the sixth module to support the 1993 integrated business system ( ibs ) requirements and implemented a new module to support the business requirements of the office of native american programs . the fha financial data warehouse is still being developed by the office of housing . therefore , the july 1998 estimated deployment date was not met . in addition to the work completed under the 1993 fsi plan , the office of fair housing and equal opportunity ( fheo ) deployed an enhanced version of the first module for the grants evaluation management system ( gems ) that supports the pre - award process and completed the development of the second module to support grantee tracking in fiscal year 1998 . this system is being used by fheo to monitor its two major grant programs . in addition to the work completed under the 1993 fsi plan and to carry out federal housing administration mortgage insurance system ( fhamis ) goals in the information strategy plans and resulting from business process reviews , the office of housing deployed and is using the single family premium collection subsystem to collect and account for premiums . the office of housing also deployed the single family data warehouse and a multifamily data quality system to support its fhamis project . the office of housing deployed the first phase of the real estate management system ( rems ) in march 1998 . to help make good decisions on information technology investments , best practices require that the in - depth analysis be based on accurate , reliable , up - to - date project information . this information includes cost - benefit analyses , risk assessments , and implementation plans for both new and ongoing projects . once the information is analyzed , projects are ranked based on their relative benefits , costs , and risks . this ranking should determine which projects should be funded and is the essence of information technology portfolio analysis . after investment decisions have been made , schedules should be established at key milestones to regularly monitor and track the cost , schedule , benefits , and risks of selected projects . in 1997 , hud implemented a new process to improve how the department screens , ranks , and selects information technology investments .