access and manipulation . the agency also noted that its systems have undergone tests to ensure that intrusions should not occur . we agree that progress has been made in the area of internal controls . will the agency's performance information be credible ? at the request of congress and to assist agencies in their efforts to produce useful performance plans , we issued guides on assessing annual plans . we subsequently reviewed the fiscal year 1999 performance plans for the cfo act agencies . we also issued reports on fiscal year 1999 plans that identified practices that can improve the usefulness of plans and approaches used to connect budget requests with anticipated results . a majority of agencies' fiscal year 2000 plans give general pictures of intended performance across the agencies , with the plans of the department of labor , department of transportation ( dot ) , the general services administration ( gsa ) , and the social security administration ( ssa ) providing the clearest overall pictures . to assess the degree to which an agency's plan provides a clear picture of intended performance across the agency , we examined whether it includes ( 1 ) sets of performance goals and measures that address program results ; ( 2 ) baseline and trend data for past performance ; ( 3 ) performance goals or strategies to resolve mission - critical management problems ; and ( 4 ) identification of crosscutting programs ( i.e. , those programs that contribute to the same or similar results ) , complementary performance goals and common or complementary performance measures to show how differing program strategies are mutually reinforcing , and planned coordination strategies . figure 3 shows the results of our assessment of the 24 agencies . we categorized each agency's plan based on the degree to which it collectively addressed the four practices presented above . all of the fiscal year 2000 plans we reviewed contain at least some goals and measures that address program results . in our assessment of the fiscal year 1999 plans , we identified the lack of comprehensive sets of goals that focused on results as one of the central weaknesses that limited the usefulness of the plans for congressional and other decisionmakers . while this improvement is still not evident across all agencies , some plans incorporate sets of performance goals and measures that depict the complexity of the results federal agencies seek to achieve . for example , to help achieve improved public health and safety on the highway , dot has performance goals and measures to reduce the rates of alcohol - related and large truck - related fatalities and injuries and to increase seat belt use , in addition to its goals related to highway fatality and injury rates . the dot plan also provides helpful information that explains the importance of each goal , the relationship of annual goals to dot strategic goals , and the relationship of the performance measures to annual goals . does the agency have the right mix of strategies and resources needed to achieve its goals ?