examples include the following . army regulation 710-3 , asset and transaction reporting system , requires logsa to ( 1 ) ensure that activities submit cbsx input data by the date scheduled and that the data are correct and ( 2 ) take appropriate follow - up action if data are not accurate or submitted by the scheduled date . however , logsa had neither scheduled dates for units to report their cbsx transactions nor kept a log or schedule of expected transmissions . therefore , without such reporting schedules , logsa could not detect when units failed to submit transactions and the major commands lacked appropriate data to measure unit compliance . moreover , according to logsa's analysts , they have not routinely followed up on and corrected rejected transactions . in addition , while logsa requested that units submit transactions weekly ( exactly when transactions are submitted is left to the discretion of the unit ) , in practice , we found that reporting frequency varied greatly . some units reported several times a week while others did not report to cbsx for months . although logsa transmits to units confirmations of receipt that contain the total number of transactions received , neither army regulations nor their implementing guidance require units to verify the total , investigate discrepancies , and retain the receipt confirmations . property book officers for several units in our sample told us that while they review and retain for various periods the logsa receipt confirmations , they do not always compare these confirmations with their lists of cbsx - reportable transactions to ensure that all data transmitted were received by cbsx . thirty - five adjustments ( 23 percent ) in our sample were caused by problems in cbsx or spbs - r software . because of these software errors , cbsx ( 1 ) posted incorrect adjustments , ( 2 ) posted invalid transactions , or ( 3 ) did not post valid transactions . in some of these cases , errors in the validation process itself created inaccurate balances in cbsx that were not corrected until logsa conducted its next 6-month validation process . the following were the specific software problems found . twenty - one adjustments were caused by a software error in the cbsx validation process which resulted in invalid adjustments being posted to unit balances . the cbsx validation process compares the unit's spbs - r equipment balances to the unit's adjusted equipment balances in cbsx and changes the cbsx balances to mirror the spbs - r balances . for validation purposes , the cbsx equipment balance is adjusted to remove transactions received after the unit's validation cutoff date , which is the date when each unit runs the spbs - r validation process for submission of balance data to logsa . this process is necessary to account for timing differences between the dates the units and cbsx ran their respective validation processes . however , when a unit's asset balances were reduced to zero in cbsx by transactions subsequent to the unit validation date , the cbsx validation process did not adjust the unit's equipment balances for these transactions .