additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . details of our scope and methodology are in appendix i . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of health and human services or her designee . the inspector general of the department of health and human services provided us with written comments . these comments are discussed in the agency comments and our evaluation section of the report and are reprinted in appendix ii . over the past several years , hcfa has initiated a number of actions to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of its controls over fraud . although these controls have been implemented within various functions throughout the 32 medicare carriers , they have limitations that do not address the full spectrum of changes in today's health care environment . the already difficult task of detecting fraud has become a greater challenge as the number of medicare part b claims has increased from 468 million in 1990 to 623 million in 1994 . at the same time , the percentage of claims processed electronically doubled from 36 to 72 percent , with further increases likely . figure 2 shows the volume of medicare part b claims processed from paper and electronic submissions from 1990 through 1994 . the former secretary of health and human services initiated the workgroup for electronic data interchange in 1991 to reduce administrative costs in the nation's health care system by promoting electronic claims submission . hcfa promoted this initiative by requiring that carriers reimburse providers for electronic claims more quickly than for paper claims ( 14 days versus 27 days ) , thus encouraging providers to submit more claims electronically . this is an important gain , and the increased use of electronic claims submission should be encouraged ; however , this method also increases the need for more innovative controls to curtail fraud . with paper claims , signatures of providers and any obvious alterations to documents are apparent to claims adjudicators . in addition , the same types of claims ( for example , by medical specialty ) typically were handled by the same adjudicator . therefore , aberrations could be more easily spotted . in contrast , electronic claims submission eliminates human intervention and thus any opportunity to examine provider signatures or detect any alterations to claims data . hcfa requires medicare carriers to implement various manual and electronic fraud - detection controls , such as prepayment edits , medical review of overutilized and medically unnecessary procedures , and review of beneficiary complaints .