management and procurement . ·reviews major reorganization proposals . studies personnel management and systems development to help develop and initiate long - range plans and goals . ·develops and recommends strategies for approaches to improvement in the value and effectiveness of management systems , field administration , program operations , mid - range and strategic planning , and program evaluation . determines the most efficient and cost - effective methods of management and program service delivery services as well as an assessment of performance and results . ·provides leadership and procurement management direction . participates in the development , implementation , and oversight of policies , regulations , and procedures followed by executive agencies in providing for the procurement of property and services and by recipients of federal grants and assistance . ·reviews and analyzes agency submissions , studies , research materials , and other information related to assigned areas . synthesizes highly complex and voluminous materials . assists in the review and clearance of reports to congress . ·reviews , comments on , and leads negotiations on policy issues . fully successful performance standards: demonstrates thorough knowledge of assigned program areas and applicable policies . identifies relevant issues and options for analysis and develops appropriate recommendations for decisions . in the context of established time constraints , produces staff work on issues that is complete , concise , accurate , unbiased , creative , quantitative wherever possible , and analytically and logically sound . evaluates significant existing program policies , plans , and performance to assess whether they achieve intended purposes cost effectively and consistent with administration priorities . fully successful performance standards: assignments are completed accurately and on - time , provide meaningful information , conform to applicable requirements , are internally consistent , and properly reflect decisions that have been made . analysis ( legislative , regulatory , paperwork , policy , procurement , budget , and management ) is completed in time for action by policy officials and taken to the appropriate organization level for resolution . iv.1 in app . iv for a comparison of examiners' major duties before and after omb 2000. ) omb also developed a new set of performance standards to cover all of its professional staff , including rmo and statutory office staff . before omb 2000 , standards were individually tailored to particular positions . for example , previous performance standards for a budget examiner were focused specifically on budget formulation and review responsibilities . offm policy analyst standards included analyzing , coordinating , and monitoring financial systems issues ; general management division policy analyst standards included analyzing the implementation of management initiatives , program evaluation , and long - range planning . omb revised its performance standards to make them more uniform , to simplify them , and to encompass broader responsibilities , but the standards no longer identify specific responsibilities , including management responsibilities . ( fig . iv.2 in app . iv shows omb's new critical job elements and performance standards for professional staff. ) as it has done traditionally , omb primarily used on - the - job training to familiarize its examiners with their responsibilities .