the five states in our review have this feature . in august 1994 we reported on the potential benefits to the medicaid program of automated produr systems , after examining how information technology could be used in implementing a drug utilization review ( dur ) program . in response to your request , this report examines states' actual experiences in using automated produr systems in their medicaid programs , recognizing that such experience has been brief . specifically , you asked that we focus on how such systems can ( 1 ) improve patient safety by identifying and preventing inappropriate drug therapy , ( 2 ) reduce program costs , and ( 3 ) reduce the incidence of fraud , waste , and abuse . you also asked that we determine any other concerns that would hinder the effective implementation of these systems . finally , we discuss the varying ways in which these systems can be established , and the role that the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) health care financing administration ( hcfa ) and others could play in enhancing states' effective use of produr systems . authorized in 1965 under title xix of the social security act , medicaid is a federally aided , state - run medical assistance program . over 35 million people received an estimated $152 billion in medicaid services during fiscal year 1995 . at the federal level , hcfa is responsible for administering the medicaid program , establishing policies , developing operating guidelines , and ensuring states' compliance with medicaid regulations . federal regulations require states to provide certain basic medical services , such as inpatient hospital and physician care , under their medicaid programs . federal regulations also authorize states to provide optional services , such as optometrist services , eyeglasses , and prescription drugs . during fiscal year 1995 , all states provided prescription drugs as part of their medicaid programs ; the reported cost of these drugs during that year was about $8.3 billion . because of growing concern over the increased use and cost of prescription drugs , in 1990 the congress amended the social security act to require states to implement dur programs by january 1 , 1993 . the legislation mandated that these reviews include prospective screening for potential drug problems due to therapeutic duplication , drug - disease contraindication , drug - drug interaction , incorrect drug dosage , incorrect duration of treatment , drug - allergy interactions , and clinical abuse or misuse . ( a glossary of drug utilization review terms appears at the end of this report. ) hcfa was instructed to issue guidelines to the states on prospective dur cost and benefit reporting . while not requiring that states use automated systems for prospective screening , the law encouraged their use , and required hcfa to initiate at least 10 statewide automated produr demonstration projects . hcfa was required to report to the congress by january 1 , 1994 . in addition to promoting patient safety , dur programs must also be designed to educate physicians and pharmacists to better identify patterns of fraud , abuse ( including overuse ) , or other inappropriate or medically unnecessary care .