inquiry is read only access . clerk access allows the user to enter data other than remittance addresses . subsupervisor access allows the user to input or change contract data ; information on obligations , invoices , and receiving reports ; and remittance addresses . supervisor access allows the user to perform all subsupervisor functions as well as assign or remove access . the staff sergeant who committed the dfas dayton fraud had supervisor access . proper and effective internal controls would preclude allowing any individual user to have the ability to record an obligation , create and change invoices and receiving reports , and enter remittance addresses . once these activities are segregated organizationally by assigning them to different individuals , the authority to enter contract data and payment information must be functionally segregated within the vendor payment system application to maintain the integrity of the organizational segregation . without segregation of these duties and controls over access to the system , appropriate compensating controls need to be in place , such as reviews of remittance address change activity and periodic verification of payment addresses with the vendors . our review of the vendor payment process at dfas dayton and dfas denver's directorate of finance and accounting operations confirmed that employees with supervisor and subsupervisor access to the vendor payment system could make fraudulent payments without detection by entering contract information and obligations , invoice and receiving report data , and changing or creating a remittance address . if the data on a false invoice and receiving report match the information on the voucher , certifying officers are not likely to detect a fraudulent payment through their certification process , a key prevention control . second , problems with the lack of segregated access within the payment system application are compounded by the excessive and widespread access to the system throughout dfas and the air force . our review of vendor payment system access levels as of mid - june 1998 showed that 1,867 users across dfas and air force installations had supervisor or subsupervisor access . further , 94 of these users had not accessed the system since 1997 , indicating that they may no longer be assigned to vendor payment operations . in addition , 171 users had not accessed the system at all , possibly indicating that access is not required as a regular part of their duties . dfas officials told us they were unaware that such a large number of employees had broad access to the vendor payment system . dfas denver center has scheduled operational reviews of all dfas operating locations for completion by january 1999 . these reviews are intended to assess whether dfas operations comply with dfas policies and procedures as well as laws and regulations . however , we found that the review program did not address the implementation and effectiveness of internal controls , including the segregation of duties and systems access issues identified in this report . after we briefed the dfas denver center director about our concerns , he told us that the operational review program would be revised to place a greater focus on internal controls , including the review of vendor payment system access levels .