this review will not be completed until 2002 . it is important that nps coordinate its decisions about whether to upgrade or replace housing units with its on - going needs assessment to ensure that funds are not expended on units that will no longer be needed . over the years , we have found that decentralization of responsibility , coupled with inadequate oversight , has resulted in accountability problems within the department . for example , nps , for the most part , delegates decisions about spending and operating priorities to the individual park managers . as a result , park managers have broad discretion in deciding how to spend the parks' operating funds . prior work showed that regional or headquarters staff rarely , if ever , discussed what was being accomplished with the operating funds provided to the parks , and that key management controls needed to hold park managers accountable , such as a process for setting results - oriented expectations or monitoring outcomes , were missing . with the implementation of the results act and the performance plans that go with it , the nps has an opportunity to address these kinds of accountability problems . ( 3 ) to what extent does the agency's performance plan provide confidence that its performance information will be credible ? we found that interior's plan does not adequately address the requirements associated with these questions . most of interior's nine component performance plans do not provide a clear picture of intended performance across their respective subagencies . to address this issue , performance plans should , among other things , provide a succinct and concrete statement of expected performance for subsequent comparison with actual performance ; and contain goals that are linked to the agency's mission , strategic goals , and program activities in the budget . interior's plan had limitations in these areas . for example , we found that most of the component performance plans did not provide a succinct and concrete statement of expected performance for subsequent comparison with actual performance . one of the elements important to addressing this issue is that the goals and measures are to be objective , measurable , and quantifiable . in our view , five of the nine component plans did not adequately provide goals and measures that were objective , measurable , and quantifiable . for goals and measures to be considered objective , they should be reasonably free of any significant bias or manipulation that would distort the accurate assessment of performance , and to the greatest extent possible , they should not require subjective considerations or judgments to dominate the measurement . for example , one of nps' goals is to ensure that 50 percent of the cultural landscapes on its cultural landscapes inventory are in good condition . however , the criteria for determining what constitutes “good condition” is not defined in the performance plan , nor does nps make reference to where such a definition can be found . without a clear definition , it would be difficult to assess if the performance is being measured consistently from year to year or to understand how a change in definition could affect the end result desired from the expected performance .