cost issues were also a consideration . the cost of purchasing software , fees for networking and , for some , transportation costs to a library or other public sources of information via computer may also hinder accessibility . besides the consumer perspective , issues such as how much funding is needed , where funding comes from , and the cost of keeping up - to - date with changes in technology , were important to the experts . finally , information quality was raised by the experts as a very significant issue . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . our analyses showed that this database does act as a health information referral service and lists organizations and government offices that provide health information upon request ; it is not in our view , however , a comprehensive inventory of federal consumer health informatics systems or activities . hhs officials further noted that an effort to develop an inventory may be inappropriate because it would be outdated by the time it was published , given the fast pace of development in this area . while we acknowledge that keeping an inventory completely up to date would be difficult , we continue to believe that maintaining an up - to - date inventory of federally sponsored informatics systems offers great value to consumers and the federal government . consumers would be provided with one current source for all federal activity in this area and federal decisionmakers could get a better sense of what type of federal investment is being made in consumer health informatics initiatives ; this information would likely be helpful in examining options for public - and private - sector partnerships , and in encouraging agency coordination and accountability . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of health and human services , the director of the office of management and budget , and interested congressional committees . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5539 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors are listed in appendix iii . yvonne j. vigil , senior evaluator joseph p. sikich , staff evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . i believe that accessing this material saved my life. orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we surveyed managers of 65 informatics projects currently in operation and 13 under development , covering a wide range of informatics types and technologies . table 1 presents a sample of the different types of informatics projects covered in our review , including various target users and technologies employed .