sffas no . 6 requires a line item on the statement of net cost with a note reference for deferred maintenance , if the amount is determined by management to be material . it also requires the activity to identify each major class of asset for which maintenance has been deferred and the method of measuring it . also dod's draft federal accounting standards and requirements , dated february 24 , 1997 , which applies to defense accounting systems , includes requirements to account for deferred maintenance . further , dpas does not allow the user to designate deferred maintenance as critical or noncritical . the standard allows the optional disclosure of deferred maintenance to be stratified between critical and noncritical amounts needed to return each major class of asset to its acceptable operating condition . if management elects to disclose critical and noncritical amounts , the disclosure shall include management's definition of these categories . dpas does not provide features to record , value and report foreclosed property , or record any increase or decrease in the value of these assets . sffas no . 3 ( effective october 1 , 1993 ) contains explicit guidance on recognizing , valuing , disposing , and disclosing each of these assets . also dod's draft federal accounting standards and requirements , dated february 24 , 1997 , which applies to defense accounting systems , includes requirements to account for foreclosed property . dpas does not have the capability to provide a transaction to the accounting system to record gain or loss amounts . for example , sffas no . 6 requires that the net realizable value of an asset be used to calculate a gain or loss upon disposal or exchange with a non - federal entity . dpas does not provide the ability to record the total estimated environmental clean - up costs for an asset when it is placed in service , or upon discovery of the need for clean up , nor to periodically update these costs . also , the capability is not provided to calculate the annual expense and accrued liability amounts . sffas no . 5 requires recognition of the liability for cleanup from federal operations resulting in hazardous waste . sffas no . 6 contains detailed guidance for accounting for clean - up costs and recognizing the annual expense and accrued liability amounts . dpas does not provide features to deplete assets such as natural resources . while sffas no . 6 does not address natural resources , dod's fmr , volume 4 , requires dod activities to use the depletion of natural resources account when management deems that depletion accounting is necessary . an objective of implementing dpas dod - wide is to ensure financial control and accurate reporting of general pp&e . figure 1 illustrates how , in general , information must flow among property and related systems to ensure financial control over property . although the dpas design allows it to be implemented as shown in figure 1 , which gives dod the ability to have a fully automated property system that assures financial control and data integrity , disa's implementation of dpas failed to achieve this objective .