, existing irs systems ) . better predictability of project schedules and resources . without clearly establishing a suite of metrics that trace back to business objectives through quality improvement goals , and that are implemented organizationwide in a uniform and consistent manner , irs will be hampered in assessing the progress and quality of its software projects . moreover , the absence of a suite of metrics makes it difficult for irs to identify the reasons certain software development practices perform well while others perform poorly . metrics , therefore , when used organizationwide in developing software , would provide irs a means to better ensure uniform software development , thus avoiding the potential for repeating problems that could be costly and time - consuming to correct . to address irs's software development weaknesses , we recommend that the irs commissioner immediately require that all future contractors who develop software for the agency have a software development capability rating of at least cmm level 2 . to further upgrade irs's software development capability , we also recommend that the commissioner take action before december 31 , 1995 , to define , implement , and enforce a consistent set of requirements management procedures for all tsm projects that goes beyond irs's current request for information services process , and for software quality assurance , software configuration management , and project planning and tracking and define and implement a set of software development metrics to measure software attributes related to business goals , such as those outlined in this chapter . completing these actions by the end of 1995 is essential so that the congress , in monitoring tsm's progress and acting on tsm budget requests , has assurance that irs will be able to effectively develop , and / or oversee contractors' development of , software associated with systems modernization projects . irs agreed with our recommendations for improving its software development capability , and is taking steps to do so . irs said that it is committed to developing consistent procedures addressing requirements management , software quality assurance , software configuration management , and project planning and tracking . regarding metrics , irs said that it is developing a comprehensive measurement plan to link process outputs to external requirements , corporate goals , and recognized industry standards . irs said also that it has “baselined” all legacy systems using an accepted software engineering institute metric . we believe these steps , if implemented and institutionalized effectively , would provide irs the disciplined approach necessary to improve its software development capability . mature software development capabilities are key to quality , timely , and cost - effective tsm software development . irs also stated its belief that most government agencies and private organizations are not far along in raising their software development maturity profiles . we have identified several government organizations that have adopted cmm and are moving toward higher cmm levels . for example , the department of the army's information systems software development center in virginia and the department of the air force's sacramento air logistics center were both assessed by sei authorized assessors as cmm level 3 . the air force also has a deadline for all its software activities to reach cmm level 3 by 1998 .