interest claims are submitted by program . fms denied 47 claims by 15 states for interest ( approximately $6.4 million ) . reasons cited included insufficient documentation and repeated failure to follow the funding technique specified in the tsa . as of october 1995 , 8 of the 15 states had appealed those denials to fms . of the 8 states that filed claims to appeal these denials , all but 2 have been resolved . fms denied a portion of direct cost reimbursement claims submitted by 10 states because the costs were not eligible for reimbursement under treasury rules and regulations , or the supporting documentation contained both eligible and ineligible costs which could not be separately identified . three states submitted claims to appeal the denials ; two of these states' appeals were subsequently approved based on additional supporting documentation provided to fms . as indicated previously , most of the states visited computed interest liabilities in accordance with tsas , and the majority of the programs reviewed had interest neutral funding techniques , whereby neither the federal government nor the states incur interest . much of the state interest liability was beyond state agencies' immediate control and was instead attributed to certain states' laws which require that they have the federal funds in the bank before they make any associated disbursements , as opposed to when the check clears the bank . four of the 12 states we visited had a state interest liability totaling $18.5 million which primarily resulted from the states' adherence to such laws . omb publishes guidance to assist auditors in planning audits under the single audit act of 1984 . the guidance , entitled , compliance supplement for single audits of states and local governments , was last updated in september 1990 and does not address cmia , which was enacted in october 1990 . omb plans to issue a revised compliance supplement during fiscal year 1996 which will address cmia requirements . we reviewed and generally supported a draft of the proposed revisions to the compliance supplement relating to cash management . however , we suggested that the compliance supplement also include provisions to determine that clearance patterns were properly established and verified by the appropriate state official . the fiscal year 1994 single audit reports for the states we visited lacked consistency and comprehensiveness in checking for compliance with cmia requirements . auditors in some of the states we visited said that they obtained knowledge about cmia by obtaining fms' guidelines to state governments and attended cash management and audit conferences where cmia was discussed . the auditors also said that they intended to expand work in their next audits to cover other aspects of cmia requirements such as clearance pattern establishment and compliance with drawdown techniques contained in the tsa . fms officials informed us that they do not routinely receive a copy of single audit reports from each state . under the single audit concept , audited entities are only required to submit single audit reports to federal agencies that directly provide them funds and the single audit clearinghouse , governments division , of the commerce department . since fms is not a funding agency , entities would not be required to submit reports to fms .