each of the current efforts is discussed in more detail below . in calling for a revision to the migration strategy , the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology , in october 1995 , stressed the importance of building interoperable systems and processes by relying on common operating environments and standard data exchange — elements which many migration systems do not have . dod has directed business area managers to view their areas as part of the bigger dod enterprise and develop information systems that are interoperable . accordingly , business activities must be able to readily exchange information in order to provide senior managers with the comprehensive overview they need to make dramatic process improvements . in may 1995 , the commission on roles and missions of the armed services reported that more than 250,000 of dod's employees engage in commercial - type activities . to significantly reduce the costs of defense operations , the commission recommended that dod rely primarily on the private sector for services that need not be performed by the government and reengineer those retained by the department . specifically addressing depot maintenance and materiel management activities , the commission concluded that private contractors could provide essentially all of the services now conducted in government maintenance and inventory facilities more efficiently and effectively . consistent with the commission's recommendations , the deputy secretary of defense announced , in late 1995 , that dod would review opportunities to privatize a whole array of functions that , while important , do not directly contribute to the warfighter in the field . it has been reported that dod spends about $125 billion each year performing commercial - type support functions , including those of depot maintenance , materiel management , and transportation . it has also been reported that , by privatizing only half of these support functions , dod could save as much as of 20 percent , or $12 billion annually . we have , however , reported that under current conditions of excess depot capacity and limited private sector competition , these savings may not be realized . to achieve these savings , dod established nine working groups , including one for depot maintenance and one for materiel management . according to materiel and distribution management working group officials , all business activities are actively being considered for privatization , including those the logistics migration systems are to support . they emphasized , however , that their reviews would not be complete until mid - 1996 and resulting privatization actions would likely take a year or longer to accomplish at initial sites . they also stated that it could take longer than 5 years to fully implement any overall privatization strategy . although dod has acknowledged that its migration systems strategy has failed , it continues to deploy migration systems . over the next several years , dod plans to spend more than $7.7 billion to deploy these systems in addition to the $1.2 billion it reported having already spent . table 1 identifies the costs to date and those expected to accrue that dod reported in its fiscal year 1996-1997 biennial budget exhibits . we did not independently verify dod's budget estimates .