sffas no . 6 , accounting for property , plant , and equipment , which is effective beginning in fiscal year 1998 , deals with various accounting issues pertaining to pp&e . this statement establishes several new accounting categories of pp&e , collectively called stewardship pp&e . other pp&e is referred to as general pp&e . one of the new stewardship categories — federal mission pp&e — is defined as tangible items owned by a federal government entity , principally dod , that have no expected nongovernmental use , are held for use in the event of emergency , war , or natural disaster , and have an unpredictable useful life . federal mission pp&e , which includes ships , submarines , aircraft , and combat vehicles , is a major part of dod's total pp&e . sffas no . 6 also provides information on how sffas no . 5's standard on liabilities should be applied to pp&e . specifically , sffas no . 6 discusses how to recognize the liability for the clean up of hazardous waste in pp&e . while this statement modifies sffas no . 5 with respect to the timing of liability recognition for general pp&e , it has no effect on accounting for liabilities related to aircraft and other federal mission pp&e . we undertook this review to assist dod in its efforts to meet the new federal accounting standard , sffas no . 5 , and because of our responsibility to audit the federal government's consolidated financial statements beginning with fiscal year 1997 . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the status of dod's efforts to implement the new federal accounting standard for disclosure of liabilities , such as aircraft disposal , and ( 2 ) whether an estimate of the minimum disposal liability for aircraft , including the removal and disposal of hazardous materials , could be made . the following was done to accomplish our objectives . to assess the status of dod's efforts to implement sffas no . 5 , we reviewed dod regulations and interviewed officials from the dod comptroller's office . to gain an understanding of the procedures and the financial and logistical management information systems that can be used to accumulate and report on aircraft disposal costs , we ( 1 ) examined the management and financial reporting for these programs used by the services , ( 2 ) reviewed applicable dod and service instructions and regulations , and ( 3 ) interviewed dod , air force , army , and navy officials . to determine if the liability is reasonably estimable , we identified the financial and logistical management information systems and reporting mechanisms in place that contain information about the costs of aircraft disposal , including demilitarization and hazardous material disposal processes . we visited dod's designated aircraft storage , reclamation , and disposal facility at the aerospace maintenance and regeneration center ( amarc ) where data were readily available for addressing removal and disposal costs of older , out of service aircraft systems . to determine if the liability could be estimated for newer aircraft , we selected five aircraft for review .