omb . in addition to serving as the government's key official for financial management , the ddm is to coordinate and supervise a wide range of general management functions of omb . these functions include those relating to managerial systems , such as the systematic measurement of performance ; procurement policy ; regulatory affairs ; and other management functions , such as organizational studies , long - range planning , program evaluation , and productivity improvement . omb is responsible for providing guidance and oversight for various other laws and executive orders as well . for example , the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) requires that executive agency heads set cost , performance , and schedule goals for major acquisition programs and that omb report to congress on agencies' progress in meeting these goals . executive order 12866 directs omb to coordinate the review of agencies' rules and regulations to ensure that they impose the least burden , are consistent between agencies , focus on results over process , and are based on sound cost / benefit analysis . omb also has been responsible since 1967 , through its circular a - 76 , for carrying out executive branch policy to rely on competition between the federal workforce and the private sector for providing commercial goods and services . omb's perennial challenge is to carry out its central management leadership responsibilities in such a way that leverages opportunities of the budget process , while at the same time ensuring that management concerns receive appropriate attention in an environment driven by budget and policy decisions . concern that omb and its predecessor agency , the bureau of the budget , lacked the support and institutional capacity necessary to sustain management improvement efforts throughout the executive branch has prompted numerous calls for changes in the past . overwhelmed by — the budget process . some observers have advocated integrating the two functions , while others have proposed the creation of dedicated offices or a separate agency to provide governmentwide management leadership . prior omb reorganizations , reflecting these different points of view , have alternated between seeking to more directly integrate management into the budget review process and creating separate management offices . previous congressional and omb attempts to elevate the status of management by creating separate management units within omb sought to ensure that an adequate level of effort was focused on management issues . underscoring its concern that management issues receive appropriate attention , congress established the ddm position to provide top - level leadership to improve the management of the federal government . in 1994 , omb reorganized to integrate its budget analysis , management review , and policy development roles , in an initiative called “omb 2000.” this reorganization was the most recent of a series of attempts to bolster omb's management capacity and influence . to carry out its responsibilities , omb's resource management offices ( rmo ) are responsible for examining agency budget , management , and policy issues . this effort may be hampered if efforts to resolve problems of program overlap and fragmentation involve organizational changes , because omb lacks a centralized unit charged with raising and assessing government - organization issues .