western . the western area power administration was created in 1977 . the establishing legislation transferred power marketing responsibilities and transmission assets previously managed by the bureau of reclamation to western . western markets power , on a wholesale basis , from 55 hydroelectric power plants . the bureau operates 45 plants , the corps operates 6 , and the remaining 4 are operated by three other organizations.western also markets the federal government's share of electricity generated by the coal - fired navajo generating station in arizona . in 1995 , western marketed power to 546 customers , selling about 32.8 billion kilowatthours of energy . the percentage of cost allocated to power by the operating agencies for three large projects that western is responsible for averaged about 50 percent . these three projects accounted for about 83 percent of western's 1995 revenues . ( see chapter 3. ) inherent advantages pmas have compared to other utilities contribute to lower power production costs and lower average revenue per kwh . one such advantage is that pmas market primarily low - cost hydropower while other utilities generally must rely on more expensive coal and nuclear plants to generate electricity . another advantage is that pmas , as federal agencies , do not , for the most part , pay taxes . pmas are required to recover several nonpower costs , which is a disadvantage compared to other utilities . competition in the wholesale electricity market could impact the pmas' position as marketers of low cost electricity . as shown in figure 4.1 , in 1994 the pmas' average revenue per kwh was more than 40 percent lower than ious and publicly owned generating utilities ( pogs ) in the primary north american electric reliability council ( nerc ) regions in which the pmas operate . according to the energy information administration , in 1994 the nationwide average revenue per kwh was 3.5 cents for ious and 3.9 cents for pogs . the pmas' average revenue per kwh in 1994 , by rate - setting system , ranged from a low of 0.66 cents per kwh for southwestern's robert d. willis system to a high of 3.09 cents per kwh for southeastern's georgia - alabama - south carolina system . we also reviewed each pma's average revenue per kwh compared to national averages for ious and pogs from 1990 through 1993 . during that period , the pmas' average revenue per kwh was consistently at least 40 percent less than those of ious and pogs . a detailed comparison of pma , pog , and iou average revenue per kwh for 1990 through 1994 and a comparison of each pma's average revenue per kwh by rate - setting system to ious and pogs in the applicable nerc regions for 1994 is provided in appendix v. we have provided these comparisons by rate - setting system because each pma system and corresponding nerc region has different average revenue per kwh . these average revenues per kwh may vary considerably by rate - setting system due to customer mix , contractual arrangements , and regional environmental factors such as streamflow and wildlife . in 1994 , southwestern's average revenue per kwh was the lowest of the three pmas .