moreover , there are some drawbacks to these changes . the act also directed us to study a number of issues related to the costs of determining and certifying the attorney fees , “efficiencies” available to reduce these costs , changes to the attorney fee requirements , and the new user fee . while ssa has been paying attorney fees for over 30 years , the payment process itself is inefficient , and the costs of the process are not known . approving and paying attorney fees is a complex process that involves many steps ; a number of staff in different units and locations ; and various information systems that are not linked and that , therefore , require considerable manual intervention . regarding the costs to administer this multistep process , we have not yet fully determined whether ssa's past estimate appropriately captured the costs associated with administering attorney fees ; however , the agency is currently developing a way to capture actual costs . attorneys are compensated for their services through either a fee agreement or a fee petition . attorneys told us that the fee agreement is usually an easier , quicker way to get paid and that , although the fee petition is useful , it is also a more cumbersome tool used primarily when potential fees exceed the statutory limits or when attorneys were unable to file a fee agreement at the beginning of a case . while ssa's current process is inefficient and the agency can make some improvements , not all factors are within ssa's control , such as awaiting fee petition information from attorneys and coordinating workers' compensation offsets . the current legislative proposal states that the clock starts ticking with initial certification of benefits — also referred to as the point when the beneficiary is put in current - pay status . at this point , ssa might be developing the case for final calculation of past - due benefits and might not have control over processing times . attorneys need to realize that because the proposal starts the clock with initial certification , and additional work may still need to be done to develop the case , the total elapsed time from favorable decision to attorney fee payment might not actually be decreased . information on these issues needs to be clearly communicated or the frustration and complaints with the process are likely to continue . in addition , having the clock start before ssa has complete control over the process could create perverse incentives that may actually delay payments to attorneys . because ssa does not have control over all the activities that occur following initial certification of benefits , it is conceivable that some attorneys might view this as an opportunity to delay providing needed information to ssa in hopes of avoiding the user fee . aside from the delays that are outside its control , ssa is aware that there are steps it could take to make the process more efficient .