this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on these recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight within 60 days of the date of the report . a written statement must also be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made over 60 days after the date of this report . we are providing copies of this report to the senate and house committees on appropriations , the house committee on agriculture , the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition and forestry , the house committee on government reform and oversight , and the senate committee on governmental affairs ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6253 if you have any questions concerning the report . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) manages a wide array of programs that affect the lives of all americans and millions of people around the world . usda relies on a multitude of financial management systems to help operate its complex organization which , in fiscal year 1994 , managed $146 billion in assets and accounted for $75 billion in expenses . to more efficiently manage these programs , the department of agriculture reorganization act of 1994 authorized usda to regroup complementary programs from 43 component agencies into 29 agencies under seven overall mission areas . the seven mission areas are: ( 1 ) farm and foreign agricultural services , ( 2 ) rural economic and community development , ( 3 ) food , nutrition , and consumer services , ( 4 ) natural resources and environment , ( 5 ) research , education , and economics , ( 6 ) food safety , and ( 7 ) marketing and regulatory programs . according to usda , its reorganization will also consolidate or eliminate 1,100 of its more than 14,000 field offices . the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 vested agency cfos with the responsibility for overseeing all financial management activities relating to the programs and operations of the agency . this includes the responsibility for developing and maintaining an integrated agency accounting and financial management system that provides for ( 1 ) complete , reliable , consistent , and timely information that is prepared on a uniform basis , ( 2 ) the development and reporting of cost information , ( 3 ) the integration of accounting and budgeting information , and ( 4 ) the systematic measurement of performance . in march 1993 , the former usda secretary decided to establish the office of the cfo to oversee all financial management activities relating to the programs and operations of the department , including usda's departmentwide financial management systems . the office of the cfo also manages the national finance center ( nfc ) .