the ig found the following . property estimated at $198 million , which had been disposed of , destroyed , or physically removed was still included in the property system . for example , at the air route traffic control center in miami , a large fuel storage tank that had been removed years ago was still on the property list and at another control center , several buildings on the property list had been demolished . limited tests of real property identified about $12 million in assets held by faa that could not be located in the property system . for example , at the cleveland air route traffic control center , a medical trailer facility was not recorded and at another control center , faa failed to record a day care center completed in 1994 . the ig could not determine if 22 of 65 leases tested should have been recorded as long - term capital leases because documentation available was not sufficient to properly classify the leases . if these leases , with about $4 million in annual payments , were improperly classified as short - term instead of long - term , assets and liabilities would have been understated . these types of errors and omissions affect faa's ability to manage its real estate assets and make decisions about future needs . for example , long - range planning needs for future facilities are impaired by the lack of accurate information on the cost and useful lives of existing facilities . further , lack of records on revenue - producing properties results in the inability to analyze the adequacy of fees charged to recover costs . as with real property , faa's system for tracking equipment , such as atc equipment and aircraft , could not be relied on because of a lack of supporting documentation and numerous errors . the ig found that: at various regions , equipment records did not separately identify individual assets . for example , at one region , three computer workstations valued at $162,000 were lumped together and could not be individually identified or located . faa officials subsequently determined that the workstations were replaced in 1994 . documentation did not always exist to support reported equipment costs . for example , at one location , documentation to support the cost of mission - critical equipment , such as the backup emergency communications system and the voice switching control system , could not be located . equipment costs totaling $325 million ( out of $473 million tested by the ig ) were improperly reported as operating expenses instead of assets . based on the results of this sample test , the ig indicated that for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 , an undetermined portion of the estimated $4.5 billion in major system equipment acquisitions using facilities and equipment funding was inappropriately charged as operating expenses rather than recorded as assets . without a reliable system to accumulate project costs , and to transfer out the appropriate amount when assets are placed in service , the asset and expense accounts relating to operating materials and supplies and property and equipment will continue to be misstated .