iii and iv ) . dod concurred with our recommendations regarding procedures for documentation of costs and agreements , but noted that adequate documentation exists for most shared cost claims . the groundwater treatment was a shared cost . shell purchased the land because it was able to do so more quickly than the army would have been able to , according to army and shell officials . for its use of the property , the army paid shell about $2 million through transaction adjustments — half the purchase price . the land is well situated for commercial and industrial development as it is near an interstate highway and the new denver international airport ( see fig . shell will retain the land when cleanup is complete . another instance involved capital assets purchased by shell and charged as an allocable cost . the army could receive a proportionate credit for such assets as vehicles , office equipment , and furniture , when they are disposed of or sold . however , the identification and disposition of the allocable assets was not documented . in discussing this issue , army and shell officials did not provide detailed documentation , but described the disposition of a large set of assets relating to an incinerator . they stated that the army had received a credit for items sold and that other items were being stored . because the same army staff members record , review , and audit shell's allocable costs , the army does not have adequate control over the shared cost process . federal internal control standards require that key duties and responsibilities such as recording and reviewing transactions be separated systematically among individuals to protect the government against error , waste , and wrongful acts . this report discusses the adequacy of these processes . the army's current mission at rocky mountain arsenal is to clean up the contaminated soils , structures , and groundwater there . the arsenal , established in 1942 , occupies 17,000 acres northeast of denver , colorado , and is contaminated from years of chemical and weapons activities . the army manufactured chemical weapons , such as napalm bombs and mustard gas , and conventional munitions until the 1960s and destroyed weapons at the arsenal through the 1980s . in addition , it leased a portion of the arsenal to shell from 1952 to 1987 to produce herbicides and pesticides . in 1983 , the united states sued shell oil company for its share of the cleanup costs . in february 1989 , after extended litigation , the army and shell signed the rocky mountain arsenal settlement agreement and the related rocky mountain arsenal federal facility agreement . notwithstanding these points , the army is permitted to review shell's costs under the arsenal agreements and should do so to ensure that costs being claimed are appropriate . the arsenal agreements require that shared costs be supported by an approved task plan or other written agreement . the arsenal's program manager's office and shell officials have made numerous agreements implementing the guidance in the settlement agreement .