uncollectible . specifically , irs has estimated that only about $46 billion of the $200 billion inventory of tax debt as of september 30 , 1995 , was collectible . because of convention , irs follows a collection process introduced several decades ago , and although some changes have been made , the process generally is costly and inefficient . the three - stage collection process — computer - generated notices and bills , telephone calls , and personal visits by collection employees — generally takes longer and is more costly than collection processes in the private sector . irs had a reengineering effort ongoing to redesign its collection process , but it was suspended in november 1995 . according to irs , the suspension was related to the need to rescope priorities brought on by fiscal year 1996 budget reductions . irs subsequently initiated another broad reengineering effort that is to focus on processes beginning from the point taxpayers collect information needed to file tax returns until their accounts are satisfied . thus , the collection process may be included in this effort . while the private sector emphasizes the use of telephone collection calls , a significant portion of irs' collection resources is allocated to field offices where personal visits are made by revenue officers . irs' fiscal year 1997 budget request states that , although “these positions still comprise the lion's share of irs' enforcement efforts , they also represent on the margin the least efficient use of irs resources.” irs has initiated programs and made procedural changes to speed up its collection process , but , historically , it has been reluctant to reallocate resources from the field to the earlier , more productive collection activities . due to budget cuts , however , irs temporarily reassigned about 300 field staff to telephone collection sites to replace temporary employees who were terminated . modernized systems are also needed to facilitate irs' collection programs . modernized systems would also help provide the management information needed to evaluate the effectiveness of collection tools and the ability to adopt flexible and innovative collection approaches . existing irs computer systems do not provide ready access to needed information and , consequently , do not adequately support modern work processes . intended to direct accounts , on the basis of internally developed criteria , to the particular collection stage where they can be processed most efficiently and expeditiously . this system , which irs plans to test this summer , is intended to move accounts through the collection process faster and cheaper than under the current system . another effort under way involves the automation of certain field collection tasks . these tasks , like many in irs , have for years involved the manual processing of paper , which has resulted in irs field collection employees spending significant amounts of time on routine administrative duties . the integrated collection system ( ics ) is a computer - based information system that is intended to automate some of the labor - intensive tasks performed by field revenue officers . while this effort is not a major technological advancement , it should help irs employees be more productive by allowing them to spend their time on more effective and efficient collection - related activities .