these audits should be performed in accordance with gagas . make the frbs' audited combined financial statements and independent auditor's report publicly available upon issuance . for example , these documents could be included in the federal reserve system's annual report . include disclosures in the financial statements that ( 1 ) appropriately describe the significant accounting policies followed , such as the basis for the reported note liability and the treatment of the notes held in the vault , and ( 2 ) provide the information typically included in financial statements of other central banks and private sector financial institutions . regarding our recommendations to bring about consistency and improve the efficiency of federal reserve note accounting and reporting procedures , the board acknowledged in a letter dated january 11 , 1996 , that changes to the federal reserve act and federal reserve policies have blurred the distinction among federal reserve notes with different unique identifiers . the board acknowledged that the accounting process for note destructions offers an opportunity for further efficiencies to be gained in this area . the board stated it will give consideration to the accounting method used for federal reserve notes as the accounting and tracking systems associated with the notes are reviewed for possible redesign . our other recommendations were intended to enhance the federal reserve banks' combined financial statements as a vehicle for informing federal reserve management , the congress , and the public about the operations of the federal reserve banks , and we believe implementing them would enhance management's accountability . the board stated it will give careful consideration to our recommendations concerning the use of external auditors , presentation of financial statements , and the application of auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system ; the secretary of the treasury ; the chairman of the house committee on banking and financial services ; the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9406 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . helen t. desaulniers , attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .