this includes sharing telecommunications services and equipment . also , section 216 of this act requires that whenever usda procures or uses information technology it should do so in a manner that promotes computer information sharing among its agencies . the senior usda irm official — the assistant secretary for administration — has delegated responsibility for managing all aspects of the department's telecommunications program to the oirm director . the assistant secretary also disagreed with our recommendation to enhance alo and technical reviews of agency telecommunications plans and activities , noting that usda's alo and selective review programs are not technical functions . however , when the alo program was established , usda told the congress that alos would perform the in - depth tasks necessary to improve system compatibility and data sharing across agencies and would strengthen coordination of the agencies' telecommunications projects . further , the report addressed technical reviews , not the selected gsa reviews usda discusses in its comments . we revised the report to clarify this , but the recommendation remains unchanged . the assistant secretary also raised questions about how much money is wasted due to ineffective departmental management and planning of telecommunications . the dollar amounts included in our report are based on usda documentation and on interviews with usda's oirm staff . for example: we obtained usda commercial telephone billing records , which are maintained at nfc , showing that usda pays tens of thousands of dollars each year to lease telephone equipment that is either no longer used or cannot be located . we also obtained billing records showing that usda pays more than it should because agencies fail to make long - distance telephone calls using available fts 2000 services and fail to terminate telecommunications services at offices being closed . oirm's telecommunications services division staff , who are responsible for identifying opportunities to consolidate telecommunications , told us usda could save as much as $15 million to $30 million annually by eliminating redundant commercial telecommunications services and by sharing resources , and save as much as $2 million each year by using fts 2000 to make intra - lata telephone calls . we held numerous meetings with oirm and nfc staff during our review in which these amounts were discussed in great detail . we also included these dollar amounts in the information we provided to the assistant secretary , the deputy assistant secretary , and the oirm director during an exit conference held with these officials on july 12 , 1995 . at that time , we also provided copies of the billing records that contained the dollar amounts we cite in the report to usda's deputy chief financial officer and the nfc director , so the department could discontinue payments for leased equipment and services that are not being used . finally , the assistant secretary said the draft report did not give usda sufficient credit for oirm actions recently taken to improve departmentwide telecommunications management . the report discusses each improvement initiative undertaken by oirm that we could substantiate with available usda documentation . the assistant secretary's written comments and our response are provided in appendix i . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii .