assessment . the main thrust of this phase is separating mission - critical systems — which must be converted or replaced — from important ones that should be converted or replaced and marginal ones that may be addressed now or deferred . since the year 2000 problem is primarily a business problem , it is essential to assess its likely impact on the agency's major business functions . following this , information systems in each business area should be inventoried and prioritized ; project teams are then established and program plans devised . testing strategies must be identified , and contingency planning must be initiated as well . renovation . this phase deals with actual changes — converting , replacing , or eliminating selected systems and applications . in so doing , it is important to consider the complex interdependencies among them . changes must be consistent agencywide and information about them clearly disseminated to users . validation . here , agencies test , verify , and validate all converted or replaced systems and applications , ensuring that they perform as expected . this critical phase may take over a year and consume up to half of the year 2000 program's budget and resources . it is essential that agencies satisfy themselves that their testing procedures can meet the challenge and that their results can be trusted . implementation . deploying and implementing year 2000 compliant systems and components requires extensive integration and acceptance testing . and since not all agency systems will be converted or replaced simultaneously , it may be wise to operate in a parallel processing environment for a time , using old and new systems side by side . such redundancy can act as a fail - safe mechanism until it is clear that all changed systems are operating correctly . in february 1997 omb , in consultation with the cio council , set governmentwide year 2000 program milestones for completing the majority of the work in each phase of an agency's year 2000 activities . according to omb's schedule , the assessment phase for mission - critical systems , including performing an enterprisewide inventory , was to be completed by the end of june 1997 . ssa began examining the year 2000 problem almost a decade ago and since then has taken various steps to raise agency awareness of the issue . in addition , it has made significant progress in assessing and renovating much of the software on its centralized mainframe systems — the systems that are essential to processing beneficiary claims and providing other services vital to the public . ssa first became aware of the year 2000 problem in 1989 , when one of the systems supporting its oasdi program experienced problems projecting dates past 1999 . drawing from its experiences in addressing this problem , ssa's office of systems took the lead in raising awareness of the year 2000 issue and its potential magnitude and impact on the agency's operations . as part of these efforts , the office of systems developed a year 2000 tactical plan that presented the agency's strategy for addressing the problem .