we disagree . without sound analyses or planning , doe does not know that “converting an existing system” is a cost - effective way to meet its needs . furthermore , as our report discusses , doe is implementing this unsupported approach in an unsatisfactory manner . therefore , doe should discontinue its current effort and perform users' requirements , alternatives , and cost - benefit analyses before proceeding . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will provide copies of this report to the secretary of energy ; the director , office of management and budget ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6253 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . valerie c. melvin , assistant director keith a. rhodes , technical assistant director suzanne m. burns , evaluator - in - charge linda j. lambert , senior auditor the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . their comments are summarized below and reproduced in appendix i . the department of energy agreed with the need for systems development documentation , configuration management , and adequate testing . however , the department did not concur with our assessment of its analyses and planning for the system development effort , or with our recommendation that it terminate the system development until users' requirements , alternatives , and cost - benefit analyses have been performed . doe stated that its planning was adequate because it is converting an existing system from an unstructured language to a structured , fourth generation language , rather than developing a new system . martin marietta is scheduled to discontinue operation of the existing nmmss during september 1995 . to address our objectives , we reviewed the replacement nmmss contract , transition plan , test plan , and various other draft system documents .