modify interfaces . validation: test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an operational environment . implementation: implement converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement data exchange contingency plans , if necessary . in addition to following the five phases described , a year 2000 program should also be planned and managed as a single , large information system development effort . agencies should promulgate and enforce good management practices at the program and project levels . dla reported to us in february 1997 that it completed the awareness and assessment phases in december 1996 and is now engaged in renovation , validation , and implementation phase activities . dla's target date for having all its programs year 2000 compliant and in production is december 1998 . according to dla , it will cost about $27 million to address the year 2000 problem . in june 1997 , dla reported that of the 86 automated information systems projected to be operational after the year 2000 , dla reported that 19 were in the renovation phase , 30 were in the validation phase , and 37 were in the implementation phase . the systems projected to be operational after the year 2000 contain approximately 39 million lines of code . a breakdown of dla's systems is shown in figure 1 . dla has assigned its cio the responsibility of planning , managing , and executing the dla year 2000 program . the dla systems design center , which is responsible for developing and maintaining dla automated information systems , has overall program management responsibility for year 2000-related efforts . the center , which reports to the cio , has established a year 2000 program office and designated a program manager . the center has taken the following actions as part of its efforts to address the year 2000 problem: developed a detailed year 2000 plan ; conducted a year 2000 impact assessment , which identified the number of systems owned by dla and the lines of code associated with those systems ; estimated which mainframe , mid - tier processors , and desktop computers would still be in use by the year 2000 ; conducted pilot projects with dla's major automated information systems , including samms , mocas , defense integrated subsistence management system , and defense fuels automated management system , to assess potential year 2000 impact on these systems ; and developed year 2000 policies , guidelines , standards , and recommendations for the agency . in addition , dla has entered its mission - critical systems into the dod's defense integration support tools ( dist ) database . this is a database that dod uses to track its information systems and plans to use to facilitate the year 2000 effort departmentwide . center officials also told us that they are tracking their information systems through a database created and maintained by the center . most of fiscal year 1999 is expected to be used for final system testing .