modify interfaces . validation — test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an operational environment . implementation — implement converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement data exchange contingency plans , if necessary . in addition to following the five phases described above , the year 2000 program should also be planned and managed as a single large information system development effort . agencies should promulgate and enforce good management practices on the program and project levels . lssc is the army component responsible for applying the year 2000 five - phased resolution process to ccss . as such , in july 1996 , lssc initiated a project to address ccss year 2000 processing issues . as of july 1997 , lssc has completed a number of activities associated with the awareness and assessment phases of the process , including identifying its inventory , establishing a year 2000 project team , and assessing the date impact on ccss' 10.2 million lines of code . lssc has identified that as much as 54 percent or 5.5 million lines of code may be impacted by the year 2000 due to the fact that entire applications may need to be corrected to accommodate the date change . lssc officials stated that they still need to determine how specific code will be changed in affected applications . lssc also reported that an additional 3.8 million lines of code have already been renovated but still need to undergo integrated and regression testing . lssc plans to implement the year 2000-compliant ccss by november 1998 at a cost of over $12 million . prior to receiving funding in january 1997 , the year 2000 project remained in the awareness phase . during the awareness phase , lssc completed tasks such as assembling technical and functional representatives into a year 2000 task force , evaluating automated software assessment tools , and identifying the number of software lines of code . once the project was officially funded and entered the assessment phase , lssc officials appointed the project manager and management staff . also , the year 2000 project team prepared a project charter and schedule , secured contractor support to assist with assessment tasks , and began to determine the date impact on ccss program code . as project activity proceeded , project staff routinely reported year 2000 progress to the amc deputy commanding general , amc year 2000 logistics task force , communications - electronics command ( cecom ) year 2000 project office , and the ccss configuration control board . to support project management , lssc's year 2000 project manager drafted a plan which initially did not conform to dod's recommended year 2000 five - phased approach , although the plan did identify some tasks typically associated with year 2000 projects . for example , the plan included such tasks as beginning risk assessment and contingency plan development , providing assessment tool training , conducting an inventory of ccss applications , and obtaining contractor support for date impact assessment .