there are few changes to the services that were provided by the erie wso . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the primary changes are the discontinuance of the localized forecast for the city of erie and the addition of the nowcast . as noted before , localized forecasts were discontinued because of changes in the size and detail of zone forecasts . another significant change is the transfer of asos augmentation to faa . this relieves nws of maintaining staff on - site to take observations . table 1 presents a detailed comparison of the services provided to erie and crawford counties before and after spin - down . the pittsburgh wfo now provides all services to venango and forest counties with the exception of issuing noaa weather radio reports and updates . changes in services to these counties are minimal as pittsburgh was already providing many services to these areas . the only significant change is the addition of the short - term forecast — the nowcast — which was not provided in premodernization . table 2 presents a detailed comparison of services provided before and after spin - down . services for cameron , elk , mckean , potter , and warren counties are now provided mostly by the central pennsylvania wfo . since this office is not yet fully staffed , forecasting and long - fused warning services are still provided by pittsburgh . again , with the exception of the nowcast , no major changes have occurred for these counties . since many of these counties are mountainous , noaa weather radio service does not reach all areas . nws believes service will be improved when additional transmitters are installed in fiscal year 1998 . the central pennsylvania and pittsburgh wfos will program these transmitters . table 3 presents a detailed comparison of services provided before and after spin - down . many concerns have been raised about the specific services being provided by nws as well as the quality of the service provided . most concerns had been brought to nws' attention and nws provided responses to them . other concerns brought to our attention either had not been reported to nws or nws had not officially responded . we discussed these concerns with nws officials and received their responses . the most common concern — voiced by almost every individual we spoke with — was with the ability of distant radars to detect all types of weather phenomena . table 4 presents concerns raised by users in erie and crawford counties and nws' responses . the primary concern voiced from five of the seven counties now served by the central pennsylvania and pittsburgh wfos was the ability of distant radars to provide adequate coverage for severe weather phenomena in order to issue accurate and timely forecasts and warnings . some users in counties at the fringes of radar coverage questioned nws' ability to track approaching severe weather outside the range of an office's radar . in particular , northwestern pennsylvania was one such area with degraded radar coverage for macrobursts , mini - supercells , and lake - effect snow .