modify interfaces . validation - test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an environment that faithfully represents the operational environment . implementation - implement converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement data exchange contingency plans , if necessary . during our review , we concentrated on the navy's efforts to oversee its year 2000 program during the awareness and assessment phases — the first two phases of its overall five - phased approach . we focused our review on year 2000 work being carried out by ( 1 ) dod's office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence ( asd / c3i ) , which is responsible for promulgating dod guidance on year 2000 matters and providing assistance to defense components , ( 2 ) navy headquarters , including the offices of the chief information officer ( cio ) , who is responsible for overall coordination and management and for issuing navy year 2000 policy and guidance , and ( 3 ) the navy's two largest systems commands , the naval air systems command ( navair ) and the naval sea systems command ( navsea ) , which are the central activities responsible for developing , acquiring , and supporting aeronautical systems and ships and related weapons and combat systems . specifically , we met with the acting assistant secretary of defense for command , control , and communications and intelligence , the principal director for information management , the director for information technology , and other senior staff responsible for year 2000 issues . we reviewed defense's year 2000 guidance and other documentation on year 2000 funding , reporting , and date format requirements . we met with the acting deputy chief information officer , the team leader and coordinator from the year 2000 coordination office , and the navsea coordinator and the navair deputy cio . we obtained and analyzed documents issued by these offices that describe organizational structure and responsibilities for carrying out the navy year 2000 program . we reviewed the navy's year 2000 action plan to assess the level of guidance , roles , and responsibilities , and target milestone dates for the year 2000 effort . we also reviewed other pertinent year 2000 program documentation such as defense and navy guidance and management directives , working group minutes , status reports , and cost and schedule data . further , we reviewed available inventory information on the navy's mission - critical systems contained in the defense integration support tools ( dist ) database , which the navy uses to help manage its year 2000 efforts . the phases and a description of each follows . awareness - define the year 2000 problem and gain executive - level support and sponsorship . establish a year 2000 program team and develop an overall strategy . ensure that everyone in the organization is fully aware of the issue . assessment - assess the year 2000 impact on the enterprise .