the library of congress is much more than just a library . it provides products ranging from policy analysis and information to support legislative decisionmaking , to books on tape to aid the blind and physically handicapped . it also provides copyright registration services to the creative public , cataloging standards and services for libraries across the nation and some foreign libraries , and a host of other products and services . the library has also recently embarked on its national digital library program . under this program the library plans to digitize 5 million of its 103 million items by the year 2000 , at a cost of $60 million . of this amount , $15 million are to be provided by appropriations and $45 million are to be provided by private donations . within this context , booz - allen's findings on the library's mission , operations , and resources and the results of price waterhouse's financial statement audit are summarized as follows . today , the library is at an important crossroads in its long history . its efficiency , effectiveness , and continued relevance may depend on its ability to address key issues about its future mission . the library's mission and activities have continued to grow since its creation in 1800 , and the growth of its mission has been matched or exceeded by the growth of its collections . booz - allen found that the library's staff , management structure , and resources are in danger of being overwhelmed by this growth . booz - allen identified three alternative missions that could be considered to shape the library's future . the three missions can be used to characterize the potential scope of activity and the customers the library might serve: ( 1 ) congress ; ( 2 ) congress and the nation ; and ( 3 ) congress , the nation , and the world community of libraries , publishers , and scholars . the current library mission and activities fall somewhere between the latter two alternatives . the executive summaries of their reportsare attached . before highlighting the management review and financial audit findings , we would like to note some aspects of the library's activities that can serve as a useful context for discussing the overall management of the library . first , the library's collections are large and diverse . the library collects materials covering a wide range of subject matter , in over 400 languages , and in a variety of formats ranging from books and manuscripts to photographs and sound recordings . the library believes it currently has over 103 million items and adds to its collections at a rate of about 2.5 million items per year . the library's foreign language collections constitute approximately 50 percent of its book collections and approximately 60 percent of its cataloging workload . second , the library provides an extremely wide range of products and services . under the first mission alternative , the library would refocus its functions on the original role of serving congress . collections would be limited to broadly defined congressional and federal government needs , and congressional research service - provided information would continue to support legislative functions .