in the past , this has not occurred . for example , the data administration program is intended to support the modernization effort and address fundamental technical inefficiencies that have resulted from state's decentralized organization and mission and business operations . managers throughout the agency must begin to work together to identify and address information management weaknesses . state must also assess and prioritize its mission and business needs and begin to focus on those projects that are most needed across the department . only by taking an agencywide focus will state be able to make substantive progress and break from its history of poor information management . to institute modern information resources management practices in support of departmentwide mission and business needs , we recommend that the secretary of state designate a chief information officer , above the assistant secretary level , with the authority necessary to oversee the implementation of departmentwide irm initiatives and standards , and strengthen the recently established new irm investment review board by ( 1 ) increasing regional and functional bureau representation and ( 2 ) ensuring that the board's determinations are implemented . we also recommend that the chief information officer , in conjunction with participants from the irm investment review board , ensure development of an agency business plan specifying mission goals , objectives , and priorities to provide a sound basis for irm planning and business process improvements ; integrate irm planning with budgeting and other related processes ; ensure that the irm organization ( 1 ) issues adequate guidance to govern agencywide irm , including the areas of strategic planning and acquisition , and ( 2 ) develops information and technical architectures and standards to ensure integration of data and systems ; and require periodic evaluations of state's irm practices against those of leading organizations and implement necessary improvements to continually strengthen practices . as requested , we did not obtain written comments on a draft of this report . however , we discussed the results of our work with the under secretary for management and senior irm officials , who generally agreed with the information presented . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the date of this letter . we agree that his irm role is critical . however , we are concerned that leaving the cio as an ad hoc position will not ensure that the processes needed to effect lasting irm improvements will be institutionalized . a departmentwide process for selecting and reviewing investments is needed to effectively carry out irm improvement efforts . such a process would involve an investment review board , with significant control over decisions and balanced representation from key program and support areas . traditionally , irm projects have been thought of as individual information technology expenses . the leading organizations we studied , however , began to think of information systems projects , not as one - time expenses , but rather as investments to improve mission performance . they instituted review boards with responsibility for controlling budgets and selecting , funding , integrating , and reviewing information management projects to ensure that they meet agencywide mission and business objectives .