the majors for these managers were business related . twenty - nine of the 33 respondents reported completing one or more courses in accounting - related subjects , as follows: 1-2 subjects: 2 civilians , 3-5 subjects: 7 ( 2 officers and 5 civilians ) , and 6 or more subjects: 20 ( 8 officers and 12 civilians ) . based solely on a review of their formal education , the respondents in the latter group appear to have met the requirements to serve in gs - 510 accountant positions . a review of the profiles showed that the average years of professional work experience was 21 years for the 11 officers , with a range of 15 to 28 years , and 26 years for the 22 civilians , with a range of 12 to 42 years . the respondents had spent most of their careers in dod . figures vii.1 and vii.2 show the average number of years of work experience by rank for the officers and by grade for the civilians , respectively . con ( ) ( ) m ( ) c ( ) managers by rank ( number at each rank ) s execves ( ) gs - ( ) gs - ( ) gs - ( ) gs - ( ) gs - ( ) managers by grade ( number at each grade ) figures vii.3 and vii.4 show the number of officers and civilians who indicated that they had performed each financial management function previously outlined at sometime during their careers , and the average number of years of experience in each function . the financial management function performed most frequently was financial analysis . a review of the profiles also showed that 7 officers and 13 civilians had performed three or more of these functions . number of managers performing function ( total = 11 respondents ) g policy ( yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) number of managers performing function ( total = 22 respondents ) g policy ( yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) . figure vii.5 shows the training reported by the 33 respondents as being completed during 1995 and 1996 . figures iv.1 and iv.2 show the average number of years of work experience by rank for the officer and by grade for the 11 civilians , respectively . five civilians did not hold any professional certifications . a review of the profiles also showed that the officer and six civilians had performed three or more of these functions . number of managers performing function ( total = 1 respondent ) g policy ( yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) number of managers performing function ( total = 11 respondents ) g policy ( yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) . figure iv.5 shows the training reported by 12 respondents as being completed during 1995 and 1996 .