the noncompliance was not material to the financial statements . management has implemented internal controls which , if properly implemented and adhered to , should prevent future noncompliances . no other reportable instances of noncompliance with laws and regulations were disclosed for the provisions tested . our audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during the course of the 1995 audit , we also noted that the commission significantly improved general controls over the computerized information systems . we had identified matters for improvement and communicated them to the commission in a previous management letter . the commission has corrected , or is in the process of correcting , all general control weaknesses identified and reported in that letter . we noted no internal control weaknesses during our audit of their fiscal year 1995 financial statements that needed to be communicated to the commission in a separate management letter . as provided by the panama canal treaty of 1977 , the panama canal commission will terminate on december 31 , 1999 , when the republic of panama will assume full responsibility for the management , operation , and maintenance of the panama canal . the treaty provides that the canal be turned over in operating condition and free of liens and debts , except as the two parties may otherwise agree . as discussed in note 9 to the financial statements , as of september 30 , 1995 , the commission forecasts that the present $90.7 million in unfunded liabilities should be covered by tolls over the remaining life of the treaty . we did not examine the commission's forecast and express no opinion on it . the ability to cover these future costs , including administrative costs , is dependent upon ( 1 ) obtaining the budgeted levels of canal operations and ( 2 ) future economic events . the commission operates as a rate - regulated utility . management made this assertion based upon criteria established under fmfia and omb circular a - 123 , internal control systems . except as noted above , our tests for compliance with selected provisions of certain laws and regulations disclosed no other instances of noncompliance that would be reportable under generally accepted government auditing standards . however , the objective of our audit was not to provide an opinion on overall compliance with laws and regulations . accordingly , we do not express such an opinion . the treaty related cost schedules are presented as required by the panama canal act of 1979 , and the schedule of property , plant , and equipment is presented for purposes of additional analysis . this information has not been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements , and , accordingly , we express no opinion on these schedules . while we do not express an opinion on the detailed schedule of property , plant , and equipment , we found no material inconsistencies with the financial statements taken as a whole . preparing the annual financial statements in conformity with generally establishing , maintaining , and assessing the internal control structure to provide reasonable assurance that the broad control objectives of fmfia are met ; and complying with applicable laws and regulations .