several of these outages are highlighted below . may 8 , 1988: more than 500,000 business and residential customers lost telephone service due to a fire at the hinsdale , illinois , central office . during the following two weeks , approximately 3.5 million calls were disrupted . hospitals with centrex service in the affected area could not make calls from one floor to another . twenty percent of the departing flights from o'hare international airport were canceled and flights from other airports around the country had to be rescheduled . in a study of the hinsdale outage , the university of minnesota concluded that the cost of network failures to airlines could be between $2 and $3 million per hour and investment bankers could lose up to $5 million per hour . jan. 4 , 1991: maintenance workers in a cable vault in new jersey accidentally cut an optical fiber transmission line that provided service to lower manhattan . sixty percent of the calls into and out of the city were disrupted for eight hours . the new york mercantile exchange and the commodity exchange had to shut down operations . voice and radar systems that are used to control air traffic from facilities in new york , washington , and boston were disabled for five hours . sept. 17 , 1991: through a power sharing arrangement with new york's consolidated edison , at&t agreed to use its own power when consolidated edison's facilities were heavily loaded . on this particularly warm day in september , at&t switched to its own power . batteries designed to meet the initial instantaneous power demand performed as intended . however , alarms that were intended to inform technicians to start the facility's diesel generator had been manually disabled . when the batteries discharged , all telephone transmission systems in the facility shut down and voice and data communications controlled by the facility failed . voice and data communications between the new york , boston , and washington air route traffic control centers stopped . three new york area airports closed for several hours . flights destined for new york were either delayed or canceled . air traffic at boston was severely disrupted and delays occurred nationwide . more than 1,174 flights were canceled or delayed and approximately 85,000 passengers were affected . the day after the phone outage , flight schedules were still disrupted because aircraft were not at the right airports for the scheduled morning flights . sept. 10 , 1993: a road crew boring holes for highway road signs in ohio cut a high - capacity fiber - optic cable belonging to mci . the cable , which carries most of the company's east - to - west traffic , was repaired in about seven hours . however , millions of residential and business customers were unable to make coast - to - coast calls during that period . march 15 , 1994: during the early morning hours a fire broke out in pacific bell's los angeles central office known as the madison complex . before complete service was restored , almost 17 hours later , approximately 395,000 customers may have been affected and over 5 million calls were blocked .