we disagree with this justification . regarding defense's first point , chcs now operates , for the most part , in a regional environment , where a single chcs host facility supports one or more geographically remote satellite chcs facilities . in this regional configuration , each host maintains an automated central patient record that is accessed by satellite facilities on demand . a disruption in chcs operations at a host facility due to a fire , for instance , which destroys the computer room ( whether or not it also destroys the rest of the hospital ) will disrupt operations in every satellite facility connected to that host . concerning defense's second point , chcs program office officials have recently stated that improvements in technology — better , faster , and cheaper computer equipment — may now make it possible for them to adopt a more active plan for repairing or replacing damaged chcs hardware at a reasonable cost . finally , with respect to defense's third point , health - care providers at chcs facilities told us that they have become so dependent on the patient information in chcs that they would experience great difficulty reverting to manual methods during an extended chcs downtime . for example , chcs currently provides medical treatment facilities with the capability to perform drug interaction screening , which cannot be done as effectively by a human relying on memory or reviewing paper documents as it can by the computer . we discussed our concerns with chcs program office officials on several occasions . in recent meetings , they said they are reviewing defense's chcs backup and recovery plan to address rapid repair or replacement of damaged chcs equipment . as the backbone of defense's medical operations , chcs will provide personnel with almost instant access to patient information , from medical history to current treatment and vital statistics . with chcs , defense can make significant improvements in the way its medical treatment facilities operate: it can lower the cost and improve the quality of its health care delivery , and better address the needs of its patients , physicians , nurses , and other system users . patients' access to health care has increased with better appointment availability through improved scheduling . physicians and nurses have experienced time savings in the delivery of medical care with improved access to patient information . if defense is to realize all of chcs' potential , however , it is critical that chcs be available to physicians and other health care providers when needed . while defense's backup and recovery plan provides for recovery from disruptions in computer service due to power outages , the plan does not effectively address recovery from major disruptions requiring the repair or replacement of chcs equipment damaged as a result of disaster . health care providers have become dependent on the patient information in the system , so any major disruption in the availability of that information could result in injury or even loss of life . this risk would be greatly minimized if defense had a more effective backup and recovery plan for chcs equipment .