the metrics . according to irs , although phase one has been completed , no metrics have been defined , and implementation is currently planned for sometime between june 1996 and january 1997 . in this regard , although irs has begun to act on our recommendations , systems are still being developed without the data and discipline needed to give management assurance that they will perform as intended . before december 31 , 1995 , complete an integrated systems architecture , including security , telecommunications , network management , and data management ; institutionalize formal configuration management for all newly approved projects and upgrades and develop a plan to bring ongoing projects under formal configuration management ; develop security concept of operations , disaster recovery , and contingency plans for the modernization vision and ensure that these requirements are addressed when developing information system projects ; develop a testing and evaluation master plan for the modernization ; establish an integration testing and control facility ; and complete the modernization integration plan and ensure that projects are monitored for compliance with modernization architectures . irs agreed with these recommendations and said that it was identifying the necessary actions to define and enforce systems development standards and architectures agencywide . irs' current efforts in this area follow: irs is developing a “descriptive overview” of an integrated systems architecture , which , for example , includes a security architecture chapter . a draft of the descriptive overview is due in april 1996 , and an executive summary is due in mid - march . irs has developed and distributed a configuration management plan template , which identifies the elements needed when constructing a configuration management plan , and established a charter for its configuration management branch . irs has prepared a security concept of operations and a disaster recovery and contingency plan . irs has developed a test and evaluation master plan for tsm . irs is in the process of establishing an interim integration testing and control facility but has not determined an initial operating date . it is also planning a permanent integration testing and control facility , scheduled to be completed by the end of 1996 . irs has completed an informal draft of its tsm release definition document and a draft of its modernization integration plan . these activities start to address our recommendations . however , they do not fully satisfy any of our recommendations for the following reasons . first , irs has not completed an integrated systems architecture ( the “blueprints” of tsm ) , and no evidence has been provided to suggest that it will have one in the foreseeable future . the draft architecture documents received are high - level descriptions that fall far short of the level of detail needed to provide effective guidance in designing and building systems . for example , irs' concept of a three - tier , distributed architecture does not provide sufficient detail to understand the security requirements and implications . it does not , for instance , specify what security mechanisms are to be implemented between and among the three tiers to ensure that only properly authorized users are allowed to access tax processing application software and taxpayer data .