aac does not conform to these goals . for example , aac does not track ( 1 ) the software risks associated with cost , resource , schedule , and technical aspects of the project and ( 2 ) the size of software work products ( or size of changes to software work products ) . software subcontract management - although the goals for this kpa emphasize the selection of qualified software subcontractors and managing them effectively , aac does not ( 1 ) have a documented procedure that explains how the work to be contracted should be defined and planned and ( 2 ) ensure that software managers and other individuals who are involved in establishing a software contract are trained to perform this activity . software quality assurance - the goals within this kpa emphasize ( 1 ) the verification of the adherence of software products and activities to applicable standards , procedures , and requirements and ( 2 ) the reporting of noncompliance issues that cannot be resolved within the project to senior management . aac has an automated data processing system integrity guideline and a systems integration service ( sis ) group that has a reporting channel to senior management and is independent of the project managers . however , projects do not have sqa plans ; the sis group does not participate in certain sqa functions , such as the preparation , review , and audit of projects' software development plans , standards , and procedures ; and members of the sis group are not trained to perform their sqa activities . software configuration management - aac performs software ( i.e. , code only ) change control using a tool called “endevor,” and its employees are trained in the use of this tool . however , the scope of the goals within this kpa cover all products in the entire software life cycle and not just the software code . aac has not identified software work products ( with the exception of software code ) that need to be placed under configuration management , established a configuration management library system that can be used as a repository for software work products , or established a software configuration control board . unless both vba and aac initiate improvement activities within the various kpas and accelerate those already underway , they are unlikely to produce and maintain high - quality software on time and within budget . because vba and aac do not satisfy any of the kpas required for a level 2 ( i.e. , repeatable ) capability , there is no assurance that ( 1 ) investments made in new software development will achieve their operational improvement objectives or ( 2 ) software will be delivered consistent with cost and schedule estimates . we reviewed all documentation provided to us by va including the documents listed in their comments on our draft report . as called for by the sce methodology , we carefully compared all this documentation to the sei cmm criteria . summary results of this evaluation follow . requirements management - aac does not create or control a requirements baseline for software engineering . also , aac does not manage or control requirements .