testing requirements . the september estimate still used the gartner formula and did not take into account other factors that can have a significant impact on the cost of correction including those identified in dod's year 2000 management plan . air force officials acknowledged that the $405 million estimate is a rough figure . they planned to re - estimate costs at some point after the assessment phase is completed . costs should be continuously reestimated through the assessment and subsequent year 2000 phases . by waiting to refine its cost estimates , the air force will be delaying the availability of information needed to make informed resource trade - off decisions . in fact , trade - off issues and other funding disputes , which call for the need to develop more accurate cost estimates , have already surfaced in some air force programs . for example , one aircraft weapon system program found that correcting the year 2000 problem in ground software equipment that is used to program the aircraft's operational avionics software for navigation and weapons delivery would cost $42 million more than what was budgeted for routine maintenance of the aircraft . in august 1997 , the program office reported that it fixed the problem for about $300,000 using a temporary workaround . however , according to a program office official , because the existing equipment consists of old ibm mainframes and outdated jovial code it will have to be replaced eventually — and likely at a higher cost — in order to support future planned aircraft enhancements such as joint direct attack munition and joint standoff weapon . in addition , the air force estimates that it will cost between $70 million and $90 million to fix telephone switches throughout the service . this estimate is not included in the $405 million total air force year 2000 cost estimate . the air force is currently in a dispute with the contractor that supplied the switches over who is responsible for year 2000 correction . at the same time , air force components have not budgeted funds to fix their telephone switches . since then , and according to afcic officials , the air force has begun to address this funding issue through its normal corporate funding process . it is critically important during the year 2000 effort that agencies protect against the potential for introducing and propagating errors from one organization to another and ensure that interfacing systems have the ability to exchange data through the transition period . according to our year 2000 assessment guide , to address the issue of interfaces , agencies should ( 1 ) identify their internal and external interfaces , ( 2 ) determine the need for data bridges and filters , ( 3 ) notify outside data exchange partners of their interface plans , ( 4 ) test their interface correction strategies , and ( 5 ) develop contingency plans that address the possibility of failing to receive data from an external source or receiving invalid data . dod's year 2000 management plan places responsibility on component heads or their designated year 2000 points of contact to document and obtain system interface agreements in the form of memorandums of agreement or the equivalent .