these amounts are referred to as unpaid assessments . irs identifies unpaid assessments through a number of means . most are identified through the filing of tax returns by the taxpayer . in cases where the taxpayer files a return that reflects an amount or tax liability owed the federal government but does not provide payment or provides only partial payment , the unpaid assessment represents the difference between the tax liability as reflected on the return and the amount actually paid by the taxpayer . irs refers to these as self - assessments because the amount of the delinquent tax is identified solely through information provided by the taxpayer . irs also identifies unpaid assessments through its enforcement programs . such programs include irs' underreporter program , where information such as wages , interest , and dividends contained on the tax return is compared to other third party - supplied information , such as wage and earnings statements and annual interest statements . any differences identified through this process can result in the identification of additional tax liabilities or assessments owed by the taxpayer . also , irs tax examinations and audits can identify additional taxes owed the government . irs' substitute for return program , where irs constructs tax returns through the use of third party information and prior taxpayer history for taxpayers who have filed returns in the past but have not filed for the given period , is another tool used by irs to attempt to identify amounts that are owed the government . through these various enforcement programs , irs attempts to close what is referred to as the tax gap , which is the difference between taxes actually collected and the amount that is legally due under the internal revenue code . the tax gap can be further subdivided into the “compliance gap” and the “collection gap.” the compliance gap , which is outside the scope of this report , represents the difference between taxes that should actually be due and those that have been identified by irs , either through self - assessments or through assessments resulting from irs enforcement programs . it is this compliance gap that irs' enforcement programs attempt to close , although considerable amounts of taxes due on legal and illegal income remain unassessed or underassessed each year . the collection gap represents the difference between the amounts that have been identified as being due through assessments and the amounts that will ultimately be collected on these assessments . in total , 290 sample items ( 40 percent ) related to tax years prior to 1989 , and many of these items had extensions to their collection periods . in our sample items , we noted that a major reason for extending the collection period was ongoing litigation , such as bankruptcy , appeal , or tax court . these actions result in the suspension of the 10-year collection period until they have been resolved . also , offers submitted by taxpayers for less than the amount owed , known as “offers - in - compromise,” also result in a suspension of the 10-year period while irs considers the offer . also , taxpayers often sign waiver agreements that extend the collection period beyond the initial 10 years .