however , they did not specify these costs . although jlsc has yet to identify them , dmss will require numerous system interfaces if it is to be the corporate depot maintenance system . our concerns with this strategy are twofold . first , dod did not base its decision to develop and deploy dmss on convincing analyses of expected system development and deployment costs or detailed assessments of dmss's economic and technical risks . further , defense did not obtain the independent reviews by the maisrc and approvals by the mda of the project's milestones , which are designed to ensure the decision was consistent with sound business practice . second , we believe that dod needs to consider reengineering entire processes before implementing system changes if it is to achieve the dramatic reductions in operational support costs called for by cim . in selecting dmss as dod's initial step toward improving defense maintenance depot operations , the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics ( dusd ( l ) ) did not base its decision on sufficient analyses of expected system development and deployment costs or detailed assessments of dmss's economic and technical risks . further , dusd ( l ) did not obtain independent milestone reviews and approvals which are designed to ensure ( 1 ) decisions are consistent with sound business principles and ( 2 ) risks inherent in large information systems projects are adequately managed . thus , even the marginal improvements defense expects from dmss may never be achieved . defense directives require that decisions to develop and deploy information systems be based on convincing , well - supported estimates of project costs , benefits , and risks . these directives establish a disciplined process for selecting the best projects based on comparisons of competing alternatives . defense's principal means for comparing various alternatives is a functional economic analysis . for each alternative , it identifies resource , schedule , and other critical project characteristics and presents estimates of the costs , benefits , and risks . the office of the assistant secretary of defense for program analysis and evaluation is required to validate these estimates to help ensure that the economic analysis presents compelling quantitative data for each of the alternatives being evaluated . once an alternative is chosen , the analysis becomes the basis for project approval . any significant change in the project's expected costs , benefits , or risks requires that the project selection and direction be reevaluated . also , dod directives established the major automated information system review council ( maisrc ) to provide oversight of individual major information system projects . at each development milestone for proposed information system projects , maisrc reviews these projects to determine if they are consistent with dod policies and directives . maisrc then recommends continuation , redirection , or termination of each project to the project's milestone decision authority ( mda ) . the benefits it expects from implementing dmss are relatively meager when compared with results other organizations are achieving through reengineering . we agree with dod's concern over depot maintenance operations . further , we agree that accurate information on depot operations and costs is critical to improving this important readiness - related support process .