defense did not examine all of these promising alternatives . instead , it considered only the possibility of outsourcing computer operations with the national finance center . this option was determined to be infeasible.defense did not analyze other alternatives , including cross - servicing , integrating payroll / personnel systems , collocating personnel offices , dod - wide management of personnel operations , or outsourcing all of its personnel operations . in addition , once it decided on regionalization , defense did not follow a sound process for selecting the regions . has defense identified and mitigated the risks associated with the major cots modifications ? in conducting our review , we examined defense requirements on development , management , and oversight of information systems in light of relevant legislative and federal requirements , including the clinger - cohen act of 1996 . we discussed defense's efforts to develop and manage dcpds with officials from ( 1 ) defense's civilian personnel management service ( cpms ) , ( 2 ) the air force central design activity ( cda ) responsible for managing technical modifications , ( 3 ) oracle corporation , the contractor from which defense acquired the new system , ( 4 ) the military services and defense agencies that plan to use the system , and ( 5 ) the office of personnel management . we also visited and interviewed officials from five of the regional personnel centers and four of the local or installation - level offices . we conducted our review from august 1997 through october 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the department of defense . the acting assistant secretary for force management policy provided us with written comments . these comments have been incorporated where appropriate and are discussed in the agency comment and our evaluation section of this letter and appendix i . details on the scope and methodology of our work are provided in appendix ii . defense's civilian personnel community provides defense managers with the personnel management services and support needed to accomplish their missions , including recruitment , job classification , position management , training , career development , and benefits administration . traditionally , the military services and defense agencies have managed their civilian personnel service delivery organizations and systems through local civilian personnel offices located at or near military bases and installations all over the world . during the past 5 years , defense has been attempting to reduce personnel management costs through the following actions . ( 1 ) reducing the number of civilian personnelists . personnelists provide face - to - face assistance to civilian employees , answering questions about such issues as life insurance , health insurance , and position classification . they process paperwork for new hires , promotions , awards , and a wide variety of personnel actions and assist in training , benefits administration , management / employee relations , recruitment , and staffing . how did defense determine the number and locations for civilian personnel regional service centers and why is there a wide disparity in the number of regional centers among the services ?