including . the recruitment , selection , and training of personnel to carry out agency financial management functions . .” and should have the authority to provide agencywide policy advice on the training of all financial management personnel to ensure a cadre of qualified financial management professionals throughout the agency . in line with this mandate , the dod cfo would be the focal point to coordinate with the dod chancellor for education and professional development on training needs for dod's large network of financial personnel ( both civilian and military personnel ) . although dod has not yet established a coordinated agencywide training program for its financial management personnel , there are a number of initiatives planned or underway throughout dod that are intended to enhance the professionalism of the financial management workforce . for example , dfas officials informed us that beginning with fiscal year 1997 they have centralized control over training funds at dfas headquarters and have allocated 3 percent of its budget for training its financial management staff — an amount within the range of that spent for training reported by state government and private sector respondents . it is particularly encouraging that dfas is currently finalizing a financial management career development plan for its employees that outlines areas of needed expertise by occupational series . dfas plans to implement this “comprehensive framework to establish flexibility , development , and advancement of the dfas workforce” during fiscal year 1998 . the plan calls for job series - specific competencies and recognizes that these competencies may be obtained through a combination of education , training , and work experiences . according to dfas , a number of sources were considered in developing these competencies , including prior studies by jfmip and the office of personnel management . in addition , according to a dfas training official , dfas contracted with the office of personnel management to obtain assistance in developing the overall career development concept and in obtaining data on core competencies related to dfas job functions . within the plan , dfas recognized the value of professional certifications to workers as a means of achieving expertise and excellence in their fields and as a means of encouraging employees to continue their education and hone their professional skills . the plan represents a good start — it demonstrates a growing dfas understanding of the importance of and commitment to training . but , the plan could be improved in several critical areas . for example , the plan does not specifically address minimum annual training requirements , including a recognition that the majority of the training must be in technical accounting or other related financial management areas ; the key competencies associated with knowledge of accounting concepts , such as the statements of federal accounting standards , and jfmip's systems requirements ; how the general courses / subject areas will be linked to specific training courses that can be used to attain an identified competency ; and how the competencies and developmental activities identified will be applied to both new hires and individuals currently on - board by job series and grade level .