providerchoice . under traditional medicare , beneficiaries may obtain covered services from any physician , hospital , or other health care provider that receives medicare payments . because most providers accept medicare payments , beneficiaries have virtually unlimited choice . in contrast , beneficiaries in managed care face a more restricted list of providers . would it be appropriately shielded from the pressure exerted by special interest groups ? third , how would the administrative entity hold plans accountable for meeting medicare standards ? would it rely chiefly on public accountability , in which the process and procedures for compliance are clearly defined and actively monitored , or on market accountability , by providing comparative information on competing plans and letting beneficiary enrollment choices weed out poor performers ? answers to these questions will determine , to a large extent , whether a restructured medicare program will be administered effectively . adjusting for differences in beneficiary health status — commonly known as risk adjustment — enables plans to be fairly compensated when they enroll either healthier or sicker - than - average beneficiaries . our work and that of others show that , partially because of an inadequate risk adjustment methodology , taxpayers have not benefited from the potential for capitated managed care plans to save money.under the competitive premium approach , the ability to moderate medicare spending rests in part on how accurately analysts determine the government's share of a health plan's premium . today's medicare+choice program is phasing in an interim risk - adjustment methodology based on the limited health status data currently available . the challenge , for medicare+choice or any premium - based reform proposal , is to implement an improved method that more accurately adjusts payments , does not impose an undue administrative burden on plans , and cannot be manipulated by plans seeking to inappropriately increase revenues . in an ideal market , informed consumers prod competitors to offer the best value . our recent review of medicare+choice , however , showed that a lack of comparative consumer information dampened the program's potential to capitalize on market forces to achieve cost and quality improvements.despite hcfa's review and approval of health plans' marketing literature , many health plans distributed materials containing inaccurate or incomplete benefit information . some plans did not furnish complete information on plan benefits and restrictions until after a beneficiary had enrolled . others never provided full descriptions of benefits and restrictions . in addition , making comparisons across plans was difficult because , in the absence of common standards , plans chose their own format and terms to describe a plan's benefit package . if medicare is restructured to incorporate a competitive premium support approach , the need for beneficiaries to be well informed about their health care options becomes more critical . to guide its efforts to improve consumer information , hcfa should look to fehbp — the choice - based health insurance program for federal employees . in fehbp , for example , health plans are required to follow standard formats and use standard terms in their marketing literature . informing medicare beneficiaries , however , is likely to involve challenges not encountered in informing current and former federal employees .