additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . not all cost elements are applicable to all wcf activities . for example , the cost element of inventory losses / obsolescence generally applies only to wcf supply activities that maintain inventories . below is a list of major cost elements used to develop stabilized rates: direct and indirect labor , direct material , general and administrative expenses , inventory losses / obsolescence , inventory maintenance , condemnation of inventory items , accumulated operating results gains or losses , depreciation , and joint logistics systems center ( jlsc ) surcharge . major commands responsible for the overall management of the wcfs review the budget estimates and consolidate individual business area activities' budget estimates . the military services' and dod components' headquarters and the office of the secretary of defense also review the budget estimates before they are submitted to the congress as part of the annual budget . any changes made during the dod budget review process are incorporated into the wcfs' prices before the beginning of the fiscal year . with the exception of retirement benefit costs for civilian employees , which is discussed below , we found that all of the key cost elements to recover full cost from fms customers are now included in the stabilized price . the costs not charged by the wcf supply activities , which were responsible for about $1.5 billion ( 75 percent ) of the wcfs annual sales to fms customers , consisted of a portion of the government's share of the full cost for pension and postretirement health benefit costs for civilian personnel who worked on fms cases . the employee and the employing agency both contribute annually toward the cost of the future pension benefits . while the contributions made by dod are now part of the stabilized rate , the employee and agency contributions are less than the full cost of providing the pension benefits . therefore , the federal government must , in effect , make up the funding shortfall . in addition , neither the agency nor the employee pays the federal government's portion of postretirement health benefit costs . both the pension and postretirement health benefit costs will eventually be paid out of the general funds in the treasury — not by dod . since the pension and postretirement health benefits are costs to the government , they should be added to the stabilized rate and recovered from fms customers . in this regard , we found that the nonsupply activities we visited recognized this and modified the stabilized rate to include the full pension costs in the prices they charged fms customers . however , they did not include the postretirement health benefit cost . as noted earlier , we did not attempt to estimate the postretirement health benefit cost for nonsupply activities . including retirement benefit costs is consistent with the statement of federal financial accounting standards number 4 , which states that federal agencies should measure and report direct and indirect costs that contribute to output , regardless of funding sources . it is also consistent with omb circular no .