additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . we did not independently verify the data that agencies provided to omb . our work was performed in washington , d.c. , from october 1997 through march 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the director of the office of management and budget or his designee . on july 14 , 1998 , the assistant director for budget ; the chief , budget concepts branch of budget ; and their staff provided us with comments , which are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section . changes in the budget environment and procurement reforms have reduced the potential magnitude of problems with year - end spending . tight fiscal controls coupled with requirements for full and open competition and advance planning make it less likely that year - end spending will lead to sole - source or unplanned procurements . the competition in contracting act of 1984 ( cica ) , for example , provided a more common procurement system for defense and civilian agencies , established a “full and open competition” standard more rigorous than the “maximum practicable competition” that preceded it , and included sole - source approval and procurement notice requirements in the procurement statutes . the conference report on cica suggests that some of the act's changes to the procurement system were intended to address the year - end spending concerns raised by the subcommittee . the defense acquisition workforce improvement act ( dawia ) addressed many of the subcommittee's acquisition personnel - related concerns at dod by requiring improvements in the qualifications , training , and career development of the defense acquisition workforce . two more recent acts , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( fasa ) , and the clinger - cohen act of 1996 ( cca ) responded to subcommittee concerns regarding contract personnel performance incentives . other cca reforms required comparable qualification and training standards for civilian agencies . to illustrate the way in which changes to the procurement system have addressed the subcommittee's concerns , table 1 associates the subcommittee's recommendations with descriptions of statutory provisions that implement them in whole or in part . procurement and management reforms continue to evolve and influence the issue of year - end spending . two of the most significant procurement reforms were enacted within the last 4 years and other management reforms are in early phases of implementation .