we do not agree . based on our review , the current monitoring activities are not designed to ensure that repayment is complete , accurate , and timely . for example , none of the activities delineated by the pmas include detailed reviews of the pmas' power repayment studies , upon which rates are based . therefore , there is little assurance that these repayment studies provide for complete , accurate , and timely repayment of the costs that the federal government is entitled to recover under current law . our report includes several examples of ( 1 ) significant power - related costs that historically have not been recovered and ( 2 ) the lack of timeliness in resolving cost recovery issues once they were raised . it is important to note that our review was not designed to detect and quantify all losses , but rather to evaluate the effectiveness of the system for monitoring repayment and determine if there was the potential for financial loss to the federal government . based on our assessment of the monitoring system , we concluded that there is the potential for loss to the federal government , beyond the identified examples in the report , and therefore that the system is ineffective and needs enhancing through closer monitoring of the pmas' repayment . however , in response to the pmas' comments , we have revised our report to clarify that we are not proposing multiple detailed reviews of the power repayment studies . instead , the detailed , independent power repayment study reviews should be performed and summaries of the results of those reviews used by doe to identify issues that require follow - up and resolution with the pmas and by ferc in assessing the pmas' rate proposals . the pmas also stated that the three pmas' respective financial statement auditors perform compliance testing which already accomplishes our recommendation that the power repayment studies be independently reviewed to determine whether they provide for complete , accurate , and timely repayment . we do not agree . as we state in the report , the objective of a financial statement audit is to express an opinion as to whether the statements are fairly stated and the audit would not be expected to detect all issues related to repayment or cost recovery . the financial statement audits — and other audits — have not included detailed reviews of the power repayment studies that assessed their completeness , assumptions , methodologies , and the reasonableness of estimates used . since the existing reviews of the power repayment studies have not included such assessments to ensure that repayment is complete , accurate , and timely , it is not possible to determine whether all cost recovery issues have been identified . moreover , the pmas' assertion relates to the compliance testing at the three pmas rather than at bonneville , which receives a different type of audit and less compliance testing , according to a bonneville official . as we state in our report , some of the same cost recovery issues exist at bonneville but generally have not been raised by its financial statement auditor in audit reports .