additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . these officials generally agreed with our findings . dod reported that it had reduced its problem disbursements from the benchmark figure of $19.1 billion to $9.7 billion — a $9.4 billion reduction — as of june 30 , 1994 . although we agree that dod has made some progress , dod's reduction was actually $5.8 billion . we found that $3.6 billion of the reported reduction was for problem disbursements that the navy reclassified as negative ulos — which still must be resolved . according to the dod team leader , prior to december 1993 , one of the navy's accounting systems would not accept a payment transaction if it would result in a negative ulo . instead , the navy's system would reject such transactions to a suspense file that included disbursements that had not been matched to obligations . when dod established the june 1993 benchmark for navy transactions , it included the amounts in the suspense file and — therefore , the navy negative ulos — in the $19.1 billion benchmark . in december 1993 , the navy changed its system procedures and began processing the rejected transactions as negative ulos . at that time , dod reclassified these transactions as negative ulos and took them off the “problem” list . we informed dod on several occasions that while these transactions were properly reclassified as negative ulos , they should not have been removed from the “problem” list simply because they were reclassified from one category of problem transaction to another . although the officials agreed that the negative ulos were problem disbursements that still needed to be resolved , they continued to report them as resolved in measuring and reporting on dod's progress to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government operations , legislation and national security subcommittee . for example , on april 12 , 1994 , the dod comptroller testified before the senate committee that as of february 1 , 1994 , dod had reduced the $19.1 billion benchmark figure by $7.1 billion . however , our analysis showed that as of that date , $3.2 billion of unresolved navy negative ulos were included in the $7.1 billion reduction . compounding dod's disbursement problem is the fact that the june 1993 benchmark , which is used to measure and report dod's progress , did not include all types of problem transactions . as a result , dod significantly understated the magnitude of problem disbursements by billions of dollars . after we brought this to dod officials' attention , dod began , in march 1994 , to collect data on the problem disbursement transactions that were not originally included under the criteria dod used to establish its benchmark . using the revised criteria , our analysis showed that dod's records contained at least $24.8 billion in problem disbursement transactions as of june 30 , 1994 . dod comptroller officials stated that they plan to update the original benchmark figure to show dod's total disbursement problem but could not tell us when it would be reported .