this report summarizes those findings . the department of the treasury is authorized by the congress to borrow money on the credit of the united states to fund operations of the federal government . the bureau of the public debt is the organizational entity within treasury that is responsible for prescribing the debt instruments and limiting and restricting the amount and composition of the debt . bpd accomplishes this by issuing marketable treasury bills , notes , and bonds as well as nonmarketable securities , such as u.s. savings bonds . the bureau is also responsible for paying interest to investors and redeeming investors' securities . in addition , bpd has been given the responsibility to issue treasury securities to trust funds for trust fund receipts not needed for current benefits and expenses . during fiscal year 1997 , bpd issued over $2.34 trillion in treasury securities to the public while redeeming about $2.31 trillion of debt held by the public . most of the $2.34 trillion was raised through more than 160 securities auctions as well as the continual sale of savings securities at 40,000 locations throughout the country and investments in securities by state and local governments . further , there was $152 billion of net borrowings from federal entities , primarily trust funds . bpd relies on a number of financial systems to process and track the money that is borrowed and to account for the securities it issues . one of its primary systems is the public debt accounting and reporting system , which is used to account for the federal debt . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . specifically , we evaluated application controls intended to ensure that access privileges establish individual accountability and proper segregation of duties , limit the processing privileges of individuals , and prevent and detect inappropriate or unauthorized activities ; data are authorized , converted to an automated form , and entered into the application accurately , completely , and promptly ; data are properly processed by the computer and files are updated correctly ; and files and reports generated by the application ( 1 ) represent transactions that actually occur and ( 2 ) accurately reflect the results of processing , and reports are controlled and distributed to the authorized users . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary .