the plan for the software project is documented . software work products that are needed to establish and maintain control of the software project are identified . the software risks associated with the cost , resource , schedule , and technical aspects of the project are identified , assessed , and documented . plans for the project's software engineering facilities and support tools are prepared . the software engineering group participates on the project proposal team . the software engineering group participates with other affected groups in the overall project planning throughout the project life cycle . software project commitments made to individuals and groups external to the organization are reviewed with senior management according to a documented procedure . a documented software development plan is used for tracking the software activities and communicating status . the size of the software work products ( or size of the changes to the software work products ) are tracked , and corrective actions are taken as necessary . the project's software effort and costs are tracked , and corrective actions are taken as necessary . the project's critical computer resources are tracked , and corrective actions are taken as necessary . the project's software schedule is tracked , and corrective actions are taken as necessary . each of the cmm levels are described in appendix i . in february 1995 , tsm was added to our list of high - risk areas as a critical information systems project that is vulnerable to schedule delays , cost over - runs , and potential failure to meet mission goals . in july 1995 , we issued a comprehensive report on the effectiveness of irs' efforts to modernize tax processing . the report discussed pervasive management and technical weaknesses that must be corrected if tsm is to succeed and made over a dozen specific recommendations . in this regard , we reported that unless irs improved its software development ability , it is unlikely to build tsm in a timely or economically manner , and systems are unlikely to perform as intended . reflecting continued congressional concern with tsm , the treasury , postal service , and general government appropriations act of 1996 , required the secretary of the treasury to provide a report to the house and senate appropriations committees regarding the management and implementation of tsm . this report was provided to the committees in may 1996 . as directed by the same legislation that required the report , in june 1996 , we reported on our assessment of irs actions taken to correct its management and technical weaknesses . we found that while irs had taken some actions , none responded to any of our recommendations in total . as a result , irs was not in any appreciably better position to ensure congress that the money spent on tsm would deliver the promised capability , on time , and within budget .