additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there was no reportable noncompliance with laws and regulations we tested . the following sections outline each of these conclusions in more detail and discuss significant matters considered in performing our audit and forming our opinions . appendix i discusses the scope of our audit , including one area for which we reviewed and relied on the work of an independent public accountant under contract to the corporation's inspector general . appendix ii presents the financial statements of the funds ; appendix iii presents the corporation's assertion about the effectiveness of its internal controls ; and appendix iv contains the corporation's written comments on a draft of this report . the following information discusses our continuing concerns about the long - term viability of the single - employer fund and weaknesses in employee benefit plan audits and reporting . in addition , significant matters involving material weaknesses in internal controls are discussed in a separate section below . the single - employer fund is able to meet its near - term benefit obligations because premium receipts presently exceed benefit payments and the fund held investments having a market value of $7.2 billion and cash of $627 million at september 30 , 1994 . the single - employer fund also reported a significant gain for the year , largely as a result of the effect of rising interest rates on the program's benefit liabilities . however , the fund's unfunded $1.2 billion deficit , which represents a shortfall in assets needed to satisfy the corporation's benefit liabilities for terminated plans and for those plans considered likely to terminate , still constitutes a threat to the fund's long - term viability . in addition to the losses recorded in the financial statements and reflected in the unfunded deficit as of september 30 , 1994 , the corporation disclosed $18 billion in estimated unfunded liabilities in single - employer plans that represent reasonably possible future losses . the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , which created the pension insurance program , established funding standards for insured plans but allowed benefits to become guaranteed before being funded by plan sponsors . the resulting timing difference has contributed , in large measure , to the corporation's exposure should a financially troubled plan sponsor be unable to meet its pension obligations . moreover , the premium structure of the single - employer fund has limited the corporation's ability to manage the exposure posed by underfunded plans because premiums paid by those plans have not fully covered the risks . in 1987 , the congress modified the single - employer fund's basic flat - rate premium structure by adding a supplemental variable rate premium which , for the first time , established a link between premiums and plan underfunding . the variable rate premium was based on the unfunded vested liability as calculated by the plan , after adjusting for a common interest rate , rather than the specific unfunded liability the fund assumes should a plan actually terminate .