we disagree with hhs . the make and model information will provide users with detailed data on the reported compliance status of their products , especially for those 195 manufacturers that va has determined to have merged or been bought out by other manufacturers as of july 29 , 1998 . in addition , hhs concurred with two of the three components of the second joint recommendation . specifically , it concurred with the component of the recommendation to determine the actions that should be taken regarding manufacturers who fail to respond to requests for compliance information . hhs also stated that under current regulations , fda does not have the authority to require all device manufacturers to submit reports on whether their devices are year 2000 compliant . hhs also concurred that the identity of defunct manufacturers , along with the known types , makes , and models of devices they manufactured should be included in the clearinghouse database . it further stated that it would explore possible approaches to acquiring additional information regarding defunct manufacturers' products . hhs did not concur with the component of the recommendation to review test results supporting the medical device equipment manufacturers' certifications that their equipment is compliant . it believed that the submission of appropriate certifications of compliance is sufficient to ensure that the certifying manufacturers are in compliance . we disagree that this is sufficient . through independent reviews of the manufacturers' test results , users of the medical devices are provided with a level of confidence that the devices are year 2000 compliant . hhs also stated that it did not have the resources to undertake such a review , and there is insufficient time to complete a review of this nature . in this regard , if hhs lacks sufficient resources to review the manufacturers' test results , it may want to solicit those of federal health care providers and professional associations , such as va and the national patient safety partnership . additionally , to make effective use of limited resources , fda and the health care community , at a minimum , should focus their review efforts on critical care / life support biomedical equipment that was determined to be noncompliant but is now deemed compliant and that for which there are concerns about the determination of compliance . regarding our recommendation on legislative or regulatory changes necessary to obtain assurances that manufacturers' biomedical equipment is compliant , hhs believed that the solutions to the year 2000 problems can be reached through approaches such as the clearinghouse . hhs also clarified fda's testing of diagnostic x - ray equipment . we have revised the report to reflect this . finally , hhs described actions it has taken and planned to implement our recommendations , and these are reprinted in appendix ii . hhs also provided a number of technical suggestions to this report , and these comments have been incorporated into the report as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from the date of this letter .