sffas no . 7 is not effective until fiscal year 1998 . however , the requirement that this standard be fully implemented in fiscal year 1998 has significant implications for irs and its fiscal year 1998 custodial financial statements . the significant internal control and system weaknesses discussed earlier may affect irs' ability to implement this standard until corrective actions have fully resolved these weaknesses . for example , as discussed earlier , irs currently does not capture information at the time of receipt of payments from the taxpayer on how such payments are to be applied to the various trust funds . consequently , irs is presently unable to report collections of tax revenue by specific tax type as envisioned in sffas no . 7 and omb's format and instructions for the form and content of the financial statements of the u.s. government ( september 2 , 1997 ) . other provisions of sffas no . 7 will also be difficult for irs to implement in the short term until the significant internal control and systems issues reported in prior audits and discussed above are resolved . we evaluated irs management's assertion about the effectiveness of its internal controls designed to safeguard assets against loss from unauthorized acquisition , use , or assure the execution of transactions in accordance with laws governing the use of budget authority and other laws and regulations that have a direct and material effect on the custodial financial statements or are listed in omb audit guidance and could have a material effect on the custodial financial statements ; and properly record , process , and summarize transactions to permit the preparation of reliable financial statements and to maintain accountability for assets . irs management asserted that except for the material weaknesses in internal controls presented in the agency's fiscal year 1997 fia report on compliance with the internal control and accounting standards , internal controls provided reasonable assurance that the above internal control objectives were satisfied during fiscal year 1997 . management made this assertion based upon criteria established under fia and omb circular a - 123 , management accountability and control . our internal control work would not necessarily disclose material weaknesses not reported by irs . however , we believe that irs' internal controls , taken as a whole , were not effective in satisfying the control objectives discussed above during fiscal year 1997 because of the severity of the material weaknesses in internal controls described in this report , which were also cited by irs in its fiscal year 1997 fia report . except as noted above , our tests of compliance with selected provisions of laws and regulations disclosed no other instances of noncompliance which we consider to be reportable under generally accepted government auditing standards or omb bulletin 93-06 . under ffmia and omb bulletin 98-04 , our tests disclosed , as discussed above , that irs' financial management systems do not substantially comply with the requirements for the following: federal financial management systems , applicable federal accounting standards , and the u.s. government standard general ledger at the transaction level . however , the objective of our audit was not to provide an opinion on overall compliance with laws , regulations , and ffmia requirements tested .