it needs to be considered separately on its own merits . we found widespread agreement among accounting and budgeting experts that the federal government generally does not depreciate transportation infrastructure , research and development ( r&d ) , and human capital for either accounting or budgeting purposes . in our research we found no evidence that states or private sector businesses use depreciation in budgeting for any of these types of investments . however , economists depreciate infrastructure and r&d investments in their more global analyses to make rough estimates of national wealth . we found virtually no sources that identified methods by which these investments could reasonably be depreciated for federal accounting or budgeting purposes . our review of the professional literature and consultation with budget and accounting experts did not support depreciating such investments in federal budgeting as useful or appropriate because ( 1 ) it could undermine budgetary control ( 2 ) it would result in depreciating assets the government does not own , and ( 3 ) determining the value and useful life of these investments would be difficult to do . we believe that depreciation for these types of federal investments is not an appropriate budgetary treatment . however , we do believe that federal investments with long - term potential benefits for economic growth and productivity should be considered differently than is presently done in the budget . one option we have previously discussed is to include an investment component in the budget focusing on these areas of investment within the budget enforcement act framework , possibly with a separate floor for investment spending , to help ensure attention to these needed areas of investment while preserving the established controls in the current budget process . we are sending copies of this study to interested congressional committees and the directors of the office of management and budget and the congressional budget office . copies will also be made available to other interested parties on request . major contributors to this study are identified in appendix i . concerns about long - term national economic growth have focused attention on the federal government's role in promoting investment necessary to sustain the economy's capacity to maintain and improve future living standards . the federal government contributes to investment in two primary ways . first , the federal government can facilitate private investment by reducing the federal deficit . federal budget deficits have absorbed large proportions of national savings that would otherwise have been available to finance investments , either public or private . second , within an established fiscal policy , the federal government can change the proportion of government spending devoted to investment . three views have been cited in support of proposals to depreciate investments in the federal budget . first , the long - lived nature of the benefits arising from these investments causes some analysts to believe that their costs should also be spread over time by some method of depreciation so that costs are shared by those who will benefit in the future . second , some analysts believe that because the initial cost of these investments is high , budgeting for the full commitment up - front discourages investment and favors consumption spending .