we disagree . treasury's current interest rate is not an appropriate measure of its cost of financing loans issued in the past . rather , the interest rates in effect at the time the loans were issued represents treasury's cost . because ffb is charging tva the long - term borrowing rate of similar treasury debt at the time the loan was made , the federal government is receiving a return sufficient to cover its borrowing costs . if tva is permitted to refinance these loans without penalty , the federal government will suffer a significant loss . this loss represents the difference between the interest rate at the time of the borrowing and the interest rate on current debt treasury could avoid incurring today . in 1995 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) was asked to review proposed legislation that would have authorized tva to prepay the $3.2 billion in loans made by ffb without paying the prepayment premiums . cbo estimated that enacting such legislation in 1996 would increase federal outlays by about $120 million per year through 2002 with amounts declining thereafter until the last notes matured in the year 2016 . this proposed legislation was never introduced . several of the entities commented on our use of average revenues per kwh as an indicator of cost competitiveness and risk . in addition , each entity commented on our assessment of the risk of future financial losses . the three pmas and usda disagreed with our use of average revenue per kwh to compare utilities' competitiveness . the three pmas stated that the use of average revenue per kwh is overly simplistic and may mislead the report's readers about the magnitude and causes of the difference in costs between the pmas and other utilities . the three pmas stated that they do not believe that average revenue per kwh takes into account the differences in the types of power being sold by different utilities . they stated that a more accurate measure would be to compare similar products being offered by different utilities . usda officials stated that many variables not addressed in our analysis could significantly alter any comparison . we believe that average revenue per kwh is a strong indicator of the relative power production costs of the pmas , tva , and rus g&t borrowers compared to ious and pogs . for the three pmas , rus g&t borrowers , and pogs , average revenue per kwh should equal cost over time because each operates as a nonprofit organization that recovers costs through revenues . this assumes that the entity's competitive position is such that it can charge sufficiently high rates to recover all costs from customers . for ious , average revenue per kwh should represent cost plus the regulated rate of return . given that a large portion of an iou's rate of return ( net income ) is used to pay common stock dividends , which is a financing cost , average revenue per kwh , while somewhat higher because it includes a profit , is a reasonable approximation of ious' power production costs . in addition , analysts and bond rating agencies commonly use average revenue per kwh in assessing the competitiveness of power rates .