additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the metrorail connection to the sports arena has been completed . as of april 21 , 1998 , $16.7 million and $18 million of the $19 million budget had been approved for expenditure and had been obligated , respectively . wmata officials informed us that they expect the project to be closed out ( all bills reviewed and approved for payment ) by september 1998 . it is their expectation that after the project is closed out , there will be about a $285,000 residual from the funds associated with the department of transportation ( dot ) capital assistance grant . according to wmata officials , any residual balance must be used on a transportation related project . one district official told us that he expects the district to use these funds to defray the cost of design work on a metrorail connection to the proposed new convention center . as shown in table 1 , expenditures for the relocation of utilities have increased from the projected $3.4 million reported in our november 1997 report to about $3.5 million . the increase is attributable to a negotiated settlement between the district and the developer — dcalp — over the cost of infrastructure improvements to the site . in a letter dated october 6 , 1997 , dcalp cited seven infrastructure improvements it had made to the site , at a cost of $403,000 , which it claimed under the terms of the exclusive development rights agreement ( edra ) , that the district was responsible for . as part of its march 10 , 1998 , settlement , the district has obtained a legal agreement , intended to preclude the developer from prevailing in any future claims regarding the seven infrastructure improvements . all activities associated with soil remediation efforts have not been fully completed . the district's project manager for the sports arena is still including in the expenditures an estimated $700,000 for the removal of concrete structures below the surface and contaminated soil on a parcel of land transferred to wmata . district officials told us that they have budgeted sufficient funds to remove the concrete structures and cover the cost of remediation . they stated that based on tests done at the site , only limited amounts of the soil are contaminated . the project manager of the arena task force stated that the district has not contracted for the removal of the concrete because wmata has not made a decision regarding the land's use . the district's office of corporation counsel is actively pursuing its legal options for recouping the district's cost for soil remediation and other related costs for the arena site . this office has obtained the assistance of a private law firm and a environmental study firm — both on a pro bono basis — to assist the city in its efforts to recover the district's costs . the two firms have identified approximately 50 potential sources of the contaminants . the corporation counsel is currently assessing each firm's potential liability and the ability of each firm to make restitution .