we incorporated their comments where appropriate . sec officials agreed with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . except as noted below , nasd officials also agreed with the report . nasd officials disagreed with our characterization that their software testing approach is limited or incomplete in scope . they said that they have adopted a rigorous approach to testing . in addition , nasd said that while its approach may differ from other approaches , it is successful , as demonstrated by the significant number of changes that have been introduced over the years without problems . nevertheless , nasd officials told us that as an act of caution , they will engage an independent reviewer to assess the testing function and will respond appropriately to the reviewer's recommendations . we believe that this is a prudent step . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the chairman of the securities and exchange commission , the president and chief executive officer of the national association of securities dealers , and to other interested parties . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6418 if you or your staffs have questions about this report . other major contributors are listed in appendix i . linda d. koontz , associate director gary n. mountjoy , senior evaluator william d. hadesty , technical assistant director kevin g. mccarthy , senior evaluator sabine r. paul , senior information systems analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . this resulted in a total loss of power to the data center . at this point , nasd switched operations to the backup data processing facility in maryland and continued operations for the rest of the trading day . to address this problem , nasd ( 1 ) replaced the circuit board , ( 2 ) had the contractor who supplied the backup electrical system determine why the board malfunctioned , ( 3 ) is considering purchasing a second backup electrical system of batteries , generators , and circuit board to supplement its existing backup electrical system , and ( 4 ) hired a contractor to assess other single points of failure in the backup electrical system .