operations . the bureau will be challenged to complete nonresponse follow - up on schedule without compromising data quality , and to adequately staff nonresponse follow - up operations . with regard to completing nonresponse follow - up on schedule , if the bureau achieves its anticipated 61-percent mail response rate , enumerators will need to follow up on about 46 million of the more than 119 million housing units estimated to be in the nation . however , completing this workload in the 10-week time frame the bureau has allotted for nonresponse follow - up could prove extremely difficult since the bureau will need to complete an average of more than 657,000 cases each day for the entire 10-week period . in addition , the bureau's quality assurance procedures , which call for enumerators to revisit certain households to identify and correct enumeration errors , will add more than 17,000 cases to the bureau's average daily workload . sustaining this pace could prove challenging for a variety of reasons , ranging from nonrespondents' unwillingness to open their doors to enumerators to adverse local weather conditions . by comparison , during the 1990 census , it took the bureau 14 weeks to follow up with 34 million households using essentially the same approach to nonresponse follow - up . moreover , if the response rate proves to be less than 61 percent , past experience has shown that a lower - than - expected mail response rate can trigger a chain of events that can have significant implications for the accuracy and cost of the census . this was demonstrated during the 1990 census . the bureau had budgeted for a nonresponse follow - up workload of about 31 million cases , but because of an unexpectedly sharp decline in the mail response rate , the bureau had to follow up on an additional 3 million cases . the higher than expected workloads aggravated an already difficult staffing situation in which some census offices had difficulty filling all positions and enumerator productivity was lower than anticipated . as a result , 14 weeks were required to complete the nonresponse follow - up operation , which was 8 weeks longer than the bureau's initial estimate . or 3 percentage points less than the bureau's 61-percent goal could cause serious problems . during the dress rehearsal , although nonresponse follow - up operations were completed on schedule in both menominee county and sacramento , and 6 days early in south carolina , the bureau found that securing interviews with household members proved to be more difficult than it had anticipated . the bureau hoped to limit the portion of the nonresponse follow - up universe workload that was proxy data to less than 6 percent ; however , the bureau did not achieve this objective at any of the three dress rehearsal sites . in sacramento , 20.1 percent of the occupied nonresponse follow - up universe was proxy data ; in south carolina , the proportion was 16.4 percent ; and in menominee county , it was 11.5 percent . nonresponse follow - up is also expensive . each percentage point drop in the mail response rate in this census would increase the nonresponse follow - up workload by about 1.2 million households .