the other two did not . in addition , some project managers updated the acquisition phase portion of the life cycle cost estimates periodically between the times that the full life cycle cost estimates were revised . faa's organizational responsibilities for cost estimating have recently changed . in october 1995 , the congress instructed faa to develop and implement a new acquisition management system , which would not be subject to various existing acquisition laws . ( 6 ) is the estimate based on reliable evidence of the organization's past performance ? and ( 7 ) has the situation remained unchanged since the estimate was prepared ? once again , sei provides detailed checklists for addressing these seven questions . these sei publications are further discussed in chapter 2 and in appendixes i , ii , and iii . requirements for agency cost accounting have been evolving for decades . in a 1985 report , the comptroller general presented a framework for strengthening agencies' financial management structure . this report called for the integration of accounting and budgeting systems to better monitor progress against estimates and to better estimate future program costs . more specifically , it states that actual costs must be maintained and monitored in order to effectively manage programs and control costs . this approach was embodied in the cfo act of 1990 , which requires agencies to develop and maintain integrated accounting and financial management systems which provide for ( 1 ) the development and reporting of cost information and ( 2 ) the systematic measurement of performance . the objectives of our review were to determine if ( 1 ) faa's project cost estimates are based on good estimating policies and practices and ( 2 ) the actual costs of atc modernization projects are being properly accumulated . to determine if faa's estimates were based on good policies and practices , we researched current literature and interviewed project estimating experts to identify the key components of good cost estimating practices ; obtained and analyzed faa's policies and practices for estimating costs to determine what criteria ( directives , orders , instructions , and implementing procedures ) , if any , faa has in place to guide managers in developing projects' cost estimates ; assessed faa's cost estimating policies , practices , tools , and techniques to determine if they incorporate the key components of good cost and schedule estimating practices advocated by sei and other experts ; and selected faa's five largest ( based on latest life cycle cost estimates ) ongoing atc modernization projects and one project that was the subject of another gao review , and interviewed project managers and assessed project documentation on these six projects to determine ( 1 ) how the current life cycle cost baseline was estimated and ( 2 ) how this estimating approach compared to the sei project - level questions .