we did not verify the accuracy of the data . we performed our review from january 1995 through april 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we discussed a draft of our report with cbo and ota officials and have incorporated their comments where appropriate . malpractice insurance is the first category of medical liability costs we identified and the cost specifically measured by each of the three studies . most physicians and hospitals purchase medical malpractice insurance to protect themselves from medical malpractice claims . in most cases , the insurer will pay any claims up to a specific limit of coverage during a fixed period in return for a fee . the insurer investigates the claim and defends the physician or hospital . for example , physicians may restrict the scope of their practices to low - risk patients or procedures . while positive defensive medicine drives up the cost of health care , negative defensive medicine reduces its availability . the following discussion is limited to positive defensive medicine . while hospital and physician insurance contracts can vary greatly , we have included the following types of costs in the medical malpractice insurance cost category: premiums for purchased insurance , hospital contributions for self - insurance , and payments made from hospitals' general revenues and reserves and physicians' personal assets to cover uninsured malpractice losses . defensive medicine is generally considered to be more extensive in surgery , radiology , cardiology , emergency medicine , and obstetrics and gynecology . as we previously reported , in 1990 maine imposed practice guidelines by law that state officials expect will decrease these specialists' motivation to practice defensive medicine . these practice guidelines are intended to reduce the number of diagnostic tests and procedures that are performed for defensive purposes , including preoperative tests , such as some electrocardiograms and chest x - rays , cervical spine x - rays for some emergency room patients , some breast biopsies , and some colonoscopies . high rates of caesarean section are also cited as evidence of defensive medicine . according to the results of our earlier review , the hospitals we visited analyzed their physicians' practice patterns in an effort to reduce costs . in some cases , the hospitals found that some physicians provided a significant amount of unnecessary or excessively sophisticated services but could not determine whether the provision of these services represents defensive medicine . for example , one hospital we visited reviewed its physicians' use of low osmolality contrast agents in its cardiac catheterization lab . among health care professionals , the widespread use of low osmolality contrast agents is often viewed as a function of defensive medicine . physicians use the low osmolality agents because high osmolality contrast agents have been associated with mild to moderate adverse reactions , such as nausea and vomiting , as well as more serious adverse reactions . the average cost of the low osmolality agent used in that hospital was $146.10 , compared to $6.96 for the high osmolality agent , and represented 95 percent of the contrast media used in its cardiac catheterization laboratory .