these difficulties have materialized . in january 1998 , faa reported that more delays are likely because software requirements could increase to resolve air traffic controllers' dissatisfaction with the system's computer - human interface . faa also reported an unexpected cost increase of $35 million for stars during fiscal year 1998 . it attributed the increase to such factors as adding resources to maintain the program's schedule and the effects of any design changes to address new computer - human interface concerns . also , the estimated size of software development — measured in source lines of code — is now 50 percent larger than the original november 1996 estimate . faa has requested a reprogramming of fiscal year 1998 funds to address this cost increase . our reviews have identified some of the root causes of long - standing problems with faa's modernization and have recommended solutions to them . among the causes of these problems were the lack of a complete and enforced systems architecture , unreliable cost information , lack of mature software acquisition processes , and an organizational culture that did not always act in the agency's long - term best interest . while faa has begun to implement many of our recommendations , it will need to stay focused on continued improvement . faa has proceeded to modernize its many atc systems without the benefits of a complete systems architecture , or overall blueprint , to guide their development and evolution . in february 1997 , we reported that faa has been doing a good job of defining one piece of its architecture — the logical architecture . that architecture describes faa's concept of operations , business functions , high - level descriptions of information systems and their interrelationships , and information flows among systems . this high - level architecture will guide the modernization of faa's atc systems over the next 20 years . we identified shortcomings in two main areas . faa's system modernization lacked a technical architecture and an effective enforcement mechanism . faa generally agreed with the recommendation in our february 1997 report to develop a technical architecture and has begun the task . we will continue to monitor faa's efforts . also , to be effective , the architecture must be enforced consistently . faa has no organizational entity responsible for enforcing architectural consistency . until faa defines and enforces a complete atc systems architecture , the agency cannot ensure compatibility among its existing and future programs . we also recommended in the february 1997 report that faa develop a management structure for enforcing the architecture that is similar to the provisions of the clinger - cohen act of 1996 for department - level chief information officers ( cio ) . faa disagrees with this recommendation because it believes that the current location of its cio , within the research and acquisition line of business , is effective . we continue to believe that such a structure is necessary . faa's cio does not report directly to the administrator and does not have organizational or budgetary authority over those who develop atc systems or the units that operate and maintain them . furthermore , the agency's long history of problems in managing information technology projects reflects weaknesses in its current structure .