additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . a waterfall flows from the fountain into a pond . the stone walkway approach to the memorial garden winds through a grove of trees and is bordered by flowering shrubs and ornamental grasses . the foundation's direct and indirect costs for the memorial garden recorded as of june 30 , 1994 , are shown in table 1 . construction costs include the ( 1 ) cost and sculpturing of granite , ( 2 ) material and labor for concrete and forms for the fountain and other structures , and ( 3 ) landscaping . design costs consist of the services provided by american and french architects . accounting and legal costs include legal services from a french law firm , and consultants' costs include those for photographs and security of the construction site . general and administrative costs consist primarily of travel costs and foundation overhead charged to the project . the costs of the memorial garden have exceeded the amounts provided by the coins act , and additional memorial garden funding came , or needs to come , from other sources . because of the foundation's current financial condition , it is uncertain whether the foundation will be able to fund future costs of operating and maintaining the memorial garden . congressional requesters asked us to follow up on three of the several allegations which initially appeared in a washington , d.c. , newspaper . allegation one: the foundation spent most of its revenues from 1986 to 1992 for purposes not related to its stated program activities . the foundation , as a private , nonprofit corporation chartered in the district of columbia , is required to conduct its activities in accordance with the district of columbia nonprofit corporation act and the internal revenue code for tax exempt organizations . however , the internal revenue service and the district of columbia do not specify spending criteria for nonprofit organizations . the council of better business bureaus , which promotes ethical practices and promulgates operating standards for charitable organizations , suggests that organizations such as the foundation annually spend at least 50 percent of their revenues on program activities directly related to their stated purpose . the national charities information bureau , which promotes informed giving and a vigorous and responsive philanthropic sector , suggests in its standards that a charitable organization spend at least 60 percent of its annual expenses for program activities .