additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . comparisons between the payroll and personnel systems and reconciliations of discrepancies were not routinely done . specifically , navy and dfas compared navy civilian payroll and personnel files only four times between may 1992 and august 1994 . more importantly , discrepancies identified from these comparisons were not resolved because navy and dfas had not established procedures for systematic follow - up and correction of identified discrepancies . had more frequent payroll and personnel comparisons taken place , and any discrepancies systematically researched and their resolution documented , dfas could have promptly detected and corrected the overpayments we identified . for example , as shown in table 1 , we found that dfas paid 84 civilian employees at a higher pay rate than authorized in their personnel records . these overpayments totaled $5,251 for the one pay period we tested . in addition , table 1 shows that dfas paid about $7,700 to another 14 individuals who did not have active personnel records . dfas and navy personnel acknowledged that they infrequently reconciled payroll and personnel data . dfas officials told us that payroll and personnel data reconciliations do occur as part of the conversion process of payroll accounts to dcps . however , these officials acknowledged that not all discrepancies identified during these reconciliations are researched and resolved prior to the conversion of the payroll account to dcps . as a result , erroneous information , such as an incorrect pay rates , may be passed from the closing payroll offices to the cognizant receiving dcps payroll center . we agree that this improvement in the interface between the personnel and payroll systems could help prevent some of the kinds of overpayments we identified . however , it is unlikely that such edit checks would prevent overpayments arising from navy civilians receiving multiple dcps payments or navy civilians being paid by both dcps and other payroll systems . in addition , not all personnel information flows through the interface . by granting supervisory level access to payroll processing staff who did not need that level of access , dfas inappropriately gave the majority of its staff access to both personnel information and time and attendance data . dcps security guidelines manual states that the system's design should provide for a separation of duties between payroll clerks in the payroll office . specifically , a single payroll clerk should not be capable of both creating or changing employee records and entering time and attendance data for the same group of payroll accounts .