this is referred to as the 7-day letter . the survey responses indicated that none of the igs had used the 7-day letter during the period january 1 , 1990 , to april 30 , 1998 . earlier surveys have shown that the 7-day letter had been used on occasion by some igs . what are ig views on the usefulness of the 7-day letter ? section 5 ( d ) of the ig act , as amended , requires igs to report immediately to the agency head whenever the ig becomes aware of “particularly serious or flagrant problems , abuses , or deficiencies relating to the administration of programs or operations.” the agency head , in turn , is to transmit the ig report , with the agency head's comments , to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of the congress within 7 calendar days . for example , a survey conducted by the inspections and special reviews committee of pcie in june 1986 , and updated in 1989 , showed that the 7-day letter had been used on 10 occasions , by seven igs . although a 7-day letter has not been issued in recent years , the igs noted that it is a useful mechanism to encourage agencies to comply with the igs' requests . a 10-year review of the ig act by the house committee on government operations found that the igs viewed the use of the 7-day letter as a last resort to attempt to force appropriate action by the agency . our survey responses indicated that the igs continue to view the 7-day letter useful as a tool . twelve of the 22 presidential igs and 20 of the 24 dfe igs that responded to the question find it useful to a great or very great extent . three igs specifically stated that the threat of a 7-day letter gets immediate results . another ig responded that it had threatened the use of the letter twice and in each instance the agency responded to the ig's request . however , some presidential igs stated that it is difficult to reach agreement or consensus in pcie meetings because of the diversity of its membership with representatives bringing to meetings different agendas based on their respective agency's missions . further , according to some igs , pcie needs to better address governmentwide issues and projects . in march 1996 , executive order no . 12993 formalized the process and established the membership of the integrity committee . the integrity committee is chaired by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) representative to pcie . other members include the special counsel , office of the special counsel ; the director , office of government ethics ; and three or more igs , representing both pcie and ecie . in addition , the chief of the public integrity section , department of justice criminal division , serves as an advisor . allegations received by pcie are assigned to the integrity committee for processing and review . allegations that the integrity committee deems to be worthy of further review are referred to the department of justice , public integrity section , to determine if the allegation , if proved , would constitute a violation of federal criminal law .