develop a documented evaluation plan . develop evaluation requirements in conjunction with system requirements . assess the contractor's performance for compliance with evaluation requirements . develop measurements to determine the status of evaluation activities . ensure that the authority and the project manager review the status of evaluation activities . develop written policy for software acquisition risk management . designate a group to be responsible for coordinating software acquisition risk management activities . define resource requirements for acquisition risk management . ensure that individuals designated to perform software acquisition risk management have adequate experience and training . integrate software acquisition risk management activities into software acquisition planning . develop a software acquisition risk management plan in accordance with a defined software acquisition process . develop a documented acquisition risk management plan and conduct risk management as an integral part of the solicitation , project performance management , and contract performance management processes . track and control software acquisition risk handling actions until the risks are mitigated . ensure that risk management activities are reviewed by the authority and the project manager . gao requested comments on a draft of this report from the chairman , district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority , and the district's chief financial officer . they provided us with written comments that are reprinted in appendixes i and ii . in their comments , the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority's executive director and the district of columbia's chief financial officer acknowledged that the software acquisition project for the new financial management system was a high risk initiative and that the district's processes were not sufficiently mature . the district chief financial officer identified initiatives in each of the key process areas . both cited ongoing corrective actions , which , if properly implemented , will address several of our recommendations . for example , the chief financial officer stated that the district is developing a risk management plan and is evaluating various strategies to identify and manage risks , and that the chief technology officer for the district of columbia is developing policies and procedures for information resource management which will include software acquisition . however , the district chief financial officer also added that their efforts to date have achieved a sound acquisition state consistent with the intent of the sa - cmm . the fms project had many strengths in this kpa . the district received pro bono assistance from several companies to help define the acquisition strategy and conduct the activities for software acquisition planning . an acquisition strategy was developed and the acquisition planning team was staffed with personnel with software and systems experience . the team developed a cost estimate and the district management was briefed by the team on a periodic basis . this enabled the district management to be informed on the progress of the acquisition planning and the various activities through the solicitation phase . however , the fms project also had many weaknesses in this kpa . weaknesses observed included a lack of policy on acquisition planning and no specific assignment of responsibility for acquisition planning . furthermore , the fms project did not always document significant project decisions or update the planning document to reflect these decisions .