each business area is described below . the trade compliance business area includes enforcement of laws and regulations associated with the importation of goods into the united states . to enforce compliance with the trade laws and regulations , customs ( 1 ) works with the trade community to promote understanding of applicable laws and regulations , ( 2 ) selectively examines cargo to ensure that only eligible goods enter the country , ( 3 ) reviews documentation associated with cargo entries to ensure that it is properly valued and classified , ( 4 ) collects billions of dollars annually in duties , taxes , and fees associated with imported cargo , ( 5 ) assesses fines and penalties for noncompliance with trade laws and regulation , and ( 6 ) manages the collection of these moneys to ensure that all trade - related debts due to customs are paid and properly accounted for . the outbound business area includes customs operations related to the enforcement of laws and regulations associated with the movement of merchandise and conveyances from the united states . to enforce compliance with these laws and regulations , customs ( 1 ) selectively inspects cargo at u.s. ports to guard against the exportation of illegal goods , such as protected technologies , stolen vehicles , and illegal currency , ( 2 ) collects , disseminates , and uses intelligence to identify high - risk cargo and passengers , ( 3 ) seizes and accounts for illegal cargo , ( 4 ) assesses and collects fines and penalties associated with the exportation of illegal cargo , and ( 5 ) physically examines baggage and cargo at airport facilities for explosive and nuclear materials . in addition , the outbound business includes collecting and disseminating trade data within the federal government . accurate trade data are crucial to establishing accurate trade statistics on which to base trade policy decisions and negotiate trade agreements with other countries . by the year 2000 , customs estimates that exports will be valued at $1.2 trillion , as compared to $696 million in 1994 . the passenger business area includes processing all passengers and crew of arriving and departing ( 1 ) air and sea conveyances and ( 2 ) noncommercial land vehicles and pedestrians . in fiscal year 1997 , customs processed nearly 450 million travelers , and by the year 2000 , expects almost 500 million passengers to arrive in the united states annually . many of customs' passenger activities focus on illegal immigration and drug smuggling and are coordinated with other federal agencies , such as the immigration and naturalization service and the department of agriculture's animal and plant health inspection service . activities include targeting high - risk passengers , which requires timely and accurate information , and physically inspecting selected passengers , baggage , and vehicles to determine compliance with laws and regulations . the finance business area includes asset and revenue management activities . examples of undefined functions in the outbound , passenger , investigations , and human resources business areas are as follows: outbound: the architecture names “examine cargo” and “seize and process cargo” as 2 of the 13 functions in this business area .