there are few restrictions on foreign investors in argentina . according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , foreign investors have full access to the local capital market . the world bank and the oecd also have reported that there is a concentration of asset ownership in argentina and that most of the public enterprises were sold to financial consortia , which were composed of several argentine companies allied with international groups . although the argentine government generally tried to foster competition through the privatization process , it has experienced some problems promoting competition . one example of a problematic privatization involved the sale of aerolineas argentinas , the state - owned airline . when the airline was offered for sale in 1990 , the only qualified bidder was a consortium that included the only other airline in the country . according to the world bank , instead of disallowing the bid , the government allowed the sale to occur . service was poor and losses continued , and in 1993 , the government bought back approximately 30 percent of the airline's shares . as a result of this sale , the government now makes a greater effort to ensure that there is more than one bidder and that a regulatory framework is in place prior to the sale . the government ultimately sold the shares of aerolineas argentinas back to the private sector . the government has had difficulty establishing a regulatory regime , as illustrated by the privatization of the former state telecommunications company , the first company to be privatized in argentina . in some instances , the government preserved the monopolistic structure of the entity being sold to facilitate the attraction of private capital . a 1995 world bank report stated that the government in argentina split the telecommunications market into two regional monopolies to increase the competitiveness of the industry , but we were told that the government also used the monopoly rights to increase the proceeds from the sale . although a regulatory agency had been established to monitor the telecommunications industry , the government did not , according to the world bank , develop clear regulatory processes prior to the sale . the government subsequently brought the regulatory agency under closer scrutiny and formed a plan for improving its regulatory framework . there have been improvements in the agency's performance , but a 1993 world bank report stated that the regulatory capacities in argentina may take many years to develop . we were told by government officials , however , now that the government has experience with both regulated monopolies and with competition , that the government strongly prefers the latter . the speed and variable manner in which argentina privatized may help to explain why the country's regulatory capacities are not more developed . a privatization expert told us that argentina's decentralized privatization process allowed the government to privatize quickly and to formulate solutions for problems as they arose .