the transfer is recorded in the cas system . throughout the day , transactions from cas are automatically uploaded and posted to ias . the daily reconciliation of cas and ias involves the comparison of the end - of - day department inventory totals from cas to the total reflected in ias . the two totals must be equal . periodically , the independent proof clerk performs a blind confirmation of the reconciliation in which the clerk is “locked out” of ias and submits the cas balances to the accounting department for reconciliation . the daily reconciliations of cas and ias are reviewed and approved by cash administration management . sharon s. kittrell , auditor the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . safeguarding controls are a subcategory within each of these control objectives . safeguarding controls — those designed to prevent or promptly detect unauthorized acquisition , use , or disposition of an entity's resources — are primarily operations controls . however , certain aspects of safeguarding controls can also be considered compliance and financial reporting controls . when legal or regulatory requirements apply to use of resources , operations controls designed to safeguard the efficient and effective use of resources also address compliance objectives . similarly , objectives designed to ensure that losses associated with the use or disposition of resources are properly recognized and reflected in the entity's financial statements also address financial reporting objectives . in may 1994 , coso issued an addendum to its integrated framework to provide specific reporting guidance on controls concerning safeguarding of assets . coso stated that there is a reasonable expectation that a management report will cover not only controls to help ensure that transactions involving an entity's assets are properly reflected in the financial statements , but also controls to help prevent or promptly detect unauthorized acquisition , use , or disposition of the underlying assets . coso believes it is important that this expectation be met . the addendum provided suggested wording for management's report on internal control over financial reporting to also specifically state safeguarding of assets when covered by management's report . internal control , as described in the integrated framework , consists of five essential and interrelated components: control environment , risk assessment , control activities , information and communication , and monitoring . the control environment represents the control consciousness of an entity , its management , and staff .