additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the offices then review the monthly reports for accuracy . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . both of these weaknesses increased the risk of security or reliability breaches . for example , the operating system contained the names of five programs that no longer existed , introducing the risk that an unauthorized program could be run under one of those program names to gain unauthorized access to programs and data files . scc officials were reviewing software change and maintenance procedures and planned to formalize them . also , scc management advised us that unused program names have been eliminated . one fundamental technique for safeguarding programs and data is the appropriate segregation of duties and responsibilities of computer personnel to reduce the risk that errors or fraud will go undetected . at scc , we found inadequate segregation of duties , particularly in the granting of powerful security privileges . scc has explicitly assigned two systems programmers to assist in the security administration of the access control software . under normal circumstances , back - up security staff should report to the security administrator and have no programming , operations , or librarian duties . because these individuals have both systems and security administrator privileges associated with their user accounts , they can eliminate any audit trail of their activity in the system . scc officials indicated that they were reviewing this issue and considering several steps to mitigate the risks of assigning dual responsibilities . other password controls were weakened due to ineffective acf2 implementation . for example , 49 accounts could bypass all acf2 controls ( including the creation of audit trails , known as logging ) , allowing the user full and virtually undetectable access to all files , programs , and other system resources . this level of authority should generally be limited to emergency ids , which are activated with management approval on a temporary , as - needed basis to handle problems or emergencies . scc officials advised us that they are assessing the granting of full access to such a large number of individuals and have begun to reduce or eliminate such access . in the interim , to mitigate the risks associated with unlogged access to sensitive files , they have changed their procedures to ensure that all updates to order entry and payroll files are logged . further , controls over security administration could be improved if the data security administrator reported directly to the scc director to provide adequate authority and independence in security matters . currently , the data security administrator reports to the assistant director of the educational services and support division .