we revised the report as appropriate . our report did not state that the authority used $734,471 to give pay raises and lump sum retroactive pay adjustments . our report properly states that these payments were part of the authority's expenditures in excess of budgeted amounts . we have considered these attachments in our evaluation . however , these attachments are not included in the report . we are sending copies of this report to the ranking minority member of your subcommittee and the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee of the district of columbia , senate committee on appropriations ; subcommittee on oversight of government management , restructuring and the district of columbia , senate committee on governmental affairs ; and subcommittee on the district of columbia , house committee on government reform and oversight . we are also sending a copy to the chairperson , district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority . copies will be made available to others upon request . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4476 or hodge herry , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-9469 . include a management discussion and analysis ( md&a ) section to enhance the annual report . clearly label and describe ( 1 ) the agency funds' separate statement , ( 2 ) what the information represents , and ( 3 ) how it relates to the authority's financial statements , in the notes to the financial statements . define the actual , actual ( budgetary basis ) , and budgeted reporting bases used in the fy 1996 combined statement of revenues , expenditures , and changes in fund balance . delete reference to propriety fund in note 2 since none were reported . revise note 2 to refer to the combined statement of revenues , expenditures , and changes in fund balance and discuss that no encumbrances were reported for fiscal year 1996 . include more detailed and useful information on the types of reimbursement due from the district in note 3 . explain in note 5 that fixed assets are reported on the combined balance sheet at their net value and depreciation is not reported on the statement of revenues , expenditures , and changes in fund balance in accordance with governmental accounting standards . the following are gao's comments on the letter from the executive director of the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority dated november 2 , 1998 . our report did not state that the use of interest earnings took place in fiscal year 1996 . our report properly states that the authority was authorized to use interest income on all escrow accounts with the passage of the management reform act and retroactively applied the interest earnings to its excess expenditures during fiscal year 1997 . the authority stated that its role and function have increased from its inception without an increase to the authority's appropriated budget . while it is true that the authority's responsibilities have increased , the congress also provided the authority with additional sources of financing that could be used for the increased responsibility .