each is described below . usda's nfac commissioned four business process reengineering teams to develop new , common business processes for operating the one - stop service centers . one team was responsible for reengineering processes used to interface with customers and provide general information and then refer customers to program specialists for more detailed information ; the second team was responsible for reengineering processes to assist customers in applying for program benefits , processing applications , and delivering benefits ; the third team was responsible for reengineering processes used to acquire , access , annotate , update , analyze , and share geospatial information ; and the fourth team was responsible for reengineering administrative processes supporting fleet management , travel , and hiring . in august 1997 , these four teams collectively developed 17 recommendations for implementing business improvements . the recommendations included developing a common database for customer information and creating a mechanism for providing consistent cross - training at all service centers . the teams also identified steps necessary for implementing these recommendations . usda plans to begin implementing the recommendations during the remainder of fiscal year 1998 and in fiscal year 1999 . the goal of the telecommunications project is to replace the existing telecommunications infrastructure to allow the agencies located in the same building or geographic area to share data and transfer calls , consolidate telecommunications services , and provide an integrated electronic mail ( e - mail ) system and satellite transmission down - links for training . to do so , usda is acquiring and installing new data communications equipment ( i.e. , modems , routers , hubs ) , voice communications equipment ( i.e. , integrated phone systems ) , and wiring . usda's current plans call for completing installation of this equipment and wiring at about 3,100 locations — 2,554 service centers , 52 state offices , and 500 other support offices — by the end of 1998 . usda's original goal was to install new telecommunications equipment and wiring at all sites by the end of 1997 . however , in january 1997 usda experienced significant problems when it began nationwide implementation of the project . because telecommunications equipment being installed at the initial sites was not properly configured and did not interface with the existing computer equipment , it did not work properly and therefore delayed the installation schedule . as a result of this , as well as other factors , the telecommunications project fell more than 1 year behind schedule , and the overall cost of the project has increased by millions . as of may 31 , 1998 , about 40 percent of the 3,100 planned installations had been completed . the goal of the common computing environment project is to replace the service center agencies' existing information technology systems ( separate and various hardware , software , and applications at the 3,100 locations ) with a common computing environment .