the premium differential will reduce earnings for saif members . ( see figure 2.1. ) because of the potential magnitude of the differential in premium rates between bif and saif that could develop under the board's proposal and the potential effects such a differential could have on thrifts and their insurance fund , the director of ots , at the january 31 , 1995 , fdic board meeting requested that the board hold public hearings to discuss the issues and concerns raised by the board's proposal . we concur with the ots director's request and believe such hearings would be a useful forum for examining the implications associated with the premium rate disparity that would develop under the board's proposal . uncertainties inherent in the estimation process could result in the actual premium rate differential being significantly different from the projected differential in any given year . however , it is fairly certain that a period of high premium rate differentials will exist between bif and saif until saif reaches its designated reserve ratio . since fico bonds were first issued in 1987 , the thrift industry has paid assessments for the annual interest expense on fico's bonds . fdic projections are that saif will achieve its designated reserve ratio in 2002 and that saif - insured thrifts will be assessed for fico bond interest through that time . for purpose of our analyses , we assume that assessments of saif - insured thrifts for fico bond interest will continue until the bonds mature in 2017 through 2019 . if fico assesses saif members to pay the annual fico interest , using the assumptions underlying fdic's projections , annual assessment rates could be lowered to approximately 19 basis points after saif attains its designated reserve ratio . however , these rates would need to be gradually increased as the portion of saif's assessment base available to pay fico decreases . this would result in a substantial premium rate differential continuing through the liquidation of fico bonds , while at the same time increasing the fund's reserve ratio to a level significantly higher than the designated reserve ratio . the premium rates for saif and the resulting differential could be even higher under scenarios where the portion of the saif assessment base available to pay fico interest experiences significant shrinkage . fdic official projections on assessments for saif - insured thrifts do not go beyond the year 2002 or otherwise address to what extent saif - insured thrifts may be assessed for fico bond interest after saif achieves its designated reserve ratio . if saif - insured thrifts are not assessed for the fico bond interest , fico will be unable to pay the interest expense unless other funding mechanisms are made available . fdic officials advised us that they will be examining this issue . in its comments on a draft of this report , fdic stated that in setting saif premiums , it may consider fico assessments and the effects of saif premiums on the ability of fico to meet its obligations . however , fdic's comments also reflected the tension that fdic may face at some future time between its duty to protect saif and fico's debt service requirements .