establishing . based on the results of the diagnosing phase and the general goals that were defined in the initiating phase , the organization develops a strategy for improvement , prioritizes activities , and formulates measurable goals . process action teams are established to develop action plans for improvement . acting . action plans are implemented through pilots . the results of pilots are evaluated and action plans are modified as appropriate . when proven effective , action plans are implemented throughout the organization . learning . after the new processes have been in place for some time , their effectiveness is evaluated , communicated throughout the organization , and , as appropriate , used to formulate new action plans to ensure that goals are achieved . to determine the status of ssa's efforts to improve its software development processes , we analyzed key documents , including ssa's software process improvement program management plan , dated april 1997 , client / server transition strategy: preliminary risk assessment , dated september 1996 , and relevant systems and strategic planning documents , such as the information systems plan . in addition , to determine the status of specific projects being undertaken by contractors in support of the improvement initiatives , we reviewed the statements of work for contractor services and final deliverables , such as baseline assessments and software process improvement reports . we did not independently verify the accuracy of information reported in the contractors' assessments of ssa's software development processes . we analyzed sei's idealsm: a user's guide for software process improvement , dated february 1996 , which ssa is using to implement and manage its process improvement program , to determine whether ssa's current and planned software development practices are consistent with this guidance . we reviewed additional sei reports , including moving on up: data and experience doing cmm - based process improvement , dated august 1995 , to identify successful practices of organizations applying cmm - based process improvements . in addition , we reviewed documents discussing the implementation schedule , technical strategies , and risks associated with ssa's development of the rds software application to obtain information on the agency's experiences in software development . however , we did not specifically evaluate the progress of ssa's ongoing effort to develop rds . to further support our assessment of the actions that ssa is taking to improve its software development capability , we interviewed the deputy commissioner for systems and other systems officials directly involved in implementing the improvement initiative , the general services administration official responsible for administering the support contract for ssa's client / server software development assessment , and representatives of the contractors involved in this initiative . we performed our work from march 1997 through november 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . diagnosing . using cmm , the current practices of the organization are appraised and characterized . results of the assessment are documented and recommendations are made regarding areas in which to focus improvement efforts . ssa provided written comments on a draft of this report . these comments are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section and are reprinted in appendix i .