each is discussed below . the office of systems architecture and investment analysis is adding a draft section on data management to the logical architecture that describes the current state of data exchange between atc systems . however , this section does not define specific standards ( eg , standards for data elements and naming conventions ) , and faa officials have not established milestones for doing so . this office is also planning to develop guidance addressing how security controls ( eg , hardware and software solutions ) will be implemented to satisfy security requirements . however , this effort has not been approved by faa management , and therefore remains unfunded . also , this office has created a menu of architectural standards ( eg , data management , data interchange , communication protocol , application development , and security standards ) to increase ipts' awareness of what standards exist for the ipts to use at their own discretion . the office of information technology is initiating efforts to improve software acquisition processes , has trained the ipts on software process improvement , and has established a software engineering process group to champion process improvement activities . however , these initiatives do not specify software product standards , such as standard programming languages and development tools , or standards for software structure , both of which are critical to modernizing atc systems cost effectively . moreover , faa cannot yet demonstrate specific and measurable process improvements . the acquisition policy branch has begun an initiative to develop systems engineering guidance for ipts' optional use . because this guidance is early in its development and a complete draft does not yet exist , faa would not provide us a copy for review . the lack of a complete systems architecture has produced architectural differences and incompatibilities among atc systems , such as different communication protocols and proprietary operating environments , and will continue to do so for future systems . ( examples of these differences for key systems in the current and near - term en route environment are provided in appendix ii. ) further , the significance of these incompatibilities will increase as faa moves to a more networked systems environment . overcoming these incompatibilities means “higher than need be” system development , integration , and maintenance costs , and reduced overall systems performance . additionally , because many existing systems are largely proprietary , opportunities for application software reuse among systems is effectively precluded and options for migrating applications to new hardware and software platforms are restricted . a system interface is hardware and software that acts as an interpreter to interconnect different systems and allow for the exchange of data . the more similar the communications and data features of the systems that are to communicate , the less complicated this interface . conversely , the more disparate the systems , the more complicated the interface . communications and data management subarchitectures are essential to standardize communication protocols and data formats , respectively , so that system interfaces are less costly and easier to implement . as described in chapter 1 , system interoperability in the atc system of systems is essential for faa to successfully perform its mission .