each of the phases is summarized below . initiating phase: during this phase , an organization establishes the management structure of the process improvement program , defines and assigns roles and responsibilities , allocates initial resources , develops a plan to guide the organization through the first three phases of the program , and obtains management approval and funding for the program . two key organizational components of the program management structure established during this phase are a management steering group and a software engineering process group ( sepg ) . responsibility for this phase rests with senior management . diagnosing phase: during this phase , the sepg appraises the current level of software process maturity to establish a baseline of the organization's process capability , and identifies any ongoing process improvement initiatives . the sepg then uses the baseline to identify weaknesses and target process improvement activities . it also compares these targeted activities with any ongoing process improvement activities and reconciles any differences . responsibility for this phase rests primarily with line managers and practitioners . establishing phase: during this phase , the sepg prioritizes the software process improvement activities and develops strategies for pursuing them . it then develops a process improvement action plan that details the activities and strategies and includes measurable goals for the activities and metrics for monitoring progress against the goals . also during this phase , the resources needed to implement the plan are committed and training is provided for sepg's technical working groups , who will be responsible for developing and testing new or improved processes . responsibility for this phase resides primarily with line managers and practitioners . acting phase: in this phase , the work groups create and evaluate new and improved processes . evaluation of the processes is based on pilot tests that are formally planned and executed . if the pilots are successful , the work groups develop plans for organization - wide adoption and institutionalization , and once approved , execute them . responsibility for this phase resides primarily with line managers and practitioners . leveraging phase: during this phase , results and lessons learned from earlier phases are assessed and applied , as appropriate , to enhance the process improvement program's structure and plans . responsibility for this phase rests primarily with senior management . in 1996 , customs initiated some limited software process improvement activities . specifically , it hired a contractor to develop a process improvement plan , which was completed in september 1996 . according to the plan , customs was to reach cmm level 2 process maturity ( the repeatable level ) by 1998 and cmm level 3 ( the defined level ) by 2002 . customs began limited implementation of the plan in may of 1997 , when it established process improvement teams for two kpas — software project planning and project tracking and oversight . generally , the teams were tasked with defining , implementing , and maintaining cmm - based processes for their respective kpas . customs did not staff or fund any other kpa improvement activities at this time . in august 1997 , customs discontinued all process improvement activities .