sffas no . 6 requires that a line item for “deferred maintenance amounts” be presented on the statement of net cost . the statement of net cost is one of several financial statements . it is designed to report the gross and net costs of providing goods , services and benefits . although no dollar amounts for deferred maintenance are to be reported on the statement of net cost itself and thus are not included in the net costs of activities , the explanatory notes to the financial statements must include dollar estimates of deferred maintenance . when agencies begin to disclose deferred maintenance in their fiscal year 1998 financial statements in compliance with the standard , the annual audits of agency financial statements will help ensure that whatever is reported is subject to independent scrutiny . as the objective of the financial statement audit is to obtain reasonable assurance about the financial statements as a whole , individually reported deferred maintenance amounts will receive varying levels of audit coverage depending on their materiality to the financial statements . doi received a qualified opinion on its fiscal year 1996 financial statement from its ig because the bureau of indian affairs could not provide adequate documentation or reliable accounting information to support $170 million for other structures and facilities , $17 million in accounts receivable , $136 million of revenue , and $19 million of bad debt expense . the acting cfo for doi stated that the agency will implement the accounting requirements for deferred maintenance in fiscal year 1998 . the agency also noted that it intends to include deferred maintenance disclosures in its fiscal year 1997 financial statements . to implement the deferred maintenance requirements , the acting cfo stated that he is relying heavily on the work of the facilities maintenance study team and other agency officials charged with coordinating implementation . in march 1997 , this multibureau team was tasked with seeking better methods of determining , validating , and correcting maintenance and repair needs . the acting cfo reported that he expects the facilities maintenance study team's report to provide the agency with current and deferred maintenance information as well as guidance on standard definitions and methodologies for improving the ongoing accumulation of current and deferred maintenance information . the acting cfo for doi stated that his office has not yet issued guidance for implementing the deferred maintenance reporting requirements of sffas no . however , he noted that the work of the facilities maintenance study team is currently addressing how to standardize definitions and procedures throughout the department . the acting cfo stated that his office has determined that the condition assessment method will be used to estimate deferred maintenance for all types of pp&e . because information on deferred maintenance will come from individual bureaus within doi , the acting cfo reported that he plans to establish an appropriate working group to define condition assessment criteria and procedures for different facility types to further improve the comparability of the information generated . while the acting cfo does not plan to distinguish between critical and noncritical assets in doi's consolidated statements , he noted that the bureau of reclamation does make a distinction between critical and noncritical deferred maintenance .