we disagree . first , omb officials noted that unless an adjustment is made for the effect of different discount rates , it is impossible to draw valid conclusions about the accuracy of subsidy rates by observing that they have fluctuated over time . we did not draw conclusions about the accuracy of subsidy rates . however , we did observe that the rates fluctuated over time and that some fluctuation would be expected . we said in the report that the reliability of credit data is questionable for a number of reasons . our characterization of the data was based primarily on results of the audits of the fiscal year 1996 financial statements as well as some discrepancies we identified between rates provided to us by agencies and those reported in the president's budget . second , omb officials said that we could not draw conclusions about a program from the size or direction of subsidy reestimates unless the effect of interest rate reestimates is removed . our report did not draw conclusions about programs from the size or direction of subsidy reestimates . third , omb officials were concerned that our discussion of the timing of reestimates could lead to the incorrect conclusion that the budget formulation process for subsidy rates for new loans is not being informed by the experience on existing loan cohorts . we disagree . such a conclusion regarding the effect of not performing reestimates is , in fact , correct . given that we found three of the five agencies received waivers of the reestimate requirement , it would appear that their budget formulation is not being informed by the most recent experience on existing loan cohorts . ( see appendix iv. ) agriculture officials stated that the report's comments and suggestions will improve budget formulation and accounting for programs under credit reform . they further stated that fsa is working to address the concerns noted in the report . ( see appendix v. ) education officials strongly agreed with the report's emphasis on the importance of the federal credit reform act of 1990 . their comments note that , over the past 5 years , education has steadily increased staff , contractor , and system resources dedicated to developing accurate and timely credit estimates . education officials also raised a question about their perception that our report implied that “significant shifts in subsidy reestimates over time are necessarily a bad thing.” our report did not imply this . rather , we said that over time , some fluctuation in subsidy rates would be expected , some estimates varied widely , and these sharp variations raise questions about the causes for these changes and the reliability of the underlying data . education officials also provided some clarification of their use of the omb subsidy model . ( see appendix vi. ) hud officials acknowledged that the agency has experienced some reporting and estimation problems and stated that the agency has made significant progress since the enactment of the federal credit reform act of 1990 . they noted that the draft report documents the difficulty that virtually every agency is experiencing in dealing with credit reform requirements .