we did not validate the information the airports reported . most airports reported that their year 2000 programs were in place , with defined management responsibilities and tracking mechanisms and inventories of potentially affected equipment already complete or in process . however , most airports had not yet determined how to renovate all their equipment . the large airports typically reported following a more structured approach than the small ones . as noted earlier , the large and medium - sized airports are generally more dependent on automation than the small airports . a central program office with the authority to manage and coordinate year 2000 activities is a key element to a successful program . because of the interdependencies among an airport's computers , equipment , applications , and databases , the date change problem requires centrally developed and integrated renovation plans , validation standards and tests , and resource allocations . and ( 3 ) what factors affect the progress of airports' preparations for the year 2000 ? the operations we examined in this review include those under the control , in whole or in part , of the nation's airports . they do not include such other critical functions in the nation's air transportation system as the air traffic control system operated by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) or the operations and the maintenance of aircraft and other equipment owned or operated by the nation's airlines . our primary method of data collection for this report was a questionnaire we mailed to 413 airports owned by local municipalities , states , and regional or independent authorities . this questionnaire focused on airports' preparations to help ensure essential operations continue through and after the year 2000 . the questionnaire was based , in part , on a gao publication describing a structured approach for addressing the year 2000 date change . to obtain the highest possible response rate , we agreed with your staff that the responses from individual airports would remain confidential . as of december 1998 , we obtained responses from 334 airports ( 81 percent ) , which represent about 96 percent of the passengers that were served by u.s. airports in 1996 . for a full description of our methodology , see appendix i . airports are an important component of the national airspace system ( nas ) , as they are the entry and exit points to the nas for most travelers . although airports differ greatly in size and in the services they provide , most airports provide parking services , security and access control on their grounds , baggage - handling services , aircraft fueling , navigational support ( such as runway lighting ) , and emergency communications throughout the airport and to ground crews . some airports also provide such additional services as moving sidewalks and subways to connect terminals and computerized monitoring of runway conditions . to help provide these services , airports often rely on computer systems and other equipment with internal microprocessors . some of these functions — such as baggage handling , controlling access to secured areas , and runway lighting — can also be performed manually and often are performed manually at small airports .