this will not be easy . not only do federal and state interests differ , but it will take time to develop data collection systems and reporting capacities once the initial decisions are made . even in the case of employment training programs , for example , in which there has been a congressional focus on program outcomes , we have found that most state agencies do not collect information on participant outcomes , nor do they conduct studies of program effectiveness . federal agencies will need time to work with the states to establish reporting requirements , including the types and measurement methodologies for needed program information , and how and by whom such information will be collected and analyzed . for example , we recently testified that hud may face difficulties implementing its plans for consolidating housing and community development funds into larger programs that rely on performance measures to evaluate state and local efforts . localities will need time to establish performance measures and work out program details . community development researchers have had difficulty developing suitable performance measures because communities' needs differ and the results of some activities may not be quantifiable . according to work on the early implementation of gpra , many federal agencies currently lack the ability to track progress , evaluate results , and use performance data to improve their agencies' effectiveness . like executive branch agencies , states , will need to make significant investments in people , skills , and systems to effectively gather and use performance information . in designing performance measurement systems for block grants , it will be important to take into account certain lessons from evaluation research . most notably , performance measurement efforts and evaluation studies both involve cause and effect relationships . in the case of performance measurement , there is an assumption — perhaps implicit — that any results observed are a consequence of the programs and activities under scrutiny . however , as we have reported , good evaluative information about these kinds of program effects is difficult to obtain . each of the tasks involved — measuring outcomes , ensuring the consistency and quality of data collected , establishing the causal connection between outcomes and program activities , and separating out the influence of extraneous factors — raises formidable technical or logistical problems that are not easily resolved . federal officials need to be aware of existing fiscal and programmatic state and local commitments when designing federal block grant accountability provisions . overall , evaluations and studies suggest that the broader the objectives and range of authorized activities and the fewer the requirements on grants , the greater the fungibility of funds . all grant programs potentially are susceptible to the problems of fungibility , but these issues loom larger in a block grant context for two reasons . first , under block grants the commingling of federal and state funds is allowed to help realize administrative cost savings , promote innovation , and improve service delivery . second , the federal government often assumes the role of a fiscal junior partner under block grants as state and local expenditures can easily overshadow the federal contribution within broadened categories of state and local spending .