additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . however , these efforts have not been implemented agencywide . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . these causes are related to the lack of a disciplined acquisition management approach . in the 1980s and early 1990s , we reported that problems with modernization projects occurred largely because faa did not follow the guidance outlined in office of management and budget circular a - 109 , which is the principal guidance for acquiring major systems in the federal government . circular a - 109 calls for following a disciplined , five - phased approach to acquisition in order to minimize problems , such as cost increases and schedule delays . the five phases include ( 1 ) determining mission needs ; ( 2 ) identifying and exploring alternative design concepts ; ( 3 ) demonstrating alternative design concepts , including prototype testing , and evaluation ; ( 4 ) initiating full - scale development and limited production , including independent testing ; and ( 5 ) full production . before moving from one phase to the next , the guidance calls for a key decision point , at which time agency heads are to evaluate the cost , schedule , and performance parameters of major projects . during these reviews , any management concerns about these parameters must be resolved before the acquisition is allowed to proceed . from the inception of the air traffic control modernization program until 1991 , faa did not follow circular a - 109 guidance . the agency believed that it could deliver and install new systems more quickly by combining circular a - 109 phases . for example , faa merged the first three phases into one , under which the agency performed some prototype testing but ignored mission need and alternative analyses . however , faa's failure to follow circular a - 109 resulted in delays in many of the major systems in the modernization effort , most notably faa's centerpiece project , known as the advanced automation system ( aas ) . moreover , she has filled many key management positions that had been vacant and has also begun to provide senior managers with incentives to work together toward agency goals . for the most part , faa will need to sustain its commitment to fully implementing the various initiatives underway . as a first priority , it will be important for the agency to continue all of its efforts to help ensure that it can fulfill its mission when the year 2000 arrives .