we did not independently verify these costs . we performed our work at the headquarters , departments of the navy and air force ; defense security assistance agency ; office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , washington , d.c. ; naval air systems command , patuxent river , maryland ; naval sea systems command , arlington , virginia ; air force aeronautical systems center and air force security assistance center , wright patterson air force base , dayton , ohio ; and the defense finance and accounting service centers in denver , colorado , and columbus , ohio . we performed our work between february 1998 and august 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of defense or his designee . the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) provided written comments . these comments are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section and throughout the report where appropriate and are reprinted in appendix i . we found that the air force and navy were not following prescribed policies and procedures for reporting the delivery of items to fms customers in order to recover the nonrecurring research , development , and production costs . as a result , fms customers' trust fund accounts were not being charged for millions of dollars of these costs for major defense equipment items they had received . volume 15 of dod's financial management regulation 7000.14-r , entitled security assistance policy and procedures , states that “charges for nonrecurring costs are earned as items are physically delivered to the fms customer.” it also requires that deliveries be reported to dfas denver within 30 days of shipment . while the dod policy is not specific about the length of time after delivery during which an activity is to charge an fms customer's trust fund account for the nonrecurring costs , responsible dod accounting officials told us that the nonrecurring costs should be recouped as items are delivered . according to the dod accounting officials , dod activities should prepare the delivery report , recover the nonrecurring costs , and submit both the delivery and recovery of costs data to dfas denver within 30 days of shipment of the items . therefore , dod policy recognizes delivery reporting as a key step toward initiating the charges to recover nonrecurring costs from fms customers' trust funds . the following describes what generally should be a typical transaction flow to report the delivery of major defense equipment and recovery of nonrecurring research , development , and production costs . the military service program office is generally responsible for reporting the delivery of items as they are made . it also prepares a cost statement , which serves as the supporting documentation for recording earnings , and forwards these data along with the delivery report to its budget or finance office . the budget or finance office reviews the information and reports the delivery to dfas denver . the budget or finance office also attaches a letter to the cost statement requesting that the area accounting office prepare a voucher to collect the nonrecurring costs .