valuation is not an exact science . it requires a great deal of experience and depends to some extent on the professional judgment of those conducting the valuation . different valuation methods may result in different ranges of expected values depending on , for example , the assumptions about the future performance of the entity , the expectation of future earnings , and the level of investor interest . officials in most of the countries told us that because of this complexity , the centralized agencies responsible for the management of privatization hired financial advisors to assist with the valuation process . in the united kingdom and france , the entity being sold often hired its own financial advisors to represent the entity's interests , such as the desire for a generous capital structure . neither the entity nor its advisors , however , took the lead in managing the sale process . all the governments we studied employed a combination of valuation techniques to estimate the value of the entity being sold and to forecast the proceeds . most used present value analysis , but other approaches were also used to develop an overall valuation . in the governments we studied , the valuation process served a variety of goals . for example , valuation entered into some governments' decisions about whether to sell an entity . valuation was also used to determine the appropriate financial and organizational structure to maximize proceeds . the united kingdom used valuation primarily to maximize proceeds because the decision to sell had already been made . in new zealand , the government relied on valuation to determine whether to sell the entity to meet its goals of improved economic efficiency and debt reduction . many of the countries also used valuation to determine a minimum acceptable price or a price range . we were told that , in general , none of the governments in this study included estimated future tax revenues from the entities sold in their estimate of future returns to the government because many of the entities already paid taxes and it is generally difficult to forecast tax revenues . france primarily uses valuation to gauge the market , minimize market risk , and maximize the proceeds from a sale . the french privatization law of 1993 specifies what will be privatized ; the government , therefore , does not use valuation to compare the return to the government of retaining as opposed to selling the entity . valuation is done using a variety of analyses , including net present value analysis . in determining whether to privatize an entity , new zealand conducts studies to estimate the market value of the entity if it were sold compared to the returns accruing to the government from retaining the entity . the government's advisors conduct a cash flow analysis to determine if the entity is worth more under government ownership or private ownership . when valuing the entity both under continued government ownership and as a private sector concern , the government uses a commercial discount rate appropriate for the industry in which the entity is located . if the returns from selling the entity do not exceed the returns from government ownership , then the entity generally is not sold .