gallo winery . in fiscal year 1995 , mpp funding was reduced to $84.5 million from the budgeted level of $110 million . eligibility rules could be revised to ensure that mpp funds are supporting additional promotional activities rather than simply replacing company or industry funds . while large firms receive mpp funds to increase exports of u.s. agricultural products , the resources otherwise available to such firms may indicate that they have no demonstrable need for government assistance . our reviews of u.s. department of agriculture crop price supports show that the program's eligibility rules allow producers to avoid payment limits and reduced program payments . these income support payments , known as deficiency payments , are the principal payments made to producers who participate in farm programs for wheat , feed grains , cotton , and rice . the payments are designed to protect producers' incomes when crop prices fall below a legally established target price . the food security act of 1985 limited the payments for those commodities to $50,000 per person annually . for the act's purposes , a person is broadly defined as an individual , an entity ( such as a corporation , limited partnership , association , trust , or estate ) , or a member of a joint operation ( such as a general partnership or joint venture ) . despite reforms made by the congress in 1987 , producers have avoided the payment limit by reorganizing their farming operations to include additional persons . according to omb , deficiency payments amounted to $6.4 billion in fiscal year 1994 . one option to further tighten payment limits as a means to reduce program costs would be to change eligibility rules to limit payments to $50,000 per individual and only provide benefits to individuals actively engaged in farming . in another example , narrowing eligibility rules for veterans disability compensation could generate savings without affecting veterans who suffered disabilities as a result of military service . in 1994 , cbo reported that about 250,000 veterans were receiving about $1.5 billion annually in department of veterans affairs ( va ) compensation for diseases neither caused nor aggravated by military service . our study of five other countries' veterans programs shows that they do not compensate veterans under these circumstances . dollar savings could be achieved by targeting disability benefits more narrowly , as is done by other countries . adjusting fees and charges to the beneficiaries of some business - type federal programs and services offers a third targeting strategy to reduce the deficit . fees exist for many services provided by the federal government , including customs and other inspections , use of recreation and other facilities , and mail delivery . however , in many cases , the direct beneficiaries of these kinds of governmental activities contribute little to support the program or administrative costs of the activity . as a result , the programs and services are often overused and / or under - provided , and money must be found elsewhere in the budget to make up the difference between administrative costs and beneficiary charges .