we have incorporated their comments as appropriate . we are sending copies of this letter to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee on oversight of government management , restructuring , and the district of columbia , senate committee on governmental affairs ; the subcommittee on government management , information , and technology , house committee on government reform and oversight ; other interested congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of the treasury ; heads of the 24 cfo agencies ; agency cfos and igs ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . this letter was prepared under the direction of gloria l. jarmon , director , civil audits / health and human services , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-4476 if you or your staffs have any questions . major contributors to this letter are listed in appendix i . deborah a. taylor , assistant director maria cruz , senior audit manager anastasia kaluzienski , audit manager the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . it is published in the treasury financial manual . the department of the treasury's financial management service is responsible for maintaining the sgl . as part of a cfo agency's annual audit , the auditor is to report whether the agency's financial management systems substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements , applicable accounting standards , and the sgl . if the auditor determines that an agency's financial management systems do not substantially comply with these requirements , the act requires that the audit report ( 1 ) identify the entity or organization responsible for management and oversight of the noncompliant financial management systems , ( 2 ) disclose all facts pertaining to the failure to comply , including the nature and extent of the noncompliance , the primary reason or cause of the noncompliance , the entity or organization responsible for the noncompliance , and any relevant comments from responsible officers or employees , and ( 3 ) include recommended corrective actions and proposed time frames for implementing such actions .