additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we found risk analysis weaknesses at the five facilities . for example , none of the facilities visited conducted a complete risk analysis to identify and determine the severity of all the security threats to which they were vulnerable . without these analyses , systems' vulnerabilities may not be identified and appropriate controls not implemented to correct them . an effective quality assurance program requires reviewing software products and activities to ensure that they comply with the applicable processes , standards , and procedures and satisfy the control and security requirements of the organization . one aspect of a quality assurance program is validating that software changes are adequately tested and will not introduce vulnerabilities into the system . we found many weaknesses in quality assurance at the five facilities visited , including instances of failing to independently test all software prior to placing it into operation . in addition , when software products were tested , this testing was sometimes incomplete ( eg , did not include integrity or stress testing ) .such quality assurance weaknesses can result in systems not functioning properly , putting federal taxpayer data at risk . internal audit and internal security functions are needed to ensure that safeguards are adequate and to alert management to potential security problems . we found many weaknesses in the internal audit or internal security functions at the five facilities visited . for example , two of the facilities had not audited operations within the last 5 years . an effective security awareness program is the means through which management communicates to employees the importance of security policies , procedures , and responsibilities for protecting taxpayer data . for punishments other than counseling or removal ( eg , suspension ) , the range was between 10 percent and 86 percent . in june 1996 , it developed specific criteria for analysts to use when making referral decisions . at that time , we will send copies to the chairman , senate committee on governmental affairs , and the chairmen and ranking minority members of the ( 1 ) subcommittees on treasury , postal service , and general government of the senate and house committees on appropriations , ( 2 ) senate committee on finance , ( 3 ) house committee on ways and means , and ( 4 ) house committee on government reform and oversight . we will also send copies to the secretary of the treasury , commissioner of internal revenue , and director of the office of management and budget . copies will be available to others upon request . if you have questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6412 . major contributors are listed in appendix iii . the objectives of our review were to ( 1 ) determine whether irs is effectively managing computer security and ( 2 ) determine whether irs is effectively addressing employee browsing of electronic taxpayer data .