additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . ssa encountered problems with rds during its initial pilot testing . for example , systems officials stated that , using rds , the reported productivity of claims representatives in the ssa field office dropped . specifically , the officials stated that before the installation of rds , each field office claims representative processed approximately five case interviews per day . after rds was installed , each claims representative could process only about three cases per day . at the conclusion of our review , systems officials stated that because the rds software has not performed as anticipated , ssa has entered into a contract with booz - allen and hamilton to independently evaluate and recommend options for proceeding with the development of rds . in addition , ssa has delayed expanding the pilot by 9 months — from october 1997 to july 1998 . this is expected to further delay ssa's national roll - out and implementation of rds . moreover , because rds is essential to identifying iws / lan phase ii requirements , the deputy commissioner for systems has stated that delaying the pilot will likely result in slippages in ssa's schedule for acquiring and implementing phase ii equipment . nationwide implementation of iws / lan is a complex logistical task for ssa , requiring coordination of site preparation ( such as electrical wiring and cabling ) in over 2,000 remote locations , contractor - supplied and installed furniture and intelligent workstation components , and training of over 70,000 employees in ssa and dds locations . moreover , once installed , these systems must be managed and maintained in a manner that ensures consistent and quality service to the public . unisys noted that it was having difficulty obtaining 100-megahertz workstations . however , ssa did not accept unisys' upgrade proposal . further , the deputy commissioner for systems stated that ssa did not believe it was necessary to upgrade to a faster processor because the 100-megahertz workstation meets its current needs . for its modernization efforts to succeed , ssa must have the necessary workstations to support its processing needs . this is particularly important given the agency's expressed intent to operate future client / server software applications on iws / lan to support redesigned work processes . adding database engines , facsimile , imaging , and other features like those planned by ssa during phase ii of the iws / lan initiative could demand a workstation with more memory , larger disk storage , and a processing speed higher than 100 megahertz .