sffas no . 6 defines deferred maintenance as “maintenance that was not performed when it should have been or was scheduled to be and which , therefore , is put off or delayed for a future period.” it includes preventive maintenance and normal repairs , but excludes modifications or upgrades that are intended to expand the capacity of an asset . the deferred maintenance standard applies to all property , plant , and equipment , including mission assets — which will be disclosed on the supplementary stewardship report . for the department of defense ( dod ) , mission assets , such as submarines , ships , aircraft , and combat vehicles , is a major category of property , plant , and equipment . in fiscal year 1996 , dod reported over $590 billion in this asset category , of which over $297 billion belonged to the navy , including 338 active battle force ships such as aircraft carriers , submarines , surface combatants , amphibious ships , combat logistics ships , and support / mine warfare ships . the navy spent a little over $2 billion on ship depot maintenance for its active fleet in fiscal year 1996 . therefore , in addressing the issues in this report and others regarding deferred maintenance , all levels of maintenance must be considered . in comments on a draft of this report ( see appendix i ) , the department of defense agreed that it must consider the key issues identified in this report as it implements deferred maintenance reporting requirements . we are sending copies of this letter to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on appropriations , the house committee on appropriations , the senate committee on armed services , the house committee on national security , the senate committee on governmental affairs , and the house committee on government reform and oversight . we are also sending copies to the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of defense , the assistant secretaries for financial management of the air force and army , and the acting director of the defense finance and accounting service . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9095 if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this letter . cleggett funkhouser , merle courtney , chris rice , rebecca beale , and john wren were major contributors to this report . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . sffas no . 6 recognizes that there are many variables in estimating deferred maintenance amounts . for example , the standard acknowledges that determining the condition of the asset is a management function because different conditions might be considered acceptable by different entities or for different items of property , plant , and equipment held by the same entity . amounts disclosed for deferred maintenance may be measured using condition assessment surveys or life - cycle cost forecasts.therefore , sffas no .