we are currently reviewing the coe . while it may address technical infrastructure problems associated with logistics business systems , we believe that defense must still incorporate into the new strategy the essential ingredients that ensure sound decisionmaking as we recommended in our report: conducting required economic and technical risk analyses and providing adequate oversight for the systems currently being deployed . in doing so , defense can ensure that the systems being deployed now will be compatible with systems or work processes developed under the common operating environment approach . further , it can ensure that sound business decisions are being made as it finalizes the new approach . additionally , while the military services and defense agencies have requested materiel management deployments , because the systems have not been fully tested , they may not be an improvement over existing legacy systems . in addition , in the near - term , these systems will require the services and agencies to continue to maintain their legacy systems . we believe that before these systems are deployed to the services and the agencies , defense needs to ensure that testing is sufficient . this should help reduce the risks of software problems surfacing in later phases of the system lifecycle . as stated in our report , the economic analysis completed in 1995 was not reflective of the new approach to materiel management systems . an analysis for the new strategy may well have identified the additional risks that have not been addressed , such as those associated with maintaining the legacy systems that will now remain under the new strategy . in addition , developing an economic analysis after deployments have begun will not give defense decisionmakers an opportunity to ensure that good business decisions are being made before funds are committed . both itmra and the office of management and budget's november 1995 guide for evaluating information technology investments call for such analyses prior to making information technology investments as it allows senior managers to examine trade - offs among competing proposals and to ensure that each project is cost - effective and beneficial . we support defense's efforts to communicate its intentions for materiel management systems with management across the services and within logistics operations . obtaining support of decisionmakers is critical to the success of the new strategy . however , because defense has not complied with its own regulations for ensuring sound decisionmaking , these managers still do not have the information necessary for making informed decisions . further , the logistics information board , which defense has established to review execution of the new strategy is no substitute for a full maisrc review . for example , while the logistics information board consists of members who participate in logistics business operations , maisrc comprises high - ranking officials separate from logistics business who have a more independent perspective in reviewing the strategy . further , while the logistics information board can play an effective role in development and implementation of the strategy , maisrc plays a vital role in developing and rigorously verifying the cost - benefit and alternative analyses that are fundamental to making investment decisions .