additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we verified the data in five ways . do they provide commensurate benefits to the government ? does gsa's dpa process add value to procurements and do agencies receive the dpas in a timely manner ? does the extra time taken to award brooks act contracts ( those that are compared to warner exempt ) result in higher quality products and services ? we also grouped our data according to the six agencies that awarded the most it contracts ( see appendix iii ) . this information can be further researched to determine if these agencies have unique processes and procedures that can be adopted by other agencies . we discussed our methodology and the resulting individual agency statistics with agency officials from army , navy , air force , dod , hhs , nasa , treasury , and gsa . these officials agreed with our methodology and told us that the information contained in this report would be useful in helping them identify areas for further research and improvement . as arranged with your office , we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen of the senate committee on governmental affairs and that committee's subcommittee on oversight of government management , the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on government reform and oversight , and the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate and house committees on appropriations ; the director of the office of management and budget ; the administrators of the general services administration and the national aeronautics and space administration ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , the air force , health and human services , and treasury ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . should you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6413 . other major contributors are listed in appendix iv . as you requested , we compiled data about the federal it procurement process . in this report , we agreed to provide statistical data about the it procurement process , including information about the time taken ( 1 ) to acquire it within various dollar strata , ( 2 ) to complete sole source and full and open procurements , and ( 3 ) by dod to acquire brooks act and warner exempt contracts . our data were limited to statistical information about the it procurement process . we made no attempt to determine the appropriate amount of time required to complete the procurement steps or identify problems that may have lengthened the procurement time , since these issues were beyond the scope of this report . to obtain the it procurement information , we developed and mailed questionnaires to the contracting personnel of 35 federal agencies . this mailing was based on a stratified random sample of it contract award notices published in the commerce business daily from january 1990 through september 1992 — the most current data when we drew the sample .