( continued ) . another way to estimate the total resources available for welfare programs is to compare total federal and state resources available under the block grant with what comparable federal - state spending would have been for 1997 caseloads under afdc . we did not verify the accuracy of these data . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from hhs , nga , ncsl , and the american public welfare association ( apwa ) . these comments are discussed in the letter , and hhs' comments are reprinted in appendix iii . states currently have more budgetary resources available for their welfare programs than they would have had under prior law . this is primarily the result of a combination of three interrelated factors: ( 1 ) the unprecedented declines in caseloads , ( 2 ) the new federal financing mechanism , or block grant , that provides resources to the states without regard to the numbers of people states' welfare programs serve , and ( 3 ) the maintenance of effort requirement on states that establishes a minimum , or floor , funding level for their state welfare programs . this appendix describes the influence each of these factors has on total resources available , and then presents our estimates of the combined effect they have on total available resources . given the fixed nature of the federal funding stream and states' minimum moe contributions , caseload volatility will dramatically affect the resources available per recipient for state welfare programs . as caseloads drop , there will be more resources available to the states to finance their welfare programs since programs' finance needs are largely driven by caseload assumptions . in contrast , if caseloads rise , there will be fewer federal dollars per recipient when compared to the previous budget period , and states will need to raise additional resources on their own or adjust their programs to make their resources go further . in many states , caseloads began to decline even before the enactment of prwora and continued to do so after passage of the law as shown in table ii.1 . while there remains controversy over some of the reasons for the caseload declines , research indicates that important factors include the strong economy and changes in federal and state welfare policies . total afdc / tanf recipients by state ( continued ) total afdc / tanf recipients by state ( continued ) overall , states' caseloads have declined by about a third since 1994 . however , this national average masks the differences among the states in the magnitude and timing of their caseload declines . for example , in north carolina , the caseload dropped by about a third since 1994 , with a decline of 20 percent before federal reforms had been enacted and an additional 13 percent decline in the last year . in contrast , in new mexico , the overall decline is also near the national average ; however , virtually all of the change occurred in the last year — after prwora passed .