from omb's efforts . for instance , 11 agencies received unqualified audit opinions on their fiscal year 1997 financial statements — up from 6 in fiscal year 1996 . at the same time , there are major obstacles to overcome . the most serious challenges are framed by the results of our first - ever audit of the government's consolidated financial statements , for fiscal year 1997 ; deficiencies in the statements prevented us from being able to form an opinion on their reliability . these deficiencies are the result of widespread material internal control and financial systems weaknesses that significantly impair the federal government's ability to adequately safeguard assets , ensure proper recording of transactions , and ensure compliance with laws and regulations . notice: this draft is restricted to official use . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss our observations on the office of management and budget's ( omb ) efforts to carry out its responsibilities to set policy and oversee the management of the executive branch . as you know , last month we issued a major new series of reports , entitled performance and accountability series: major management challenges and program risks , and an update of our high risk series . collectively , the reports show that long - standing performance and management challenges hinder the federal government's efforts to achieve results . the report series also highlighted numerous improvements that agencies need to make in their performance , management , and accountability . making these improvements will require the sustained efforts of the leadership and staff within agencies . at the same time , the report series also underscored the pivotal role that the federal government's central management agencies — in particular , omb — must play in guiding and overseeing agencies' efforts to address the shortcomings that we identified and to implement the changes necessary to improve performance . today , as requested by the subcommittee , we will cover three major points . this draft testimony is being provided to obtain advance review and comment from those with responsibility for the subjects it discusses . it has not been fully reviewed within gao . first , we will provide an outline of omb's wide - ranging management responsibilities and note that the question of whether to integrate or separate management and budget functions has been long debated . second , we will discuss the effectiveness of omb's management leadership , which , in our view , has been uneven . finally , we will discuss the factors that appear to contribute to progress in sustaining improvements in federal management . as agreed , our statement today is based on , and updates as appropriate , the testimony we provided on these three points when we appeared before this subcommittee last may . our observations are made on the basis of work we are currently doing and have done at federal agencies and at omb .