these factors contribute to increased costs . aerospace experts in industry and academia have identified a variety of options for attempting to reduce the costs of weather satellite systems such as goes . for example , a number of studies have been done of alternative architectures based on smaller satellites carrying fewer instruments , which would have the potential to reduce launch and production costs . in the case of goes , an architecture based on smaller satellites carrying one critical meteorological instrument instead of two could be considered . according to a recent study supported by nasa and the department of defense , cost reduction occurs predominantly , although not entirely , in small spacecraft , which tend to be inherently simpler and cost less than large spacecraft . further , a smaller spacecraft would not need as large a launch vehicle as the current goes system uses . currently , goes satellites are launched on atlas iia vehicles , which cost $80 to $90 million each . smaller satellites could be designed to use delta vehicles , for example , which currently cost $45 to $50 million apiece , or perhaps an even smaller vehicle . while the actual cost of launching a smaller goes satellite 10 or more years from now cannot be determined , it is likely to continue to be cheaper than the launch cost for a large satellite . a recent study by the applied physics laboratory of johns hopkins university shows that a small spacecraft architecture can increase the flexibility of the system to respond to failures and , in doing so , potentially reduce costs relative to an architecture based on larger satellites . for example , in the goes system , failure of an instrument or a critical subsystem on one of the current spacecraft would likely necessitate the launch of a replacement , even though the original spacecraft might still retain some capabilities . if a smaller satellite architecture were used , in which each spacecraft would have only one primary meteorological instrument , the failure of an instrument would not affect the operations of the instruments flying on other spacecraft . similarly , the failure of a critical subsystem , such as the communications or power subsystems , would only affect one instrument instead of two . thus the overall robustness of the system would be enhanced . based on discussions with noaa , nasa , and academic experts , it appears that a smaller satellite architecture could also provide greater flexibility in the deployment of meteorological instruments . currently , imagers and sounders are always deployed in pairs ( one set per satellite ) so that an operational constellation of a pair of instruments in both the east and west locations can be maintained . flying the instruments on separate spacecraft would allow greater flexibility to position individual instruments in orbital locations where they are most needed and to change the locations of specific instruments in the event of a spacecraft failure or other emergency . it could also allow deployment of differing numbers of imagers and sounders to meet changing user needs . making a decision about this or any other alternative architecture is not a simple task .