additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . the cost of complying with new environmental regulations . the cost of nonpower programs that , to date , have been funded primarily through appropriations . these appropriations , which amounted to $70 million in fiscal year 1998 , are expected to be substantially reduced or discontinued beginning in fiscal year 2000 . by not including these costs , tva will have less cash than contemplated in the plan to pay down debt and reduce fixed costs , which could jeopardize full achievement of the plan's objectives . tva estimates that the demand for peaking power in its service territory through 2007 will exceed its current and planned generating capacity . tva currently has several options planned or underway to meet a portion of this excess demand , including ( 1 ) purchasing new gas - fired combustion turbines , ( 2 ) purchasing power that was already under contract when the 10-year plan was issued , ( 3 ) modernizing hydro facilities , ( 4 ) improving the efficiency of certain existing fossil plants and combustion turbines , ( 5 ) contracting for the power from a new lignite plant , ( 6 ) upgrading certain nuclear plants , and ( 7 ) issuing a request for proposal for purchasing power generated from renewable resources . tva projected that these measures would not be sufficient to meet the entire increase in demand , and the 10-year plan assumes that tva will purchase power from other utilities to make up the difference , which is inconsistent with prior year practices . however , since the plan was finalized , tva officials have told us that they plan to evaluate other power supply options and to invest in new capacity if the resulting long - term increase in costs to produce power ( interest and operating expense ) would ultimately be less than the cost of purchased power . tva has already decided to invest in new capacity rather than purchasing power in at least one case — in 1998 , tva announced plans to purchase eight gas - fired combustion turbine units that will be used to replace a like amount of purchased peaking power that was assumed in the original plan . according to tva officials , while they expect this decision to result in a positive cash flow by fiscal year 2010 , the decision to purchase these units will require about $65 million more in cash disbursements through 2007 than would have been necessary to purchase a comparable amount of power from other utilities . but , according to tva's analysis , while acquiring this new generating capacity in lieu of purchasing power will initially increase capital expenditures and thus reduce the amount of cash available to pay down debt , it will also decrease tva's annual cost of power because it will be less expensive for tva to operate this new equipment than to purchase a like amount of power from other utilities .