it is being managed by dla . initial sps implementation began in may 1997 . sps development and implementation are expected to be completed by september 30 , 2001 , at a cost of about $295 million . the defense procurement payment system ( dpps ) is intended to be a single standard dod system for calculating contract payments and posting the payment information to accounting records . this system , along with sps , is to replace the current contract payment system — mechanization of contract administration services ( mocas ) . dpps is expected to ( 1 ) provide a single system which dfas can use to validate funds availability ; ( 2 ) reduce dfas' reliance on hard copy documents ; and ( 3 ) eliminate cumbersome manual processes for reconciling contract , payment , and accounting records . like sps , dpps will use edi capability to share data with other systems . the dpps initiative began in september 1995 . it is being managed by dfas and is estimated to cost $114 million . dpps implementation is scheduled to be completed by april 15 , 2002 . simply stated , electronic malls are electronic versions of suppliers' catalogs that are available through the internet . these malls will eventually allow dod customers to access a variety of electronic ordering systems or “stores” . the stores usually specialize in commodity groups such as industrial products , office supply products , food , or textiles . dla and each military service are developing an electronic mall for the inventory items they manage . this will not be an easy task . the dri electronic commerce and paperless communication initiatives involve a number of ongoing projects . some of these projects began as acquisition reform measures , others were initiated to improve financial management operations and problem disbursements , and others were initiated to simply take advantage of existing and emerging technologies to improve operational efficiencies and save money . ( see app . i for a brief description of the electronic and paperless programs included in this initiative. ) the dri report does not explain the relationships among these initiatives nor does it attempt to quantify the costs and benefits of the initiatives . meeting the dri goal of paper - free processing by the year 2000 will be a challenge , given dod's inability to bring radical change to its processes in the past and the fact that many of the paperless communication efforts are not scheduled to be completed until after 2000 . efforts could be further complicated because each military service and defense agency typically changed only the processes and systems it controlled . often , this approach eliminated the potential to significantly improve a process that cuts across several agencies . to address these types of issues and to centralize the management of dod's electronic commerce initiatives , dod recently created the joint electronic commerce program office . this office will be managed and staffed with dla and defense information systems agency ( disa ) personnel . the dri report includes several military service and support agency consolidation , restructuring , and regionalization initiatives that are intended to make dod activities more efficient and support dod's planned personnel reductions .