the respondents had spent most of their careers in dod . figures vi.1 and vi.2 show the average number of years of work experience by rank for the officers and by grade for the civilians , respectively . colonel ( 4 ) managers by rank ( number at each rank ) gs - 15 ( 12 ) managers by grade ( number at each grade ) figures vi.3 and vi.4 show the number of officers and civilians who indicated that they had performed each financial management function previously outlined at sometime during their careers , and the average number of years of experience in each function . the financial management function performed most frequently was financial analysis . a review of the profiles also showed that two officers and three civilians had performed three or more of these functions . number of managers performing function ( total = 4 respondents ) f / pong & acc policy ( yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) number of managers performing function ( total = 12 respondents ) yea ) yea ) opon ( yea ) ( yea ) . figure vi.5 shows the training reported by the 16 respondents as being completed during 1995 and 1996 . number of managers ( total = 16 respondents ) a review of the profiles showed total receiving accounting - related training: 3 ( 1 officer and 2 civilians ) , total receiving financial - related training: 7 ( 1 officer and 6 civilians ) , total receiving training in general topics: 10 ( 1 officer and 9 civilians ) , and total not receiving training: 6 ( 3 officers and 3 civilians ) . a review of the profiles showed that the two managers reporting professional certifications were cgfms — one officer and one civilian . the 14 managers that did not hold any professional certifications included 3 officers and 11 civilians . figure vi.6 shows the types of professional certifications reported by the systems command financial managers . number of managers ( total = 16 respondents ) . the u.s. army corps of engineers managed o&m , rdt&e , and procurement budgets totaling $715 million during fiscal year 1997 . thirty - two of the 59 key financial managers ( representing headquarters and 29 of its 55 offices ) provided information on their qualifications and experience , including 30 resource managers , 1 deputy resource manager , and 1 budget officer . table vii.1 shows the officer and civilian composition of the respondents by rank and grade , respectively . brigadier general ( o - 7 ) colonel ( o - 6 ) lieutenant colonel ( o - 5 ) major ( o - 4 ) captain ( o - 3 ) first lieutenant ( o - 2 ) . as shown in table vii.2 , all 32 respondents held bachelor's degrees , with 2 reporting more than one major . a review of the profiles also showed that 8 officers and 18 civilians had performed three or more of these functions . the army's comments are reprinted in appendix ix . also , the army provided a number of technical comments , which were fully addressed in finalizing our report .