additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dacs supports ins' enforcement activities . the national automated immigration lookout system ii ( nails ii ) is a lookout enforcement system which contains data about persons of interest to ins , including aliens who are suspected of illegal activities and / or have been previously deported . nails ii is used by inspectors at various ports of entry throughout the country . the nonimmigrant information system ( niis ) contains arrival , departure , and ancillary information pertaining to nonimmigrant aliens entering the united states legally on tourist or business visas . the student and schools system ( stsc ) is the primary vehicle for identifying , locating , and determining the status or benefit eligibility of nonimmigrant students and their dependents . appendix i provides a more detailed description of the databases . all alien case files in the databases , with the exception of niis and stsc , have corresponding paper files , which contain information on all service and , if applicable , enforcement actions that ins has taken or is taking . the paper file for criminal aliens generally includes a set of fingerprints , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) criminal history , and other identifying information , such as a photograph . the pilot phase of lesc started in july 1994 and is scheduled to last 15 months and will conclude september 30 , 1995 . its objectives are to develop an interim site in burlington , vermont , and , using ins staff temporarily detailed to the site , field test lesc's ability to respond to inquiries , initially from the phoenix arizona police department and , starting in november 1994 , from the maricopa county , arizona , sheriff's department . this phase is estimated to cost $1.4 million . during fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , lesc will accept queries from california , new york , florida , texas , and illinois in addition to arizona . in its fiscal year 1996 budget , ins has requested 39 staff positions to operate lesc and estimates that lesc operating expenses will total $3.4 million and $3.6 million for fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , respectively . an interim independent assessment of the lesc pilot operating results through february 1995 concluded that the lesc concept was viable and recommended that the pilot continue so that a full assessment can be made at the conclusion of the pilot test . in october 1995 , the justice management division of doj plans to perform a full evaluation of lesc's first year of operation . if this evaluation indicates that lesc should be expanded nationwide , ins plans to conduct this expansion over a 3-year period , subject to justice and office of management and budget approval . in addition , ins officials told us that a site survey will be done based on gsa's site selection criteria before a permanent location is selected . these apprehension and deportation authorities have been delegated to ins .