interior is in error . while all projects do , indeed , contain some elements of risk , our point was that interior was incurring and not mitigating unnecessarily high levels of risk because it does not have an integrated architecture for indian trust operations and has not corrected fundamental weaknesses in its it management processes . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . this position is not valid . the decision to use cots products does not compensate for the lack of an integrated information system architecture for indian trust operations . such an architecture would have identified and preferably reengineered the business functions of trust operations , and then mapped these into information systems to support the business functions . just choosing cots products from the marketplace does not accomplish the same purpose . in fact , the close relationship between business functions and it is the reason we focus on all 13 projects in the high level plan as a whole , even though , as interior points out in its comments , only 4 of the projects are information technology systems projects . further , small efforts , like irs' $17 million cyberfile project , as well as large ones , like faa's modernization , have failed due to poor program management , including lack of an architecture . with an estimated cost of $60 million for it systems and an additional $54 million for data cleanup , the information systems supporting the 13 projects will have to be effectively managed if they are to succeed . interior bases its decision to proceed with its it acquisitions without a formal architecture ( and without an estimated date for completing one ) on the “pressing need for more responsive indian trust systems.” however , moving to implement complex systems before developing an architecture does not expedite solutions . instead , it greatly increases the chance of building duplicative systems , introducing potential integration problems , and perpetuating inefficient and overlapping business processes that currently exist in indian trust operations .