also , sffas no . 7 requires a new statement — statement of financing — to show how budgetary resources obligated during the period relate to the net cost of operations for that reporting entity . several agencies have expressed concerns about having the available resources to prepare the statement . in particular , agencies are concerned that preparing the statement will require extensive analysis by trained accountants because agency accounting systems have not been modified to support the preparation of the statement . this statement is currently before the principals for adoption . after being adopted by the principals , it will go before the congress for a 45-day congressional review period . fasab is also considering additional accounting issues: management's discussion and analysis ; governmentwide supplementary stewardship reporting ; amendments to accounting for property , plant , and equipment ; and accounting for social insurance . we previously reported that agencies face significant challenges in fully implementing systems requirements , accounting standards , and the sgl . agencies made some progress in fiscal year 1997 toward implementing and maintaining financial systems that comply with these requirements . however , agencies have indicated concerns with implementing new accounting requirements imposed by accounting standards which became effective in fiscal year 1998 . moreover , the need to update a significant number of critical systems applications coupled with the government's history of systems development difficulties portends problems in achieving substantial compliance with ffmia's requirements in the near future , particularly as agencies are struggling to address critical year 2000 computer conversion issues . although the accounting standards were issued several years ago , some agencies are not prepared to address key elements of the requirements that became effective for fiscal year 1998 . for example , the managerial cost accounting concepts and standards promulgated in sffas no . 4 are aimed at providing reliable and timely information on the full cost of federal programs , their activities , and outputs . the standard requires agency management to define responsibility segments and to measure and report the costs of each segment's outputs . however , management of several agencies have expressed difficulty in linking responsibility segments to general ledger accounts , which is necessary to assign costs to segment outputs . in addition , the deferred maintenance requirements of sffas no . 6 require disclosures related to the condition and the estimated cost to remedy deferred maintenance of property , plant , and equipment . as we reported in january 1998 , a critical step in developing a deferred maintenance estimate is a complete and reliable inventory of property , plant , and equipment on which to assess maintenance needs . core system data could not be reconciled to feeder system data . transaction detail supporting account information was nonexistent or not readily available . system financial data were not consistent with the sgl and its posting requirements . as a result of these weaknesses , government managers are not receiving the timely , uniform , reliable information needed to oversee programs , reduce costs , and help make resource decisions .