additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we do not agree that this approach is the most cost - effective . first , upgrading the edits by moving from the contractor who develops the original edits to one unfamiliar with them would not be easy and could be costly because this is a major task , which is facilitated by a thorough clinical knowledge of the existing edits . for example , the iowa test system contains millions of edits , which would have to be compared against annual changes in the cpt codes . second , the annual licensing fees that hcfa would avoid with hcfa - owned edits would be offset somewhat by the need to pay a contractor with the clinical expertise offered by commercial vendors to keep the edits current . third , while the commercial edits could cost more than hcfa - owned ones , this increased cost has been justified by hcfa's test results , which demonstrated that commercial edits provide significantly more medicare savings than hcfa - developed edits . regarding hcfa's initial plan to fully disclose the hcfa - owned edits as they are with cci , this policy is not mandated by federal law or explicit medicare policies , nor is it followed by other public insurers , and it could result in potential contractors declining to bid . in a may 1995 memorandum from hhs to hcfa , the hhs office of general counsel concluded that federal law and regulations do not preclude hcfa from protecting the proprietary edits and related computer logic used in commercial claims auditing systems . further , according to hcfa's deputy director , provider purchasing and administration group , hcfa has no explicit medicare policies that require it to disclose the specific edits used to audit providers' claims . likewise , other public health care insurers , including champva , tricare , and the two state medicaid agencies we visited , do not have such a policy , and are indeed using commercial claims - auditing systems without disclosing the details of the edits . rather than disclose the edits , these insurers notified providers that they were implementing the system and provided examples of the categories of edits that would be used to check for such disparities as mutually exclusive claims . this approach protects the proprietary nature of the commercial claims auditing edits . hcfa's methodological approach was similar . however , if the request for proposals requires that these edits be in the public domain , it is doubtful that such vendors would bid on this contract using their already developed edits . an executive of a vendor that has already developed a claims auditing system told us that his company would not enter into such a contractual agreement if hcfa insists on making the edits public , because this would result in the loss of the proprietary rights to his company's claims auditing edits .