sec . thus , the broad management responsibilities imposed by section 3506 fall on the department and not the contractor . however , we do not read the act as excluding government - owned contractor - operated information resources from the requirements imposed on agencies by section 3506 . in addition , the office of management and budget's evaluating information technology investments: a practical guide provides a systematic approach to managing the risks and returns of information technology investments . according to this guide , one of the organizational attributes critical to the success of an agency's information technology investments is defining a portfolio that includes information technology projects in every phase ( initial concept , new , ongoing , or fully operational ) and for every type ( mission critical , cross - functional , infrastructure , administrative , and r&d ) of information technology systems . since approximately 90 percent of the department's information technology investments are made by its management and operating contractors , it is incumbent upon the department to collect and maintain accurate information on these information resources . without this information , the department cannot expect to develop a full and accurate accounting of its information technology expenditures or to adequately assess the extent to which its information resources contribute to program productivity , efficiency , and effectiveness . in addition , even with performance - based contracts , information on what resources exist agencywide will be essential to contractors in identifying the appropriate systems to consolidate or eliminate , and to the department in assessing how well contractors meet performance goals aimed at eliminating systems duplication to achieve savings . as you know , 31 u.s.c . 720 requires the head of a federal agency to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations . you must send the statement to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on governmental reform and oversight within 60 days after the date of this report . you must also submit a written statement to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made over 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house and senate committees on appropriations , the senate committee on governmental affairs , the house committee on governmental reform and oversight , and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . we performed our review from july 1995 through march 1996 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . details on the scope and methodology of this work are in appendix ii . if you have questions about this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-6240 or valerie c. melvin , assistant director , on ( 202 ) 512-6304 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii .