five majored in accounting . as shown in table vi.3 , 10 staff also held master's degrees . the majors for eight of these staff were business related . all of the 12 respondents reported completing one or more courses in accounting - related subjects , as follows: 1-2 subjects: 1 officer , 3-5 subjects: 5 ( 2 officers and 3 civilians ) , and 6 or more subjects: 6 ( 3 officers and 3 civilians ) . none held professional certifications . in collaboration with air force officials , we identified 204 key financial managers across the department for this review , of which 173 ( or 85 percent ) provided information on their qualifications and experience . respondents included all 10 staff from the office of the assistant secretary of the air force ( financial management and comptroller ) — saf / fm&c , 106 of 129 staff from four operational commands and their installations , 28 of 36 staff from the air education and training command and its all 29 staff from the air force materiel command and centers , including 5 air logistics centers responsible for supply and maintenance support and 3 product centers responsible for the research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) and procurement of air force aeronautical , electronics , space , and missile systems . the saf / fm&c respondents performed roles involving financial operations , financial management policy , and / or budget execution . the officials responding from the major commands and installations included 76 comptrollers , 14 deputy comptrollers , 68 budget officers , and 5 working capital fund managers — the last being from the air force materiel command and its air logistics centers . of the 173 respondents , almost 70 percent were military officers . table 2 provides a breakout of the 117 officers by rank and the 56 civilians by grade . the officers served mainly as comptrollers and budget officers at major commands and comptrollers at installations , and the civilians most often served in budget officer positions at installations . over 90 percent of the respondents ( all 117 officers and 41 of 56 civilians ) reported having attained bachelor's degrees , and about 75 percent had also attained master's degrees . aetc managed an o&m budget of $1.8 billion for fiscal year 1997 . as shown in table iv.1 , 28 of the 36 key financial managers from aetc ( representing 13 of its 16 installations ) provided information on their qualifications and experience . financial analysis was the function performed most frequently . of the five staff that did not hold any professional certifications , three were officers and two were civilians . number of staff ( total = 12 respondents ) . george h. stalcup , associate director geoffrey b. frank , assistant director robert l. self , evaluator - in - charge patricia a. summers , senior auditor dennis b. fauber , senior evaluator francine m. delvecchio , communications analyst michele a. howard , intern the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .