we have revised the report . we agree that uncollectible debts may still be legally enforceable and as such , should be transferred to nfc . as stated in our report , uncollectible accounts should not be considered as valid accounts receivable for financial reporting purposes , however ; aousc needs to account for these receivables for enforcement , compliance , and tracking purposes . jan b. montgomery , assistant general counsel the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . see comment 1 . we have modified the results in brief and other sections of the report to reflect that 25 districts are providing new criminal debt account information for input into the nfc system and that the nfc implementation is slightly ahead of schedule . the report has been modified to reflect the recent additional progress made by aousc . we have further updated the report to indicate that aousc ( 1 ) has begun converting criminal debt accounts from its interim accounting software package to the new off - the - shelf accounting system and ( 2 ) is planning to complete conversion efforts for all 25 districts by may 1995 . aousc is correct in its characterization of our report as emphasizing that much more needs to be done to completely implement the nfc system . we have modified the report to reflect that , as of april 1995 , aousc was slightly ahead of schedule in implementing the nfc system . we believe the discussions of aousc's overall strategy and policies for the phase i nfc implementation effort are appropriate . we have modified the results in brief section to reflect that aousc and doj should work together to determine the collectibility of criminal debt . we have further clarified that doj is responsible for enforcing the collection of delinquent and defaulted criminal debts . while we agree that doj and the u.s . fines: amounts the court sets as punishment . fines may accumulate interest , and those that are not paid promptly may result in additional penalties . restitution: amounts paid to identifiable crime victims that are entitled to compensation . special assessments: fixed amounts , ranging from $5 to $200 , assessed for each count upon which the defendant is convicted . the courts are required to impose special assessments on each offender convicted of a crime . reimbursement of costs: an amount equal to the court and legal costs of the trial .