sffas no . 3 , accounting for inventory and related property , defines operating materials and supplies as consisting of tangible personal property to be consumed in normal operations . sffas no . 6 , accounting for property , plant , and equipment , which is effective beginning in fiscal year 1998 , deals with various accounting issues pertaining to pp&e . this statement establishes several new accounting categories of pp&e , collectively called stewardship pp&e . other pp&e is referred to as general pp&e . one of the new stewardship categories — federal mission pp&e — is defined as tangible items owned by a federal government entity , principally dod , that have no expected nongovernmental use , are held for use in the event of emergency , war , or natural disaster , and have an unpredictable useful life . federal mission pp&e , which includes ships , submarines , aircraft , and combat vehicles , is a major part of dod's total pp&e . recently , fasab reviewed the asset category for ammunition and reiterated its position that ammunition should be classified as operating materials and supplies rather than federal mission pp&e . although the asset categories for financial reporting may be different , the sffas no . 5 requirements for recording the disposal liability are the same for operating materials and supplies and mission assets . we undertook this review to assist dod in its efforts to meet the new federal accounting standard , sffas no . 5 , and because of our responsibility to audit the federal government's consolidated financial statements beginning with fiscal year 1997 . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) the status of dod's efforts to implement the new federal accounting standard for disclosure of liabilities , such as ammunition disposal costs , and ( 2 ) whether the ammunition disposal liability was probable and whether a reasonable estimate of the minimum disposal liability for ammunition could be made . to determine if the liability is probable , we reviewed financial accounting standards , environmental laws and regulations , and dod manuals that address the handling and disposal of hazardous material . we also reviewed congressional committee reports that requested ammunition disposal cost information . we also interviewed dod officials responsible for financial reporting and those at the service level responsible for program management , ammunition demilitarization , and disposal . to determine if a disposal liability was reasonably estimable , we obtained information on ammunition inventories , as of september 30 , 1996 , the most recent data available at the time of our review , and what it costs to demilitarize and dispose of ammunition . to determine the availability of ammunition inventory information , we interviewed service officials responsible for inventory management and obtained information on the services' ammunition inventory systems as well as their ammunition inventories as of september 30 , 1996 . to determine the availability of ammunition demilitarization and disposal cost information , we obtained information on the volume , nature , and cost of the army industrial operation command's ( dod's single manager for ammunition ) disposal activities , as well as information on the joint ordnance commanders group's munitions demilitarization studies .