we did not independently verify this information . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the comments have been incorporated into the report where appropriate . to address this shortfall , nws initiated a number of measures , both temporary and permanent . temporary actions included freezing operational equipment replacements , reducing central logistics quantities , deferring central communications network operations and maintenance , and reducing operational supplies and stock levels . according to the former director and the deputy for operations , these measures — which total about $10.8 million — must be restored in fiscal year 1998 if nws is to carry out its mission . further , nws officials did not fill 118 vacant positions in fiscal year 1997 . in commenting on a draft of this report , the department stated that these positions were not filled in order to mitigate the effect of reductions - in - force in the southern regional headquarters and the national capital area . the department added that by holding these vacancies , nws was able to provide the maximum level of placement opportunities for employees directly affected by the reduction - in - force . nws officials consider these positions critical , however , and plan to fill them in fiscal years 1997 and / or 1998 . permanent measures included reducing staff in the national capital area , streamlining central computer operations , reducing field outreach activities , and curtailing most nonoperational travel . another permanent measure was to accelerate the closure of the southern region . as shown in figure 2 , by the closure of the southern region , nws expected to go from a 6 region structure to a 5 region structure which included three mainland regions , with a total of 233 ftes ( representing a reduction of 59 ftes ) as of october 1 , 1998 . according to the former director of nws , the decision to accelerate the closure of the southern region was based on ( 1 ) the agency's need to address budget reductions and ( 2 ) the fact that it was already scheduled for closure in fiscal year 1999 , upon completion of the modernization . the former director said that he met with the administrator of noaa on various dates from august through december 1996 to discuss staff cutting options available to address the fiscal year 1997 budget shortfall . among the options proposed by the former director were ( 1 ) closing the southern region , ( 2 ) consolidating the six regional offices into one , and ( 3 ) reducing staff at the four mainland regional offices . he indicated that the administrator rejected both the consolidating the six regional offices into one option and the reducing staff at the four mainland regions option . the administrator of noaa told us that he provided overall guidance to the former director of nws to address the budget shortfall and that specific cuts within this broad guidance were to be decided by nws .