examples of these weaknesses follow . there was no independent quality assurance review or testing of locally developed programs . application programmers have the capability to access or modify production computer software programs after the programs have been reviewed or tested , increasing the risk of unauthorized changes to production programs . application programmers use real taxpayer data for software testing purposes , increasing the risk that sensitive taxpayer data could be disclosed to unauthorized individuals . without adequate quality assurance and control over the software development and change process , irs runs a greater risk that software supporting its operations will not ( 1 ) produce reliable data , ( 2 ) execute transactions in accordance with applicable laws , regulations , and management policies , or ( 3 ) effectively meet operational needs . an organization's ability to accomplish its mission can be significantly affected if it loses the ability to process , retrieve , and protect information that is maintained electronically . for this reason , organizations should have ( 1 ) established procedures for protecting information resources and minimizing the risk of unplanned interruptions , ( 2 ) a disaster recovery plan for restoring critical data processing capabilities , and ( 3 ) a business resumption plan for resuming business operations should interruptions occur . disaster recovery and business resumption plans specify emergency response procedures , backup operations , and postdisaster recovery procedures to ensure the availability of critical resources and facilitate the continuity of operations in an emergency . these plans address how an organization will deal with a full range of contingencies , from electrical power failures to catastrophic events , such as earthquakes , floods , and fires . the plans also identify essential business functions and rank resources in order of criticality . to be most effective , disaster recovery and business resumption plans should be periodically tested and employees should be trained in and familiar with the use of these plans . we found weaknesses relating to contingency planning at the facilities reviewed , as the following examples illustrate . disaster recovery plans had not been completed or lacked essential information , such as designation of an alternate computer processing site , telecommunications requirements , and procedures for restoring mission - critical processes and applications . disaster recovery procedures were not adequately tested to determine irs' ability to restore and operate all mission - critical applications . disaster recovery goals and milestones were not developed based on users' business needs , which provides little assurance that users' processing needs will be met in the event of a disaster . business resumption plans had not been developed or were incomplete . backup generator capacity or the alternate electrical power source did not effectively meet the needs of the facilities . due to the nature of these and other weaknesses , irs facilities may not be able to recover their data processing capabilities , resume business operations , and restore critical data promptly in the event of a disaster or disruption of service .