we disagree . we found that the problem — snow blockage — is identified in nws' trouble report system as a contract deficiency , meaning that any sensor modifications to address this problem are the contractor's responsibility . the government - provided sensors that do not meet specifications are the temperature and dew point sensor and the ceilometer . the temperature and dew point sensor does not meet reliability requirements , and the ceilometer fails more frequently than the specification permits . the shortfalls of each of these six sensors in meeting specifications and nws' resolution plans are discussed in detail in appendix i . inaccurate reports , according to a representative for the airline dispatchers federation , could lead a pilot to approach an airport during underreported wind gusts , incurring unexpected safety risks . similarly , a university of maryland climatologist stated that inaccurate precipitation reports could lead researchers to incorrectly evaluate flood and drought frequencies , intensities , and durations , and could result in ineffectively designed irrigation systems , dams , and other structures . finally , a senior nws meteorologist stated that inaccurate dew point observations could contribute to a forecast for clear weather , when in fact a hazardous thunderstorm is brewing . nws has steps under way to address most of these sensor shortfalls , but these actions are not yet complete . the program office , which is responsible for the units being produced , has had the contractor develop modifications to resolve shortfalls with the wind sensor , the precipitation accumulation sensor , and the precipitation identification sensor ; has tested the modifications ; and has incorporated these modifications in asos units now being produced . nws' office of system operations ( oso ) , which is responsible for the units once they are commissioned and which did not participate in the program office testing , is testing the modifications to these three sensors in an operational setting before approving them for implementation on commissioned systems . in february 1995 , oso approved the wind sensor modification for implementation on commissioned systems , based on preliminary testing . however , oso is continuing to test the modification . additionally , the program office is currently testing modifications to the freezing rain sensor and ceilometer and evaluating how best to improve the wind direction problem , excessive ceilometer failures , and the dew point sensor reliability problems . until nws completes actions to resolve asos shortfalls , their success cannot be ascertained . in the interim , asos will not provide its full complement of promised capabilities and will sometimes produce inaccurate or incomplete weather reports . the asos specification calls for mean time between system critical failuresand system critical errors to be 2,190 and 8,760 hours , respectively . nws system reliability demonstrations during winter months in 1993 and 1994 indicated that asos was not meeting these requirements . the 1994 results show mean time between critical failures to be 1,200 hours ( versus 2,190 ) and mean time between critical errors to be 2,800 hours ( versus 8,760 ) . furthermore , critical failures and errors that were caught and corrected by weather observers were not included in these results .