not applicable . alternatives analysis reflecting the technical feasibility and cost - effectiveness of alternatives — including outsourcing . the agency has decided to move to a client / server architecture . no consolidation strategy was submitted for this move . architecture design , or technical solution , based on selected data center consolidation alternative , and identifying the receiving and closing data centers and workload realignment as well as the communications architecture . none submitted . high - level implementation approach identifying major consolidation tasks and presenting a schedule , milestones , and resources . none submitted . funding plan identifying and forecasting costs associated with the consolidation process and funding requirements for all major tasks associated with the consolidation . none submitted . exceptions that could not be included in the consolidation plan . no exemptions requested . alternatives analysis reflecting the technical feasibility and cost - effectiveness of alternatives — including outsourcing . the agency reported that it met the omb target mips for a minimum size computer center at both of its computer centers . architecture design , or technical solution , based on selected data center consolidation alternative , and identifying the receiving and closing data centers and workload realignment as well as the communications architecture . see above . high - level implementation approach identifying major consolidation tasks and presenting a schedule , milestones , and resources . see above . funding plan identifying and forecasting costs associated with the consolidation process and funding requirements for all major tasks associated with the consolidation . see above . exceptions that could not be included in the consolidation plan . see above . alternatives analysis reflecting the technical feasibility and cost - effectiveness of alternatives — including outsourcing . architecture design , or technical solution , based on selected data center consolidation alternative , and identifying the receiving and closing data centers and workload realignment as well as the communications architecture . not applicable . high - level implementation approach identifying major consolidation tasks and presenting a schedule , milestones , and resources . not applicable . funding plan identifying and forecasting costs associated with the consolidation process and funding requirements for all major tasks associated with the consolidation . not applicable . exceptions that could not be included in the consolidation plan . requested exemption because the service's computer center meets the minimum target size for computer centers . alternatives analysis reflecting the technical feasibility and cost - effectiveness of alternatives — including outsourcing . alternatives analyses were submitted for 3 of the agency's 12 computer centers , with selection of option to consolidate in - house operations . two of the agency's computer centers were exempt ( see below ) and another two were designated for brac . alternative analyses were not submitted for the remaining 5 computer centers , which will support the agency's planned distribution standard system . architecture design , or technical solution , based on selected data center consolidation alternative , and identifying the receiving and closing data centers and workload realignment as well as the communications architecture . not submitted for centers that will support the distribution standard system because the agency believed these requirements were not applicable to its overall strategy .