sfas no . 114 provides loss recognition and measurement criteria for individual loans that are identified for evaluation of collectibility . the statement specifies that , for loans which are individually assessed , impairment should be measured on the basis of the present value of the loan's expected cash flows , the loan's observable market price , or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent . sfas no . 114 , however , does not specify how a creditor should identify loans that are to be individually assessed for collectibility , address how an institution should determine loss reserves for loans that are not individually assessed , or provide additional guidance for the establishment of overall reserves . therefore , while sfas no . sfac no . 2 states that accounting information is reliable to the extent that users can depend on it to reflect the economic conditions or events that it purports to represent . reliability of accounting information stems from representational faithfulness and verifiability . in other words , to be reliable , accounting information must be verifiable and directly related to the economic resources and obligations of the enterprise , as well as to transactions or events that change those resources or obligations . with regard to comparability , sfac no . 2 states that information concerning an enterprise gains greatly in usefulness if it can be compared with similar information about other enterprises and with similar information for different periods of time or points in time for the same enterprise . the significance of information , especially quantitative information , depends to a great degree on the user's ability to relate it to some benchmark . one of the principal reasons for accounting standards is the desire for such benchmarks for purposes of making financial comparisons . loans are the largest single component of most depository institutions' assets ; therefore , loan loss reserves and related provisions are critical to understanding the financial condition of a depository institution , including identification of changes in its credit risks and exposures . provisions directly affect an institution's current earnings and represent the amount necessary to adjust the loan loss reserve to reflect estimated uncollectible loan balances outstanding . in theory , as the risks and exposures from uncollectible amounts in the loan portfolio increase or decrease , this should be reflected by a corresponding increase or decrease in the provision and reserve . because of their importance as indicators of financial condition , loan loss provisions and reserves must reliably reflect estimated losses in the loan portfolios of institutions and be subject to meaningful comparison . the loan loss reserve must be sufficient to cover both specifically identified loss exposures as well as other inherent loss exposures in the institution's portfolio . therefore , an adequate reserve hinges on ( 1 ) timely identification and analysis of loss exposures on impaired loans , and ( 2 ) analysis of loss exposures on unimpaired loans considering past trends and current conditions . loss exposures on larger balance impaired loans are generally best evaluated using individual loan assessments , which include detailed review of the financial condition of the borrower , loan payment history , fair value of collateral , loan guarantees , and other relevant information .