the ams contract was awarded in april 1997 . sps began deployment ( installation , training , and deployment assistance ) in may 1997 . as of september 30 , 1997 , sps was available to 2,535 users out of a planned total of 43,826 . according to the program manager for sps , as of september 30 , 1997 , the program development and implementation is expected to be completed by september 30 , 2001 , at a cost of about $295 million , including $20 million for the shared data warehouse . the defense procurement payment system ( dpps ) is intended to be the single standard dod system for calculating contractor payments and generating accounting records . the system , as designed , will replace the contract payment functions currently in mocas . it is expected to standardize and improve contract payment processes by computing timely and accurate payments and making the disbursement data available to dod entities responsible for procurement , logistics , and accounting . dpps is expected to improve payment process efficiencies by ( 1 ) providing a single system that dfas can use to validate funds availability , ( 2 ) reducing dfas' reliance on hard copy documents , and ( 3 ) eliminating manual reconciliations . dpps will operate in an on - line , real - time environment — providing up - to - date contract and payment information . to calculate and schedule payments , dpps will rely on the dfas corporate database ( another initiative described later in this report ) for the needed contract and receiving report information . contract payment information generated by dpps will also be stored in the dfas corporate database . contract payment information needed by contracting officers to administer the contracts will be duplicated from the dfas corporate database into the shared data warehouse for their use . the dpps program started in september 1995 . dfas plans to award a contract for dpps by april 1998 . dfas also plans to procure a commercial off - the - shelf software package to compute entitlements and support the dpps accounting functions . according to the dfas program manager for dpps , as of september 30 , 1997 , full dpps deployment is expected by august 31 , 2001 , and the total program cost is reported to be $46 million . in commenting on a draft of this report , a dfas official said that the program costs have been recalculated and as of december 31 , 1997 , they were estimated to be $114 million , and the system is expected to be completed by april 15 , 2002 . the shared data warehouse ( sdw ) is a dod initiative that is intended to be the single database containing the official procurement records needed to support contract placement and contract administration functions in sps . although dod officials agree that the information produced in the accounting and procurement communities must be shared with each other , they have not finalized their plans on how or to what extent they will do this . sdw is designed to support the complete contract cycle , from initial concept and contract award through contract closeout .