nws has not done this for awips . according to nws officials , they have not explicitly linked either awips requirements or higher - level capabilities to mission improvements , and they have no plans to do so because they claim that other requirements reviews , analyses , and validation activities already provide implicit justification for all awips' proposed capabilities . we disagree . we carefully reviewed these other activities and while we found them to be valuable for different reasons , they were neither intended to nor do they demonstrate that awips' full array of capabilities will improve nws mission effectiveness . omb circular a - 109 , “major system acquisitions,” expands on a - 130 , requiring federal agencies to make system design decisions based on a review of proposed system functional and performance capabilities contributions to mission needs and program objectives . in effect , agencies developing computer systems , like awips , are to show that proposed system capabilities will produce some mission effectiveness or efficiency gain , like more reliable and timely forecasts or office and staffing reductions . these requirements are consistent with our recent findings on how leading public and private organizations tie technology investments to measurable mission improvements . we found that successful organizations' information system investment decisions are tied to explicit and quantifiable mission improvements . by doing so , these organizations know that investing in system requirements will make a difference in mission outcomes . ensuring that proposed system capabilities are justified before expensive software development begins requires validating ( that is , proving ) that system requirements are anchored in user needs , which in turn are grounded in positive mission impacts . to do less increases the chances of spending money on capabilities that , even though desired by users , will not advance the organization's effectiveness or efficiency . accordingly , software development guidance advocates assuring traceability from derived system requirements , designs , and implementations to both original user needs and mission needs . approaches to validating proposed capabilities include performance modeling and prototyping . according to nws , planned awips capabilities are necessary and will contribute to nws' goals of weather forecast and warning improvements , field office consolidation , and staff reductions . however , nws officials were unable to produce any analysis or associated documentation to validate this claim . instead , they presented the results of past awips requirements analysis and definition activities and discussed ongoing requirements validation activities that , while useful in their own right , do not justify awips capabilities on the basis of mission improvements . each of these requirements review activities are discussed below . the first awips requirements review began in 1984 , when nws initiated the denver awips risk reduction and requirements evaluation ( dare ) program , an extensive awips prototyping effort to analyze and refine meteorology requirements . later , nws augmented the dare prototype addressed roughly half of awips' 22,000 requirements . the half that were addressed equates to over three - fourths of awips' total lines of code . moreover , even those awips capabilities that were part of the prototypes , with one limited exception , were not explicitly linked to measurable improvements in nws' mission effectiveness during these prototyping activities .