this will not be easy and will take time . if va is to achieve the benefits associated with dss , it must change a decades - old culture in which business is conducted without enough focus on delivering high quality health care at minimal cost . in addition , for dss to be useful for decision - making , it will require a complete and accurate information infrastructure . we are encouraged by the recent steps taken by the under secretary for health . he has demonstrated an understanding of the issues and a willingness to respond . however , unless the under secretary's actions are sustained and expanded to fully address the organizational and information infrastructure issues identified , including piloting dss at a small number of sites , the millions of dollars invested in dss to date are at risk . to increase the likelihood of dss' success , we recommend that the secretary of veterans affairs direct the under secretary for health to develop a comprehensive business strategy to identify the specific business goals ( for example , reduction of cost in a specific area by a specific percentage ) , performance measures , and key decisions that dss will be required to support ; give high priority , by allocating appropriate resources , to establishing a complete , consistent , and accurate dss information infrastructure ; and identify data that are needed to support decision - making and ensure that these data are complete , accurate , consistent , and reconciled monthly . we also recommend that va not implement dss at any site beyond the 38 already begun until ( 1 ) defined business goals and a supporting information infrastructure supporting key decisions are in place and ( 2 ) va's capability to use dss effectively as a management tool can be demonstrated . the vha chief financial officer provided oral comments to our draft report . he stated that the report was a fair , open , and honest assessment of va's efforts to implement dss and that va concurred with most of the recommendations in the report . va concurred with our recommendation to establish a business strategy and specific business goals and has already taken several actions in this regard . the under secretary for health recently established a work group on performance measures that will be a key component to this effort . in addition , va recently appointed a new dss program director , and his first priority is to draft and implement a detailed dss business plan . the under secretary for health also authorized establishing a dss corporate advisory board to oversee implementation of major systemwide policies and a field advisory board to identify , prioritize , track , and resolve issues that arise from pilot site experience . va also concurred with our recommendation to allocate appropriate resources to support the dss information infrastructure . the new vha chief information officer will oversee both dhcp and dss . this individual and the vha chief financial officer will address resource allocation needs relating to these systems . va concurred with our recommendation to identify data needed to support decision - making and ensure that these data are complete , accurate , and consistent .