department of defense . we recently reported that the department of defense , which is responsible for about a third of the federal government's reported mission critical systems , has taken positive actions to increase awareness , promote sharing of information , and encourage components to make year 2000 remediation efforts a priority , but that its progress in fixing systems has been slow . however , defense lacked key management and oversight controls to enforce good management practices , to direct resources , and to establish a complete picture of its progress in fixing systems . accordingly , we recommended that the secretary of defense ( 1 ) establish a strong department - level program office , ( 2 ) expedite efforts to establish a comprehensive , accurate departmentwide inventory of systems , interfaces , and other equipment needing repair , ( 3 ) clearly define criteria and an objective process for prioritizing systems for repair based on their mission - criticality , ( 4 ) ensure that system interfaces are adequately addressed , ( 5 ) develop an overall , departmentwide testing strategy and a plan for ensuring that adequate resources are available to perform necessary testing , ( 6 ) require components to develop contingency plans , and ( 7 ) prepare complete and accurate year 2000 cost estimates . the department of defense concurred with our recommendations . we have also recommended improvements in the year 2000 programs of the air force , logistics systems support center , the defense finance and accounting service , and the defense logistics agency , including the need to develop contingency plans . health care financing administration ( hcfa ) . hcfa administers the medicare program , the nation's largest health insurer . hcfa expects to process over 1 billion claims and pay $288 billion in benefits per year by 2000 . in may 1997 , we reported that the heath care financing administration had not taken enough initial steps , such as developing an assessment of the potential severity of the century change , to ensure that it can avoid the systems - related service disruptions that may occur as the year 2000 approaches . hcfa agreed to implement our recommendations that it identify responsibilities for managing and monitoring year 2000 actions , prepare an assessment of the severity and timing of potential year 2000 impact , and develop contingency plans for critical systems . federal deposit insurance corporation . the federal deposit insurance corporation is the deposit insurer of approximately 11,000 banks and savings institutions which are responsible for over $6 trillion in assets and have insured deposits totaling upwards of $2.7 trillion . we found that while the federal deposit insurance corporation has taken aggressive efforts to ensure that the banks it oversees mitigate year 2000 risks , it still faces significant challenges in providing a high level of assurance that individual banks will be ready . we recommended that the federal deposit insurance corporation work with other federal bank , credit union , and thrift institution regulators to , for example , revise their year 2000 work program , complete guidance to institutions to mitigate risks associated with corporate customers and reliance on vendors , and establish a working group to develop contingency planning guidance .