additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the remaining amount has yet to be expended . with the information technology projects , a senior mpd official stated that the age of the headquarters building ( built in 1941 ) made it difficult to create workstations because the building lacked sufficient electrical outlets and adequate wiring to accommodate the system needs . therefore , extensive refurbishing and rewiring had to be undertaken , and this contributed to the delay in the delivery of computers and communication equipment and the payment to the contractors involved . according to mpd officials , items such as supplies , furnishings , and uniforms to be apportioned to each police district and division office are delivered to individual offices and divisions from the property division . vehicles and computers are delivered directly from vendors to the fleet division and information services division , respectively . mpd officials told us that these items were distributed to their final destinations at the police districts and division offices . however , we could not track mpd's inventoried items such as patrol vehicles , motorcycles , and communication consoles , purchased with the $15 million beyond mpd's receipt because inventory information was not completely documented or updated in either the district's asset management system or mpd's inventory records . in a june 10 , 1998 , letter to the authority , a mpd senior official stated that currently it is not possible to track inventory items from central receiving to the divisions according to their funding source . the mpd official further stated that the september 1997 report of the physical inventory count did not provide identification numbers , location of assets , or the individual accountable for high - dollar value equipment , such as patrol vehicles , or sensitive items , such as computer equipment . as a result , sufficient detailed records at the district and division offices to enable the proper tracking of assets is still not available . in order to completely implement the district auditors' recommendations pertaining to the district's inventory and asset management systems and ensure control over all assets , mpd stated that it ( 1 ) has contracted with a vendor to undertake a full - scale physical inventory of assets for september 1998 ( the detailed report complete with information omitted from the 1997 inventory report will be available in november 1998 ) , ( 2 ) plans to obtain software upgrades to further develop and maintain a complete continuous asset management system , and ( 3 ) intends to integrate this system with the district's new financial management system in calendar year 1999 . in commenting on a draft of the report , mpd stated that it is committed to continuing improvement of its accounting , financial , and procurement systems . mpd referred to its initiatives to improve its control over inventory , pointing out that it had obtained software upgrades to further develop and maintain a complete continuous asset management system .