sfas no . 115 permits some investment securities to be carried at historical cost on the basis of the intent and ability of an entity's management to hold the instruments to maturity , but other securities are to be carried at fair value . although sfas no . 115 does not apply to derivatives , it does apply to investment securities that have derivatives - like characteristics , such as structured notes and cmos . as stated in our december 1992 comment letter to fasb on the exposure draft for sfas no . 115 , we continue to believe that the standard is too subjective and difficult to verify . market value accounting for all debt and equity securities would eliminate the judgmental nature of sfas no . 115 and would provide for early exposure of portfolio declines . although market value accounting has been criticized because it can cause earnings volatility based on temporary changes in market values , we believe this volatility , if it occurs , reflects the realities of the marketplace . we believe that a market value approach to investment securities and related liabilities and hedging instruments would help expose activities that threaten an entity's viability and facilitate more timely corrective actions . in contrast , management's ability to account for investment portfolios and related activities at historical cost has allowed some managers to avoid recognition of problems until they become so severe that they require drastic action . an example of the dangers of such use of historical cost accounting is illustrated by the major losses of cap corp. as discussed in chapter 2 and appendix i , market conditions in 1994 , compounded by an aggressive investment and funding strategy , resulted in large declines in the values of cmos held by cap corp . in the fall of 1994 , many member credit unions began withdrawing shares they held in cap corp. to avoid recording the losses on its cmo portfolio , cap corp funded these withdrawals with additional borrowing rather than selling some of its cmo portfolio . once these borrowings resulted in violation of regulatory borrowing limits , cap corp was forced to liquidate some of these investments at substantial losses to fund credit union member withdrawals . yet , cap corp continued to record the vast majority of its portfolio at historical cost , apparently taking advantage of the subjective criteria of sfas no . 115 that allow entities to carry such securities at cost if they have the ability and intent to hold them to maturity . as of september 30 , 1994 , cap corp's internal reports showed that over 95 percent of its portfolio was carried at historical cost , which was approximately $35 million greater than the market value of these securities at that time . had earlier recognition of these market value losses occurred in cap corp's financial reports , the negative effects of its investment strategy would have surfaced sooner , perhaps in time for remedial action that could have averted its failure . as of september 30 , 1996 , no specific gasb standards existed that established rules for accounting for most types of investments held by state and local government entities . while gasb statement no .