, concluding that they are secure ) . faa is not effectively managing physical security at atc facilities . faa has not analyzed the threats and vulnerabilities , or developed safeguards to protect 87 of its 90 operational atc computer systems and 8 of its 9 operational atc telecommunications networks . faa does not have a well - defined security architecture , a security concept of operations , or security standards , and does not consistently include well formulated security requirements in specifications for new atc systems . none of the three organizations responsible for atc security have discharged their respective security responsibilities effectively: the office of civil aviation security has not adequately enforced faa policies that require the assessment of ( 1 ) physical security controls at all atc facilities and ( 2 ) vulnerabilities , threats , and safeguards of all operational atc computer systems ; the office of air traffic services has not implemented faa policies that require it to analyze all atc systems for security vulnerabilities , threats , and safeguards ; and the office of research and acquisitions has not implemented faa policy that requires it to formulate requirements for security in specifications for all new atc modernization systems . faa has recognized for several years that its vulnerabilities could jeopardize , and have already jeopardized , flight safety . in its 1994 telecommunications plan , faa states that vulnerabilities that can be exploited in aeronautical telecommunications potentially threaten property and public safety . vulnerabilities that have jeopardized flight safety are discussed in our “limited official use” report . finally , making judicious decisions regarding resource allocation requires a thorough understanding of relative levels of risk , as well as reliable estimates of costs . as we have reported , faa has not fully assessed its security vulnerabilities and threats and does not understand its security risks . further , since it has not formulated countermeasures , it cannot reliably estimate the cost to mitigate the risks . as a result , faa has no analytical basis for its decisions not to allocate resources to security . in recent years , faa has invested billions of dollars in failed efforts to modernize its atc systems while critical security vulnerabilities went uncorrected . the department's comments and our detailed evaluation of them are presented in our “limited official use” report . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of transportation ; the director , office of management and budget ; the administrator , federal aviation administration ; and interested congressional committees . copies will be available to others upon request . given the importance of physical security at the faa facilities that house atc systems , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the faa administrator to complete the following tasks: develop and execute a plan to inspect the 187 atc facilities that have not been inspected in over 4 years and correct any weaknesses identified so that these atc facilities can be granted physical security accreditation as expeditiously as possible , but no later than april 30 , 1999 .