additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the pacific fleet has tested the system and is implementing it . yet , according to atlantic fleet officials , they are not planning to provide the item managers information on excesses from the system for use in their budget and buy decisions . however , the information is available for supporting consolidated financial reporting requirements , and according to atlantic fleet officials , they have provided such information for the navy's fiscal year 1995 financial reports . at the same time , the aviation supply office is planning to turn over some operating materials and supplies to dbof , such as repairables at air stations and on board about 25 ships with aircraft and helicopters — such as aircraft carriers and amphibious assault ships — which then become dbof inventories held for sale . these dbof inventories will remain at the operational level and accounted for by the units' own asset management system . one aim of this change is to improve financial management and reporting , which includes improving item managers' visibility over these items . however , the ships part control center is not planning a similar change to turn over repairables to dbof on the fleets' remaining ships and submarines . the aviation supply office's plan considered 41 naval and marine corps air stations as implementation sites for this program . twenty - four air stations will begin a phased implementation around mid - 1996 , and a few ships may have their first prototype system around april 1997 . however , no specific implementation milestone has been set for the majority of the 25 ships and the remaining 17 air stations . our scope and methodology are described in appendix i . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of defense or his designee . on july 24 , 1996 , the dod deputy chief financial officer provided us with written comments , which are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section and reprinted in appendix ii . because of its longstanding inventory management problems , dod's inventory management is on gao's list of high - risk federal program areas especially vulnerable to waste , fraud , and mismanagement . for the last 3 fiscal years , the naval audit service reported inventory management weaknesses in its audits of dbof activities' financial statements . in terms of navy inventory management weaknesses , we also have reported on excess inventory at naval aviation depots and shipyards , which are part of dbof operations . at the consumer level , navy supply officers store the operating materials and supplies purchased from dbof on ships and at shore locations , such as air stations , for subsequent issuance or consumption . in addition to items stored that are needed to meet operating requirements , these sites often have excess items stored . also , over the past 6 years , excess items have been stored at redistribution sites as ships were decommissioned or overhauled . the fleets have been redistributing these excess items free of charge from these redistribution sites .