modify interfaces . validation: test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an operational environment . implementation: implement converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement data exchange contingency plans , if necessary . in addition to following the five phases described , a year 2000 program should also be planned and managed as a single , large information system development effort . agencies should promulgate and enforce good management practices at the program and project levels . as discussed in our year 2000 assessment guide , agencies need to ensure that they have complete and accurate enterprisewide inventories of their information systems during the assessment phase of the year 2000 correction effort . this inventory helps the agency analyze the systems supporting its core business processes and rank its conversion or replacement based on key factors , such as business impact and the anticipated date the systems would experience year 2000-related date problems . the inventory also plays a very critical role in the later stages of the year 2000 process , which include renovation , validation , and implementation . for example , the inventory can be used in monitoring the status of each system included in dod's year 2000 efforts , assessing whether the most mission - critical systems are receiving appropriate attention , determining needs for testing facilities , and identifying areas that may require additional resources . the inventory can also assist in identifying and coordinating interfaces between and among systems . even if all systems within one organization were made year 2000 compliant , an external interfacing system on which the system is dependent for data or information processing can still introduce and propagate year 2000-related errors . having an accurate and reliable enterprisewide systems inventory is also fundamental to having a good information technology investment process . in today's environment of rapidly changing information technology and the demands for government organizations to operate effectively and more efficiently , agencies need to ensure that their information technology projects are being implemented at acceptable costs , within reasonable and expected time frames , and are contributing to tangible , observable improvements in mission process . in order to make the kinds of trade - off decisions that would produce these benefits , good visibility into their information system environment is indispensable . the enterprisewide inventory of information systems provides this visibility . in addition , defense will need a reliable and complete system inventory in order to successfully implement the recently passed clinger - cohen act of 1996 , which aims to ensure that agencies strengthen their information technology investment processes . among other things , this act requires that agencies ( 1 ) provide their senior managers with timely and accurate information on system costs and ( 2 ) have the capability to meet performance requirements , timeliness , as well as other conditions .