we are not questioning this . our concern is that the monthly currency activity reports are prepared from the federal reserve's accounting records , which brings into question the acceptability of any tolerance level . further , in our report , we express our concern over the l.a. bank's inability to precisely account for currency activity from its cash inventory records when it attempted to do so . even after l. a . bank officials spent several months developing procedures to attempt to accurately account for this information , the inventory records did not agree with the general ledger . this means that either the l.a. bank's new procedures for summarizing the activity in its cash inventory system were still flawed or that its financial records may be incorrect . this raises further concerns about the integrity of the internal control environment . the fact that the frb asserts that it performs daily reconciliations of this information and cannot readily and precisely account for this activity also raises concerns . we reaffirm our recommendation that because of the linkage to the accounting records , the federal reserve reconsider its $3 million tolerance for accuracy . in addition to the two major exceptions it took with our report , the frb also asserted that the reviews conducted by its internal financial examiners and internal auditors concluded that ( 1 ) the reporting errors made by the l.a. branch have not affected the integrity of the federal reserve's financial statements , ( 2 ) these errors have not affected the federal reserve's calculation of the money supply , its conduct of monetary policy , or the amount of shipments of currency and coin to or from the branch , and ( 3 ) no money has been lost due to these errors , and no key decision - making has been compromised . these matters were not within the scope of our review and our report does not make any conclusions about any of them . as previously stated , the internal reviews cited by the frb had not been completed and , therefore , not available for our review . instead , our report focuses on the serious internal control problems found in the l.a. bank . notwithstanding our primary focus , we remain concerned that , until the l.a. bank can resolve why it cannot reconcile the activity in its cash inventory records with the general ledger , it does not know and cannot be certain of the accuracy of its financial statements nor whether money has been lost . we are sending copies of this report to the chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system ; the secretary of the treasury ; the chairman of the house committee on banking and financial services ; the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ; and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9510 if you or your staff have any questions . appendix i contains comments we received from the federal reserve on a draft of this report and our response to those comments .