to obtain it . to review ? executive branch agencies review license application against export criteria and obtain letter of assurance of assurance is required , nrc requests either doe or state dept . from relevant country or countries . approved ? *nrc's office of international programs refers significant cases to the commission ( nrc ) for review , as outlined in c. f. r. 110.40 . in 1993 , the united states received 89 export license applications for nuclear materials ( source , special nuclear material , and by - product ) of which 71 were issued in 1993 and 11 were subsequently issued by may 5 , 1994 . of the remaining six applications , five are pending and one was withdrawn by the applicant country as of may 5 , 1994 . according to an nrc official , of the five pending applications , the united states is awaiting letters of assurance , as required , from the applicants before making a decision . a letter of assurance is a statement from the government of the recipient country that the nuclear materials will be handled in accordance with the terms set forth in the relevant u.s. agreement for cooperation . once nuclear materials are exported from the united states , they are subject to the controls contained in cooperative arrangements established in the terms of u.s. agreements for cooperation . the subsequent arrangements and retransfer process are regulatory controls used to control the supply , use , or retransfer of exported u.s. - supplied nuclear materials and equipment . for subsequent arrangements , the state department must approve the arrangement in order for it to proceed , and the arms control and disarmament agency must determine whether or not the arrangement requires a nonproliferation assessment statement . after the interagency review , doe will make a determination on the basis of its and the participating executive agencies' views . if , during the interagency review , any agency believes the request raises issues requiring more extensive consideration or denial , the request may be submitted for further discussion and concurrence to the subgroup on nuclear export coordination . this interagency group examines dual - use export issues , retransfers , and related matters to determine that the proposed activity is consistent with u.s. foreign policy , national security , and nonproliferation objectives and that commercial and economic considerations can be established . department of energy reviews and branch agencies for their reviews and comments . provide comment to doe . doe makes a preliminary decision on the basis of its review and agencies' comments . ( for subsequent arrangements , the state dept . must approve prior to doe. ) approved ? published in federal register and approval given to requesting country . *for subsequent arrangements , the arms control and disarmament agency may determine that a nonproliferation assessment is needed as of its review . to determine the tracking limitations of doe's nuclear materials management and safeguards system ( nmmss ) , we reviewed reports by nrc and doe consultants and the u.s. agreements for cooperation . we also examined the nmmss' documentation and other documents pertaining to the system and interviewed doe , nrc , and martin marietta officials .