the nfip illustrates this point . the nfip is not actuarially sound even though it has achieved a goal of collecting premium income sufficient to at least cover expenses and expected losses for an average historical loss year . this is because the historical experience period , beginning in 1978 , does not include any loss years that can be considered to be of a catastrophic level for the program . as a result , the average historical loss year involves fewer claim losses than the expected per annum claim losses in future years . thus , the premium income currently collected by the program may not be sufficient to build reserves for potential catastrophic losses . despite this limitation , some budget experts indicated that they thought it acceptable to use historical averages as the basis for measuring the program's accrual cost in the budget while providing some additional funding mechanism , such as the program's borrowing authority , to cover catastrophic losses . funding this amount would allow for the accumulation of reserves during years where losses are less than the historical average . no action was taken by the congress on the legislation . since the bush administration's proposal for changing the budget treatment of insurance programs , omb has continued work on developing methodologies to estimate the risk - assumed cost of deposit insurance and pension guarantees . at the request of the chairman of the house committee on the budget and because of continued interest in this area , we undertook this study to more thoroughly develop the issues involved in changing the budget treatment of insurance programs . the chairman of the house committee on the budget asked us to review the budget treatment of federal insurance programs to assess whether the current cash - based budget provides complete information and whether accrual concepts could be used to improve budgeting for these programs . specifically , we were asked to ( 1 ) identify approaches for using accrual concepts in budgeting for insurance programs , ( 2 ) highlight trade - offs among different approaches , including the current budget treatment , and ( 3 ) discuss potential implementation issues , such as cost estimation . we limited the scope of our study to programs previously identified by omb and fasab as federal insurance programs . programs included in our study are shown in table 2.1 . omb's list forms the basis of its annual analysis of credit and insurance programs , which , in recent years , has been part of the analytical perspectives volume of the president's budget . we added one program to the omb list — the federal employees' group life insurance program . this program was included by fasab as federal insurance in its recommended accounting standards for federal liabilities . of the veterans life insurance programs underwritten by the federal government , we include only those which are still open to new participants . in undertaking this study , we acknowledge that there is not universal agreement on which programs constitute federal insurance . the programs we included in our analysis share some , but not necessarily all , the characteristics of private insurance .