( naracs ) . collects surface observations data from awos and asos and distributes these data to weather processing and display systems . this report contains recommendations to you . provides backup air - to - ground radio voice communications service in the event of a failure of the primary or secondary air - to - ground radio system . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on these recommendations . you should send your statement to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight within 60 days after the date of this report . you must also send the written statement to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made over 60 days after the date of this report . we are sending copies of this letter to relevant congressional committees and subcommittees , the director of the office of management and budget , the administrator of the federal aviation administration , and other interested parties . we will send copies to others upon request . if you have questions or wish to discuss the issues in this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6412 . provides national level management and monitoring of the airspace system , including air traffic flow , aircraft operations , and en route sector and airport utilization and loading . systems and facilities outside but interfacing with an en route center automated flight service station workstation air route surveillance radar - 1 air route surveillance radar - 2 air route surveillance radar - 3 air route surveillance radar - 4 ( continued ) explanatory notes to simplified block diagram of an en route center's systems environment systems and facilities outside but interfacing with an en route center ( continued ) . faa's display system replacement ( dsr ) is precisely what its name suggests — a system to replace air traffic controllers' existing display - related systems in each of the en route centers , including pvds , channel complexes ( i.e. , dcc , dccr , and cdc ) , multiplexors , display generators , and various other peripheral devices . accordingly , dsr consists of controller workstations connected via a local area network to three interfacing systems ( hcs , edarc , and weather and radar processor ) . while providing controllers a modern atc system interface ( i.e. , aircraft situation monitor ) , dsr is not intended to introduce new situation data , images , displays , or functions . provides display capability that will be replaced by dsr . provides display capability that will be replaced by dccr , which will in turn be replaced by dsr . provides display capability that will replace dcc . provides character and image display capability that will be replaced by dsr . provides an interfacility multiplexed data transmission network . controls local and remote air - to - ground radios . make legal recordings of all voice communications between air traffic controllers and pilots . provides a backup to hcs for radar processing , and radar track and display processing .