assessment . this phase entails assessing the year 2000 impact on the enterprise , identifying core business areas , inventorying and analyzing the systems supporting the core business areas , and prioritizing their conversion or replacement . also , during this phase , contingency planning is initiated and the necessary resources are identified and secured . renovation . this phase deals with converting , replacing , or eliminating selected systems and applications . in so doing , it is important to consider the complex interdependencies among the systems and applications . validation . this phase deals with testing , verifying , and validating all converted or replaced systems and applications and ensuring that they perform as expected . this entails testing the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced systems , applications , databases , and interfaces in an operational environment . implementation . this phase entails deploying and implementing year 2000 compliant systems and components . also , during this phase , data exchange contingency plans are implemented , if necessary . institutional year 2000 awareness is the first step in effectively addressing the year 2000 problem . faa has initiated awareness activities , including conducting a year 2000 problem awareness campaign , drafting a year 2000 agencywide plan , issuing a year 2000 guidance document for project - level plan development , and establishing a program management organization . however , faa fell behind in other key awareness activities , such as finalizing the agency's year 2000 strategy , in part due to its late designation of a program manager . faa recognizes that the upcoming change of century poses significant challenges to the agency . it began year 2000 problem awareness activities in may 1996 , and during the ensuing 3 months established a year 2000 product team and designated it as the focal point for year 2000 issues within faa . also , faa established a year 2000 steering committee . since then , the year 2000 product team and steering committee have ( 1 ) sponsored an awareness day and held assessment and testing practices workshops , ( 2 ) set up web pages and published a newsletter article to provide information on the year 2000 problem , and ( 3 ) briefed faa's management on the agency's year 2000 problem . in addition , in september 1996 , the product team issued the faa guidance document for year 2000 date conversion . this guide was intended to assist the lines of businesses within faa in planning for the conversion of their computer systems to handle processing of dates in the year 2000 and beyond . it is essential that agencies appoint a year 2000 program manager and establish an agency - level program office to manage and coordinate year 2000 program activities . the problem and solutions involve a wide range of dependencies among information systems: the need to ( 1 ) centrally develop or acquire conversion and validation standards , inspection , conversion , and testing tools , ( 2 ) coordinate the conversion of crosscutting information systems and their components , ( 3 ) establish priorities , and ( 4 ) reallocate resources as needed .