we disagree . the report states that these problems were not unique to disa and that since the concept of dbof was put forth in february 1991 , we have continually reported on dod's difficulties in reporting accurately on the results of operations for the working capital funds . further , the report also recognizes that the responsibility for resolving these problems rests with dod , not disa . in addition , some of the financial reporting weaknesses discussed above are the result of disa personnel not following procedures in the recording of revenue and cost at the dmcs . as noted in our report , the dmcs have experienced difficulty in accurately recording revenues and costs . disa management needs to ensure that such weaknesses do not continue and contribute to overall weaknesses within dod's accounting systems . we did not independently verify the data . the dod ig was unable to render an opinion on disa's financial statements for fiscal year 1997 . disa is currently working with dfas to shorten its internal funds transfer process . in addition , according to disa telecommunications officials , disa had not collected amounts owed by its internal customers because these customers had failed to provide correct funding information . since most of the receivables are from government entities and constitute the primary source of revenue for the wcf , these amounts should be collected . our review of disa documentation indicated that the dmcs performed approximately $115 million of billable work during fiscal years 1996 and 1997 for which they were not reimbursed . this represents about 8 percent of the dmc revenues for the 2 fiscal years . disa performed this work without receiving the required funding document from its customers . dod financial management regulation , volume 11b , chapter 61 , states that as a general rule , no work or services should be performed by a business activity unless a reimbursable order is received and accepted . such orders constitute obligations of federal government ordering activities or advances from nonfederal government entities . further , disa's method of accounting for the $115 million was not in accordance with federal accounting standards . based upon information provided by disa , as of november 1997 , dfas had not reimbursed disa $11.7 million and $32.3 million in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , respectively , for work performed . according to the dod comptroller's office , dfas did not reimburse disa for all service provided in fiscal year 1996 because the amount dfas budgeted was less than the cost incurred . dfas stated that the primary cause for nonpayment in fiscal year 1997 was that work had been reclassified into a different category which resulted in a higher price for the service . dfas noted that this occurred after its fiscal year 1997 budget had been set and its level of funding approved . in discussing this issue with the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , we were informed that discussions are being held with dfas and disa to determine the most appropriate means to resolve the nonpayment issues . under dod's policy , prices are set at the beginning of the fiscal year and are to remain in effect for the entire year .