we have incorporated these comments where appropriate . rcris falls short of meeting its overall goal of helping epa and the states manage the hazardous waste program because it has not met three of its primary objectives . while rcris provides individual databases for states to use to maintain their data , the system is difficult to use , difficult to tailor to meet individual state and epa regional needs , and does not provide a mechanism for maintaining highly reliable data . rcris provides two databases for each state — one maintained by the state and one maintained by the epa regional office . these databases are intended to support day - to - day rcra activities carried out by the states and epa regional offices . extracts from these databases are merged to construct a database of required information for regional oversight . a national oversight database for epa headquarters and national reporting is then formed by merging extracts from the regional merged databases . rcris is not easy to use , particularly with regard to data entry and retrieval . data entry is cumbersome largely because of the design of the four key rcris modules . for example , each module uses numerous data entry screens , many of which allow the user to modify data in only a few data fields at one time . the rcris user manual shows that a user could possibly interact with up to 150 data entry screens to add , modify , or delete data . because of this design , users are often required to switch between modules , screens , and files — even when making simple changes to the data . we reviewed detailed information on the rcra program , epa's previous attempts to collect hazardous waste data through automation , and the development and operation history of rcris ; and examined prior gao and epa inspector general reports that discussed weaknesses in epa's information systems environment . we interviewed epa headquarters officials from the office of solid waste and the office of enforcement and compliance assurance . these officials included the director of the office of solid waste , the rcris system manager , and staff involved in rcra and rcris activities . we also interviewed representatives from the national governor's association and reviewed documents pertaining to its involvement in assisting epa to identify the objectives and requirements in rcris . in addition , we used relevant segments of the information systems audit methodology published by the edp auditors foundation to evaluate the extent to which rcris' development and operation met generally accepted systems practices . we reviewed and analyzed documents on epa's actions , including documentation on user requirements , system feasibility , functional requirements , change control procedures , and data management . we also reviewed epa planning documents including information on an office of solid waste strategic initiative . our work was performed at several offices at epa headquarters including the office of solid waste , the office of enforcement and compliance assurance , and office of inspector general . these offices were located in washington , d.c. , and arlington , virginia .