these results were also communicated to fms . we performed our work at fms data centers located throughout the united states . we performed our work from march 1997 through january 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of the treasury or his designee . we will send copies to others upon request . this work was performed under the direction of gary t. engel , associate director , governmentwide accounting and financial management issues , who can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3406 . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . christine a. robertson , assistant director paula m. rascona , audit manager gregory c. wilshusen , assistant director — technical advisor the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . on september 24 , 1998 , the assistant fiscal assistant secretary provided us with oral comments . these comments are summarized in the “agency comments” section of this report . our review of fms' general computer controls identified numerous weaknesses that place fms' financial systems at significant risk of unauthorized access , improper modification , loss , and disclosure . these weaknesses include inappropriate access to computer programs , data , and equipment ; inadequate segregation of duties ; improper application and systems software development and change control procedures ; and incomplete or untested service continuity and contingency plans . access controls are designed to limit or detect access to computer programs , data , equipment , and facilities to protect these resources from unauthorized modification , loss , and disclosure . however , we found several vulnerabilities in general and application controls that require frb management's attention and action . without adequate control over application software development and change control procedures , fms runs a greater risk that software supporting its operations will not ( 1 ) produce reliable data , ( 2 ) execute transactions in accordance with applicable laws , regulations , and management policies , or ( 3 ) effectively meet operational needs . an organization's ability to accomplish its mission can be significantly affected if it loses the ability to process , retrieve , and protect information that is maintained electronically . such controls include logical , system software , and physical controls . logical controls include user identifications ( id ) , passwords , or other identifiers and security software programs . fms is also responsible for administering the world's largest collections system .