additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . oirm has not effectively discharged its management responsibilities . specifically , oirm has not gone far enough under its authority to implement initiatives to consolidate and optimize fts 2000 telecommunications services . consequently , usda has not been successful achieving telecommunications cost - savings identified by tsd . for example , despite being aware in february 1994 that tsd's network analysis model was an effective tool that usda could use to reduce overall fts 2000 service costs by as much as $400,000 to $800,000 per month , oirm management never discussed these savings opportunities with the department's senior decisionmakers — usda's under secretaries and assistant secretaries — nor did it develop a plan for implementing the actions necessary to achieve departmentwide savings . consequently , as of december 1994 , usda still had not realized these savings . in addition , oirm did not act immediately to aggregate services with higher than average fts 2000 costs and to shift agency data transmissions to off - peak hours . although tsd advised oirm management about these opportunities in february and june 1994 , respectively , component agencies were not informed by oirm management about the savings opportunities until october and november 1994 . at that time , oirm provided general information on the cost - savings initiatives during meetings with usda interagency advisory groups , such as the department's management council — an interagency advisory group made up of component agencies' deputy administrators for management . however , oirm's director for operations acknowledged that oirm did not follow up these general meetings with additional briefings or develop action plans for implementing these cost - savings initiatives . consequently , as of december 1994 , no progress has been made to achieve these savings . in cases where some consolidation and optimization efforts have been initiated by tsd , oirm did not effectively discharge its management responsibility to ensure full implementation of these initiatives . for example , tsd's 1992 plan to consolidate and optimize fts 2000 services at 30 usda field sites was not implemented because oirm management took no steps to resolve interagency disagreements . in this case , although oirm gave tsd responsibility for managing the effort , disagreements between agencies over responsibilities for consolidating services at the first site precluded any further work from getting underway . a december 1992 memorandum shows that tsd advised oirm management of the problems it was having and asked for assistance in gaining agency cooperation . nevertheless , oirm management did not respond to tsd's request and the matter was left unresolved . tsd continued to try to solicit agency support for the initiative but these efforts were unsuccessful and no savings were achieved . oirm's associate director for operations was unable to explain oirm management's inaction in this case .