we did not assess the reliability of these estimates . however , we note that achieving the projected level of net savings could be diminished by the need to provide additional training and technical support to field activities in using stars field level . these issues are discussed later in this report . in addition , the october 1994 economic analysis was not a total life - cycle economic analysis of all stars components . for example , it did not include costs to enhance all of the stars components to bring them into compliance with dod's standard general ledger , key accounting requirements , and the standard budget and accounting classification code . the major automated information systems review council , which is reviewing the stars project , directed the stars project office to conduct a total life - cycle economic analysis of all stars components . this analysis is expected to be completed by december 31 , 1996 . in addition , as discussed in the next section , dfas has not developed a complete system architecture for stars — basically a blueprint for what the system will do and how it will operate . as a result , any estimate of stars total costs will be incomplete . we also found that , in less than 2 years , actual obligations to enhance stars in certain areas were significantly higher than budgeted . the stars project office estimated that in fiscal years 1995 and 1996 , stars software development costs would total $35.6 million . of this amount , $18.8 million was budgeted for projects pertaining to the key accounting requirements , the budget and accounting classification code , and the consolidation efforts . as of july 23 , 1996 , actual obligations for the software projects related to these three areas were $24.5 million , or 30 percent , above the budget estimate , although total stars software development obligations were close to what was estimated . in addition , some software development projects have already exceeded their total budget . for example , the stars project office estimated that for fiscal years 1995-1997 ( 1 ) property and inventory accounting and ( 2 ) cash and accounts payable key accounting requirement enhancements would each cost $500,000 . however , as of july 23 , 1996 , obligations for these enhancement efforts were $1.1 million and $1.2 million , respectively . neither of these projects is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 1996 , although , according to dfas , an accounts payable function was implemented for one stars component — stars field level ( but not for the stars claimant module ) . in addition , stars budget estimates were incomplete and lacked supporting documentation . for example , these budget estimates did not include dfas' internal costs , such as the stars project office . in fiscal year 1996 , the stars project office personnel costs alone were estimated at $1.4 million . moreover , the stars project office could not find documentation for much of the july 1995 budget estimate and instead provided us with a written rationale on the methodology it used to estimate the stars software development costs .