all projects ( i.e. , proposed projects , projects under development , operational systems , infrastructure , and management and technical support activities ) were not included in a single systems investment portfolio . following are examples of these steps . irs created the executive - level investment review board , chaired by the associate commissioner for modernization , for selecting , controlling and evaluating all of irs' information technology investments . irs developed initial and revised sets of decision criteria used last summer and again in november 1995 as part of its resource allocation and investment review to make additional changes in information technology resource allocations for remaining fiscal year 1996 funds and planned fiscal year 1997 spending . this review included only tsm projects under development . it did not address operational systems , infrastructure , or management and technical support activities . the treasury department created a modernization management board to review and validate high - risk , high - cost tsm investments and to set policy and strategy for irs modernization effort . irs is considering the use of a “project readiness review” as an additional investment review board control mechanism for gauging project readiness to proceed with spending . irs developed the business case handbook that includes decision criteria on costs , benefits , and risks . it is reassessing the business cases , which were developed on the tsm projects , using the handbook . eleven cases are scheduled for completion in june 1996 , and irs plans to have the remaining cases completed by september 1996 . results are planned to be presented to the investment review board to assist in making funding decisions for fiscal year 1997 . irs has developed the investment evaluation review handbook designed to assess projected costs and benefits against actual results . the handbook has been used on four tsm projects and five additional reviews are scheduled to be completed within the next year . the completed reviews contain explicit descriptions of problems encountered in developing these systems . the reviews make specific recommendations for management and technical process changes to improve future results . specific recommendations pertain to strengthening project direction and decision - making . many reflect concerns that we have raised in past reviews . the investment evaluation reviews were presented to the investment review board and disseminated to other irs managers . irs is defining roles , responsibilities , and processes for incorporating investment evaluation review recommendations at the project and process levels . these are positive steps and indicate a willingness to address many of the weaknesses raised in our past reports and testimonies . but , as noted in treasury's report on tsm , the investment process is not yet complete . according to treasury , it is missing ( 1 ) specific operating procedures , ( 2 ) defined reporting relationships between different management boards and committees , and ( 3 ) updated business cases for major tsm technology investments . these concerns coincide with two central criticisms we have repeatedly made about tsm .