ii . in addition to those listed above , kay daly , robert dee , anna kelley , james kernen , wayne marsh , frank putallaz , and suzanne rubins made key contributions to this report . the first copy of each gao report is free . additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . ordersbymail: u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 ordersbyvisiting: room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . ( 3 ) what challenges would hcfa face if it were required to hire recovery auditors to augment its overpayment identification and collection activities ? to address these questions , we reviewed hcfa policies and procedures , and examined its current and planned efforts to identify and collect overpayments . we also met with representatives from four hcfa contractors that process and pay claims and take steps to minimize overpayment losses . we discussed with these contractors how they identified and collected medicare overpayments . we also obtained and analyzed financial reports from hcfa and the four contractors and examined hcfa's implementation of the debt collection improvement act of 1996 ( dcia ) . we also met with representatives of several recovery audit firms and several of their clients to determine if the techniques they use might be applicable to medicare . finally , to determine the implementation challenges hcfa might face if it were to use the services of recovery auditors , we interviewed hcfa officials and contractor , recovery auditor , and medical association representatives . we also reviewed the hhs office of inspector general's ( oig ) and our prior work . we performed our work from september 1999 to july 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the medicare program utilizes a variety of payment methods to reimburse providers for the services it covers . hospital insurance , or part a , covers inpatient hospital , skilled nursing facility , and hospice care , and certain home health services . supplemental medical insurance , or part b , covers physician and outpatient hospital services , diagnostic tests , and other medical services and supplies . depending on the service , hcfa pays part a providers based on their costs , or on a prospective payment basis designed to cover the cost of providing a bundle of services related to a particular medical condition . in contrast , part b providers are typically paid for each individual service , based on a fee schedule . to ensure that only services the statute specifies are covered , medicare has extensive policies and rules about what constitutes covered services . it is not surprising , therefore , that providers are sometimes overpaid for their services . medicare claims are paid by a network of private health insurance companies hired by hcfa , such as blue cross and blue shield plans , mutual of omaha , and cigna .