these states provided estimates . information on the year 2000 activities of international organizations was obtained by interviews with their officials and research of information posted on internet web sites . ( no activities reported ) . there may be other organizations addressing international year 2000 issues that we did not identify . the bank for international settlements ( bis ) has undertaken a worldwide campaign to increase awareness , provide guidance , and identify the status of year 2000 efforts by central banks and major international banking organizations . sia is also conducting scenario planning sessions at international conferences to stimulate planning . these sessions focus on priorities for resolving year 2000 problems . to identify year 2000 readiness in the securities industry , sia is conducting an industrywide survey . the survey form is posted on its internet web site ( www.sia.com / year_2000 ) . if sufficient response is received , sia will post a summary of the results on its web site . sia has also developed and posted on its web site a conversion and testing schedule for its members to use in coordinating their year 2000 activities . in addition , sia is developing a checklist to help chief executive officers focus on key year 2000 activities . sia has coordinated extensively with other international organizations , including the investment dealer association , iosco , international insurance association , futures industry association , institute internationale finance , and fédération internationale des bourses de valeurs . sia is considering a coordinated effort with multilateral development banks , such as the world bank , asian development bank , and the european development bank , to promote awareness . the focus of the futures industry association's ( fia ) year 2000 activities is information sharing and test coordination among its 200 members . its members include futures commissions merchants , international exchanges , and others interested in the futures market . fia compiled a “conditions catalog” of products and transactions to be tested on an exchange - by - exchange basis in the united states . it is making this available to international members and encouraging members to adopt the same format for testing between exchanges and intermediaries . fia has posted this information on its internet web site ( www.fiafii.org ) . fia has also placed information about various exchanges on the web site and plans to include additional information about international exchanges in the future . fia met with brokerage firms , exchanges , the london clearing house , and key service providers in june and december 1997 to raise awareness of year 2000 issues and discuss possible test scenarios . fia also hosted an international meeting at its futures & options expo in october 1997 to discuss various year 2000 activities around the world . at the fia international futures industry conference in march 1998 , fia asked key members to support an industrywide test . fia is surveying 20 of the member exchanges with the highest trade volume to identify their year 2000 activities .