ii ) . under the revised proposal , the greatest shares of the $103 million are to go toward providing better telephone service and improving customer service training ( $50.4 million and $22.5 million , respectively ) . smaller amounts are to be used to , among other things , strengthen the taxpayer advocate's office ; create citizen advocacy panels ; make it easier for taxpayers to get answers in person ; and improve the clarity of notices , forms , and publications . the need for improvement in many of these areas has been apparent for some time , and certain of irs' proposed actions ( such as providing better telephone service , creating citizen advocacy panels , and strengthening the taxpayer advocate's office ) are attempts to address some of the problems recently highlighted by congress and the commission on restructuring irs . whether the $103 million is a reasonable estimate of the funds needed in fiscal year 1999 to implement this initiative will not be known until more details are available on the various parts of the initiative . another unknown is how , if at all , the revised organizational concept proposed by the commissioner earlier this year will affect irs' plans for improving customer service in fiscal year 1999 or beyond . each year , irs submits detailed budget estimates to support the administration's budget request . we have found recent years' budget estimates to be more useful for oversight purposes , primarily because of the inclusion of better performance measures and more narrative information on actual and planned performance . nevertheless , the utility of irs' budget estimates for oversight purposes is limited because ( 1 ) the intermingling of enforcement and assistance resources within various budget activities precludes an assessment of the balance between those two areas ; ( 2 ) periodic restructuring of irs' appropriations and budget activities hinders long - term trend analyses ; and ( 3 ) the budget estimates provide inadequate information on the resources being devoted to such critical areas as the year 2000 effort and the taxpayer advocate's office . achieving irs' strategic objectives of improving customer service and increasing compliance requires a mix of assistance and enforcement . finding the appropriate mix is not easy , and we do not claim to have the answer . however , we do think that it is important for effective oversight that congress know what mix irs is achieving and what mix it plans to achieve . that information cannot be derived from irs' budget estimates . for example , irs is requesting $891.6 million and 21,147 ftes for the “telephone and correspondence” budget activity within the processing , assistance , and management appropriation . that activity covers all non face - to - face contacts between irs and taxpayers . such contacts include typical forms of assistance , such as answering telephone calls and correspondence , as well as several enforcement activities , such as correspondence audits and attempts to collect overdue taxes via the telephone . last year , irs was able to provide a breakdown of the ftes included in the fiscal year 1998 budget request for telephone and correspondence . as table 2 shows , 44 percent of those ftes were for enforcement - related operations .