this is not our intention . in this report , we examine budget accounts collectively for two reasons . how many accounts are there ? what is the level of resources available in an account ? what is the primary focus of an account as created by the congress ? resource type: what type ( s ) of budget authority is available to an account ? what is the extent of resource restriction or earmarking within an account ? what are the purposes or areas of national need addressed by an account ? what is the responsible federal entity for an account ? subcommittee: which subcommittee acts on the resources in an account ? the first section of this report , “understanding the federal budget account structure,” describes the structure in terms of these eight dimensions . the second section , “discerning patterns within the federal budget account structure,” constructs profiles and discusses relationships among the dimensions . appendix i is a glossary of selected terms used in this report . appendix ii contains summary figures relating account number and size , resource type , and fund type to the final three dimensions . appendix iii presents figures ( 1 ) summarizing medians and ranges of account size by federal missions , federal organizations , and cognizant appropriations subcommittees and ( 2 ) relating federal missions , federal organizations , and appropriations subcommittees . in appendix iv , we present details of our scope and methodology . this is followed by a selected bibliography from our literature search . federal budget accounts are a product of the needs and goals of many users and reflect the many roles which they have been asked to address . the present budget account “structure” was not created as a single integrated framework but rather developed , for the most part , as separate budget accounts over time to respond to specific needs . viewing these individually developed accounts collectively discloses not only the variety within the current structure but also its complexity . our review of fiscal year 1995 budget accounts revealed a structure characterized by a concentration of budgetary resources in a few large accounts and a scattering of remaining resources among hundreds of other accounts ; a mix of account orientations with an emphasis on programs and processes , rather than objects of expense or organizations ; over 70 percent of total budgetary resources available in fiscal year 1995 from sources which did not require congressional approval in the current year ; and extensive use of general funds to provide most budgetary resources to most accounts , but with special and trust funds supporting about 30 percent of total resources and 20 percent of all accounts . these observations vary significantly among federal missions , federal organizations , and appropriations subcommittees and help to illustrate the intricate network of relationships within the budget account structure . as a result , cross - cutting initiatives that affect budget accounts will encounter in hundreds of accounts a fundamentally heterogeneous structure that serves many different needs and objectives .