term . assuming no other changes , these programs would constitute an unimaginable drain on the earnings of our future workers . actuarial balance to the hi trust fund . this analysis , moreover , does not incorporate the financing challenges associated with the smi and medicaid programs . early action to address the structural imbalances in medicare is critical . first , ample time is required to phase in the reforms needed to put this program on a more sustainable footing before the baby boomers retire . second , timely action to bring costs down pays large fiscal dividends for the program and the budget . device . it allows the government to track the extent to which earmarked payroll taxes cover medicare's hi outlays . in serving the tracking purpose , the 1999 trustees' annual report showed that medicare's hi component has been , on a cash basis , in the red since 1992 , and in fiscal year 1998 , earmarked payroll taxes covered only 89 percent of hi spending . in the trustees' report , issued in march 1999 , projected continued cash deficits for the hi trust fund . ( see fig . f u n d b a la n c e when the program has a cash deficit , as it did from 1992 through 1998 , medicare is a net claimant on the treasury — a threshold that social security is not currently expected to reach until 2014 . to finance these cash deficits , medicare drew on its special issue treasury securities acquired during the years when the program generates a cash surplus . in essence , for medicare to “redeem” its securities , the government must raise taxes , cut spending for other programs , or reduce the projected surplus . outlays for medicare services covered under supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) – physician and outpatient hospital services , diagnostic tests , and certain other medical services and supplies – are already funded largely through general revenues . although the office of management and budget ( omb ) has recently reported a $12 billion cash surplus for the hi program in fiscal year 1999 due to lower than expected program outlays , the long - term financial outlook for medicare is expected to deteriorate . medicare's rolls are expanding and are projected to increase rapidly with the retirement of the baby boomers . today's elderly make up about 13 percent of the total population ; by 2030 , they will comprise 20 percent as the baby boom generation ages and the ratio of workers to retirees declines from 3.4 to 1 today to roughly 2 to 1 . without meaningful reform , the long - term financial outlook for medicare is bleak . together , medicare's hi and smi expenditures are expected to increase dramatically , rising from about 12 percent in 1999 to about a quarter of all federal revenues by mid - century . over the same time frame , medicare's expenditures are expected to double as a share of the economy , from 2.5 to 5.3 percent , as shown in figure 4 .