“the vulnerability to . systems and networks is increasing . the ability of individuals to penetrate computer networks and deny , damage , or destroy data has been demonstrated on many occasions . as our warfighters become more and more dependent on our information systems , the potential for disaster is obvious.” in addition , as part of its federal managers' financial integrity actrequirements , the department identified information systems security as a system weakness in its fiscal year 1995 annual statement of assurance , a report documenting high - risk areas requiring management attention . in its statement , defense acknowledged a significant increase in attacks on its information systems and its dependence on these systems . also , defense has implemented a formal defensive information warfare program . this program was started in december 1992 through defense directive 3600.1 . the directive broadly states that measures will be taken as part of this program to “protect friendly information systems by preserving the availability , integrity , and confidentiality of the systems and the information contained within those systems.” disa , in cooperation with the military services and defense agencies , is responsible for implementing the program . the department's december 1995 defensive information warfare management plan defines a three - pronged approach to protect against , detect , and react to threats to the defense information infrastructure . the plan states that defense must monitor and detect intrusions or hostile actions as they occur , react quickly to isolate the systems under attack , correct the security breaches , restore service to authorized users , and improve security . disa has also taken a number of actions to implement its plan , the most significant being the establishment of its global control center at disa headquarters . the center provides the facilities , equipment , and personnel for directing the defensive information warfare program , including detecting and responding to computer attacks . disa has also established its automated systems security incident support team ( assist ) to provide a centrally coordinated around - the - clock defense response to attacks . disa also performs other services to help secure defense's information infrastructure , including conducting assessments of defense organizations' vulnerability to computer attacks . afiwc has developed a computer emergency response capability and performs functions similar to disa . the navy and army have just established similar capabilities through the fleet information warfare center ( fiwc ) and land information warfare activity ( liwa ) , respectively . defense is incorporating some of the elements we describe above as necessary for strengthening information systems security and countering computer attacks , but there are still areas where improvement is needed . even though the technology environment has changed dramatically in recent years , and the risk of attacks has increased , top management at many organizations do not consider computer security to be a priority . as a result , when resources are allocated , funding for important protective measures , such as training or the purchase of protection technology , take a back seat . as discussed in the remainder of this chapter , defense needs to establish a more comprehensive information systems security program . a program which ensures that sufficient resources are directed at protecting information systems .