compliant . irs is requesting $44 million for fiscal year 1998 to develop a replacement for these two systems and begin pilot testing in january 1998 . gpra forces a focus on results . gpra has the potential for adding greatly to irs performance — a vital goal when resources are limited and public demands are high . gpra requires each agency to develop a strategic plan that lays out its mission , long - term goals , and strategies for achieving those goals . the strategic plans are to take into account the views of congress and other stakeholders . to ensure that these views are considered , gpra requires agencies to consult with congress as they develop their strategic plans . congress and the administration have both demonstrated that they recognize that successful consultations are key to the success of gpra and therefore to sustained improvements in federal management . for irs , these consultations provide an important opportunity for congress , irs , and treasury to work together to ensure that irs' mission is focused , goals are specific and results oriented , and strategies and funding expectations are appropriate and reasonable . the consultations may prove difficult because they entail a different working relationship between agencies and congress than has generally prevailed in the past . the consultations are likely to underscore the competing and conflicting goals of irs programs , as well as the sometimes different expectations of the numerous parties involved . as a gpra pilot agency , irs should be ahead of many federal agencies in the strategic planning and performance measurement process . nonetheless , irs remains a long way from being able to ensure that its budget funds the programs that will contribute the most towards achieving its mission goals . while irs needs more outcome - oriented indicators , it also has difficulty in measuring its performance with the indicators it has . how will we use that information to make improvements ? for example , irs' top indicator is its mission effectiveness indicator . this is calculated by subtracting from the revenue collected the cost of irs programs and taxpayer burden and dividing that result by true total tax liability . while this approach may be conceptually sound , irs does not have reliable data to calculate taxpayer burden nor can it calculate true total tax liability . in summary , irs' 1997 filing season is going very well in two areas that we have criticized in the past . telephone accessibility is much higher and more taxpayers are filing electronically . regarding irs' fiscal year 1997 spending and irs' fiscal year 1998 budget request , there are several questions that congress may wish to consider as it continues its oversight and appropriations activities . among these are: should the $36 million that irs will not be using for systems development and deployment in fiscal year 1997 be rescinded ? what level of funding will irs need to make its information systems century date compliant , and will those changes be made in time ? does irs need all of the fiscal year 1998 funding it is requesting for the distributed input system / remittance processing system replacement project ?