we have incorporated these comments as appropriate . the almrs / modernization system — slated for deployment at approximately 200 blm sites around the country — is to be implemented on a common information technology platform . the platform will be composed of servers , terminals , workstations , switching hubs , multiplexers , modems , and firewalls interconnected via local , state , and national - level networks . as planned , the almrs environment will initially support existing automated systems , including legacy local area networks and microcomputers . blm expects that a typical state office installation will consist of several servers supporting major application groups — almrs ioc and related databases , office automation applications , gis applications and related gcdb databases , and e - mail . a typical state office is to provide land and mineral resource data through the state almrs ioc server to district and resource area offices . state offices are to be interconnected via a department of the interior network . each district or resource area office is to have its own gis and office automation servers . blm users are to access applications via terminals and workstations interconnected through the local , state , and doi networks . the public is to have access to selected almrs information in public access rooms equipped with stand - alone almrs ioc servers and terminals . the public access systems are expected to be isolated from the state and district office almrs ioc systems for security purposes . blm is also planning to provide connections to the internet . the bureau plans to protect each state office with a firewall system — a security device designed to protect the blm systems from intrusion by hackers . figure ii.1 shows a high - level overview of the almrs / modernization environment . accounting and information management division , washington , d.c. david g. gill , assistant director mirko j. dolak , technical assistant director marcia c. washington , senior information systems analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . details on our scope and methodology are provided in appendix i . blm's mission is to manage public lands and resources to best serve the needs of the american people .