these systems were also excluded from the dod inventory . we performed a limited search on the entire dist database for the key words acquisition , personnel , property , and time and attendance and identified 282 systems that contained one or more of these words in their system name and therefore appeared to meet the omb and jfmip definitions of financial management systems ; however , only 43 of those systems were classified in the dist as financial and only 6 were reported in the dod financial management systems inventory . several systems that were not included in dod's inventory provide critical information for use in formulating the financial statements of the military services . these systems clearly meet the omb and jfmip definition for financial management systems . unified means that the systems are planned for and managed together , operated in an integrated fashion , and linked together electronically to provide the agencywide financial system support necessary to carry out the agency's mission and support the agency's financial management needs . in addition , circular a - 130 provides governmentwide information resources management policies as required by the paperwork reduction act of 1980 , as amended . the paperwork reduction act establishes a broad mandate for agencies to perform their information resources management activities in an efficient , effective , and economical manner . consistent with the act , circular a - 130 states that the head of each agency shall maintain an inventory of the agency's major information systems . developing and maintaining a complete inventory of dod's information resources is essential to implementing a strategic information resources management process , as required by the paperwork reduction act and the recently enacted clinger - cohen act of 1996 . the clinger - cohen act calls for agency heads , under the supervision of omb's director , to design and implement a process for maximizing the value and assessing and managing the risks of their information technology acquisitions , including establishing minimum criteria on whether to undertake an investment in information systems . this process is to be integrated with the processes for making budget , financial , and program management decisions with the agency . in addition , the act states that the head of each executive agency , in consultation with the chief information officer and the chief financial officer , is responsible for establishing policies and procedures that ensure that the accounting , financial , and asset management systems and other information systems of the agency are designed , developed , maintained , and used effectively to provide financial or program performance data for financial statements . rather , dod indicated that this responsibility will remain with the chief financial officer and dfas , with assistance from the dod components . we requested agency comments from the secretary of defense or his designee . the deputy chief financial officer provided us with written comments that are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section of this report and reprinted in appendix ii . legislative and other requirements to which dod is subject recognize the significance of developing a complete financial management systems inventory .