some of these actions include the use of information technology . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the following summarizes these basic functions . loan processing: fha records data on loans originated by fha - approved lenders , issues insurance certificates , and conducts underwriting reviews of loan documentation . fha - approved lenders perform the underwritingtasks necessary to determine whether loans meet fha's insurance guidelines . quality assurance: fha reviews selected loans to ensure that approved lenders are originating loans in accordance with fha's guidelines . loss mitigation and loan servicing: fha attempts to resolve delinquencies to minimize losses that can result if borrowers default on loans . fha's loss mitigation efforts have generally involved ( 1 ) placing delinquent loans in the mortgage assignment program , which offered reduced or suspended payments for up to 3 years to allow borrowers to recover from temporary hardships , ( 2 ) offering alternative default resolution actions such as refinancing , or ( 3 ) using preforeclosure sales of homes . fha services loans that are in the mortgage assignment program , which includes collecting monthly payments , paying property taxes , and maintaining accounting records . information system weaknesses have been cited as a contributing factor for many of fha's management control weaknesses . for example , independent audit reports have cited fha systems that collect delinquency data and track default resolution actions as inadequate to support oversight responsibilities and as factors contributing to inadequate loss mitigation efforts . similarly , fha's information systems have not adequately supported the tracking and monitoring of collection and foreclosure actions on loans in the mortgage assignment program . in addition , the lack of information system support for controlling and accounting for properties assigned to real estate brokers for property disposition was cited as a major cause of the highly publicized hud scandals in the 1980s . according to hud's federal managers' financial integrity act ( fmfia ) compliance reports and independent auditors' reports for fiscal years 1994 and 1995 , fha has corrected system weaknesses in the mortgage assignment and property disposition areas but is still developing systems to support delinquency monitoring and resolution . property maintenance and disposition: fha acquires properties from voluntary conveyances by borrowers or foreclosures . fha inspects and secures the properties , performs necessary repairs , and sells the properties . the functions performed by fha generally parallel those performed by other organizations in the single family mortgage industry , such as fannie mae , freddie mac , and large private mortgage insurance corporations . however , the functions fha performs differ from those of the other organizations because of differing business objectives . fannie mae and freddie mac are government - sponsored , privately owned enterprises that purchase mortgages from lenders and ( 1 ) hold them as investments in their portfolios or ( 2 ) sell securities that are backed by mortgage pools . therefore , in addition to the functions fha performs , fannie mae and freddie mac also establish purchase prices for mortgages , negotiate purchase contracts , and market mortgage - backed securities .