blm has not done this . blm noted that the configuration management plan and program were fully implemented about a month after we completed our fieldwork . as we note in the report , we did not assess the configuration management program during our review because the plan had not been completed and the program had not yet been fully implemented before the end of our fieldwork . as we discuss in the report , the risk assessment performed at the new mexico state office focused on policies , procedures , and conditions at that office . the risk assessment did not deal with the security of , or assess the vulnerabilities of and risks to , almrs . in addition , until a full risk assessment of almrs is completed and documented , blm has no basis for asserting that the system is secure or that the plan adequately addresses the vulnerabilities and risks attendant to a nationwide client - server system . our review of blm's updated transition plans showed that only one of the four plans identified and addressed transition issues . as we discuss in the report , the transition from automated capabilities provided by centrally managed mainframe legacy systems to the locally - managed client server environment of almrs will require changes in organizational roles , responsibilities , and interrelationships among the units and people using the system . a transition plan should address these issues and guide blm in defining new operational procedures . our concern is that with the complexity of almrs and the business process changes it will require , blm needs to ensure that its transition plans provide the necessary guidance for successful transitions in its 210 state , district , and resource area offices . operations and maintenance plans are essential for operating and maintaining almrs on a daily basis . blm noted that the states will update the operations and maintenance plans for their sites . in updating their plans , the state offices will need specific information that clearly describes how they are to fulfill their day - to - day responsibilities and how these responsibilities will be fulfilled when there are unexpected shortages of qualified staff . we agree . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . beta testing is testing of a prerelease version of software by selected cooperating users in order to uncover problems that were not discovered during laboratory testing . according to blm , the beta test served that purpose . as we note in our report , these problems along with data conversion errors required correction before oat&e could begin . beta testing was conducted in november 1997 and oat&e was scheduled to be completed in december 1997 . these components are described more fully below . the almrs ioc is the flagship of the almrs / modernization .