some states have had several levels of review . figure 1 shows the highest level of certification for the 54 child support enforcement systems as of march 31 , 1998 . on page 10 , as figure 2 indicates , 25 state systems were level 2 certified as of march 31 , 1998 . figure 2 shows the status of level 2 certification for each state . since the october 1997 deadline , ocse's certification review workload has increased substantially , as shown by figure 3 . ocse conducted 13 level 2 certification reviews for the first quarter of calendar year 1998 , equaling the number of level 2 reviews conducted in 1997 — the most done in any previous year . the first quarter of calendar year 1998 is the second quarter of ocse's fiscal year 1998. documenting the results of and preparing certification reports for the certification reviews performed in 1998 . the systems director said she expects the rate of certification reviews to decline sharply because , as of march 31 , 1998 , only one request for a certification review was pending . ocse's certification guidance addresses the system requirements of the family support act of 1988 and hhs' implementing regulations , and ocse has administered the certification process consistently across states . further , while ocse , in general , used a standardized format and process in preparing certification reports on the results of its reviews , these reports were not always consistent . we recommend that the assistant secretary of the administration for children and families increase ocse's oversight of the reporting process to ensure that the reports consistently address criteria for evaluating the financial components of state systems . the assistant secretary for children and families agreed with our recommendation to increase ocse's oversight of the reporting process . this review is required for final certification . systems are granted full certification when they meet all functional requirements and conditional certification when the system needs only minor corrections that do not affect statewide operation . according to ocse analysts , states whose systems receive either type of level 2 certification are exempt from penalties for failing to meet system requirements imposed by the family support act . the family support act of 1988 set a deadline of october 1 , 1995 , for implementation and federal certification of such systems . however , when only a few states met the deadline , the congress passed legislation extending it by 2 years , to october 1 , 1997 . in some cases , regional analysts also participated in the documentation review . following that review , certification teams are formed from staff who have similar background and expertise . for example , the certification team leaders are usually systems analysts from ocse headquarters . these leaders are assisted by teams from the administration for children and families regional offices responsible for the states being reviewed . the regional teams are usually a combination of staff with systems , policy , or audit expertise . in performing the certification reviews , these teams consistently use the certification questionnaire . ocse used the same certification questionnaire for all of its level 1 and level 2 certification reviews except one .