sec . 47-3206 ( 1981 , 1996 supp .

 ) , makes 40 percent of the dedicated hotel occupancy tax available to wcca for financing the project while the remaining 60 percent ( about $5 million annually ) is allocated for other purposes . wcca is actively seeking to gain control of the 60 percent allocated for other purposes to assist it in closing a portion of the funding gap of the project . table 5 highlights some of the financing options that wcca is considering to close the funding gap . on august 29 , 1997 , we provided the mayor of the district government with copies of a draft of this report for review and comment . in a september 9 , 1997 meeting , wcca officials , including the project director , general counsel , and the chief financial officer , generally concurred with our report and provided additional information . written comments from the mayor are reprinted as appendix i . we have incorporated changes as appropriate throughout the report . wcca provided updated information concerning its progress in obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals and developing a financing plan . specifically , wcca stated that it appears to have obtained consensus on an moa that will be signed by the necessary regulatory agencies . since the mayor commented on this report , all parties have signed the moa , and ncpc has scheduled hearings on the proposed convention center for september 22 and 25 , 1997 , to consider site and design approval for the new convention center at mount vernon square , alley and street closings , as well as the urban renewal plan amendments necessary to allow construction to begin at mount vernon square . these are key issues that must be resolved before wcca can proceed with the project . wcca told us that it has a financing plan to eliminate the funding gap for the proposed convention center . this plan proposes to reallocate the hotel occupancy tax revenues imposed by d.c. code section 47-3206 — and now available to the washington convention and visitors association and the mayor's committee to promote washington — for the payment of debt service for the new convention center . in addition , the term of convention center bonds would be authorized to mature in up to 40 years . current law limits bond maturity to 30 years from issuance . wcca is drafting legislation to authorize the above changes . approval of these or alternative steps are key issues in moving ahead with the convention center project . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate and house committees on appropriations and their subcommittees on the district of columbia ; and the senate committee on governmental affairs , subcommittee on oversight of government management , restructuring and the district of columbia , and the ranking minority member of your subcommittee . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . if you or your staff need further information , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4476 . richard cambosos , senior attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .