modify interfaces . validation — test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an operational environment . implementation — implement converted or replaced platforms , applications , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement data exchange contingency plans , if necessary . to determine the status of the army's year 2000 program and the appropriateness of its strategy and actions for ensuring successful completion , we evaluated dod's office of the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence ( oasd / c3i ) efforts to provide year 2000 support to the army . we also evaluated the efforts of the army's office of the director of information systems , command , control , communications , and computers ( disc4 ) to manage and oversee army components' correction of the year 2000 problem . the disc4 director also serves as the army cio . specifically , we obtained and reviewed from these offices pertinent year 2000 guidance , project and funding documentation , and date format requirements . in addition , we reviewed the u.s. army project change of century action plan to assess the level of guidance , roles , and responsibilities and target milestone dates for the year 2000 effort . further , we met with army officials and analyzed their efforts to address the year 2000 problem at the army materiel command ( amc ) — one of the army's 17 major commands . we also obtained a copy of the army's october 1997 year 2000 inventory database to evaluate its accuracy , reliability , and usefulness . the army relies on this database to monitor year 2000 progress and as the source of army information input to the defense integration support tools . we also reviewed segments of the year 2000 database that amc uses to manage its year 2000 program . however , because the results of limited data testing showed that these army databases were incomplete and inaccurate , we could not and did not rely on the data to validate year 2000 costs or the numbers of systems reported as being in each year 2000 phase . we also obtained a copy of the u.s. army year 2000 database user's manual and discussed the specifics of database use and effectiveness with army officials . in addition , we met with officials from the logistics systems support center ( lssc ) , an army central design activity with responsibility for maintaining the software for the commodity command standard system ( ccss ) — a large standard automated information system — to determine whether lssc officials were receiving year 2000 guidance and other related requirements issued by the oasd / c3i and the army's disc4 . we also discussed with lssc officials their progress and challenges they face in solving the year 2000 problem . further , we compared the information they maintained on their efforts with the information disc4 and amc are maintaining for oversight purposes .