our statement is accurate . the department explains that it gained valuable experience through initiative 6 , but does not dispute the facts that usda took no action on nearly half of the cost savings opportunities identified under initiative 6 and that the initiative was terminated . usda agreed that it is desirable to develop an enterprise network based on a comprehensive business architecture and contends that it currently has a high - level business architecture in place that is based on usda's strategic plan and forms the basis for the definition of requirements for an enterprise network . usda also strongly believes that further development of the department's business architecture and development of the enterprise network must continue as a coordinated and integrated effort and , given that the current telecommunications infrastructure is fragmented and expensive to maintain , it does not make business sense to slow the pace of developing an enterprise network . therefore , as the department moves forward on its enterprise network , usda stated that it intends to update the architecture to include additional information on business data needs and information sharing requirements and to reassess telecommunications requirements as a matter of ongoing business practice . usda's position is inaccurate and misses the point of our recommendation . the department's current architecture is incomplete . for example , it does not identify many of the kinds and / or types of data used in the department and does not provide a clear foundation for a seamless flow of information and interoperability among all agency systems that produce , use , and exchange information . as a result , it cannot provide an adequate basis for defining requirements for an enterprise network . by moving forward on an enterprise network without completing the architecture , usda risks repeating past mistakes , i.e. , investing in telecommunications that do not effectively support the department's strategic business / program and operational needs . troy g. hottovy , senior information systems analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these matters and our responses are discussed in appendix ii .