it requires patience . its message and value is care in considering what the government has done and might do . new initials will be needed but the job must be done. during the 1960's a bipartisan consensus developed that federal management needed improvement . a study requested by president johnson in 1966 and carried out by the heineman task force criticized the federal government's management of the new great society programs . the task force recommended strengthening the management responsibilities of the then - bureau of the budget ( bob ) . in 1970 president nixon proposed changing bob into a new office of management and budget ( omb ) , with the new agency expected to give greater attention to federal management issues . to gain greater administrative control over major executive branch departments and agencies , president nixon proposed a new governmentwide initiative: management by objectives ( mbo ) . mbo was a popular management technique used in the private sector and had also been implemented at the department of health , education , and welfare during the president's first term . mbo was intended to centralize goal - setting decisions while at the same time allowing managers to choose how to achieve the goals . it focused on tracking progress toward goals previously agreed upon between a supervisor and subordinate . president nixon formally initiated mbo in an april 18 , 1973 , memorandum to 21 agencies , which included the 11 cabinet departments and constituted about 95 percent of the budget and federal employees . president nixon stated: “i am now asking each department and agency head to seek a sharper focus on the results which the various activities under his or her direction are aimed at achieving . agencies' strategic plans must include the agency's mission statement ; identify long - term general goals , including outcome - related goals and objectives ; and describe how the agency intends to achieve these goals through its activities and through its human , capital , information , and other resources . in the mid 1970s , the annual deficit was a matter of public debate . by 1977 the annual deficit had been above $50 billion for 2 years , reaching a post - world war ii high of $73.8 billion for fiscal 1976 . a general sense existed that federal spending was out of control , with much of it no longer subject to annual appropriations but driven by permanent entitlement programs and multiyear budgetary authority . during 1976 , the congress and candidate jimmy carter had responded to the new budget situation . beginning in the spring the congress held hearings on proposals for so - called “sunset” legislation that would have required periodic zero - base reviews of all federal programs by their congressional authorizing committees . sunset proposals , however , did not become law .