ifms does not meet these requirements . although ifms includes an accounts receivable module , which epa began using in 1989 , the module does not meet the special requirements needed to manage the settlement agreements reached with prps . it lacks the capabilities to compute compound interest and manage installment payments . this module also lacks the ability to produce accurate aging reports for treasury and epa management . epa has recognized that it has a receivables problem . it has reported this problem as a material weakness in its fiscal year 1994 federal managers' financial integrity act report . this weakness is very significant , especially given that epa data show that uncollected superfund cost recovery receivables totalled about $498 million at the end of fiscal year 1994 . because epa has not yet resolved its problem with receivables , some regional offices have developed their own automated systems or manual procedures to overcome these limitations . for example , four regional offices have developed local pc - based systems to provide some of these accounts receivable capabilities , while another region uses a combination of manual procedures and ifms capabilities . staff in these regions pointed out that the locally developed systems or procedures give them the capability to perform basic debt - servicing functions that ifms does not support . epa has initiated efforts to address its information system limitations . these efforts include ( 1 ) reporting cost data in greater detail , ( 2 ) using a statistical tool to test the integrity of financial data , and developing a capability to require that the site / project field is complete and valid , ( 3 ) implementing and testing an imaging system to improve the agency's identification and retrieval of superfund work - performed documentation , and ( 4 ) developing a pc - based information system to better manage accounts receivable . however , additional actions are needed to fully address the limitations and ensure that the agency obtains the best possible systems support for its cost recovery efforts . to address the need for more detailed cost data , in october 1995 , epa plans to begin using an expanded 41-digit account code structure in ifms . this expanded structure should provide the capability to record costs in greater detail , such as by site operable unit , and thus better support epa's cost recovery efforts . to assess financial data reliability , epa's financial management division has recently developed an automated statistical sampling tool . the division instructed the regions and finance centers in march 1995 to begin using this statistical tool as part of the agency's internal control evaluations . in august 1995 , epa officials stated that the results of the initial testing are currently being reviewed . in response to our concerns , epa officials told us they intend to issue guidance for automated statistical testing of the integrity of financial data needed for cost recovery . regarding application controls , epa officials acknowledged that the capability to require that the site / project field be completed when financial transactions are entered into ifms would be beneficial .