ii. ) sec generally agreed with our recommendation that it report more specific , detailed information to congress on the industry's year 2000 progress . sec also agreed with our suggestions to focus particularly on the industry's overall progress in moving its operations through the various phases of achieving year 2000 compliance and on providing contingency planning information for the 1998 report . sec also agreed that an annual report to congress may not provide sufficiently timely information . other organizations are requiring even more frequent reporting . for example , the treasury department is requiring its bureaus to report their status monthly . more frequent reporting by sec would help to identify any problems sooner and thus provide congress and sec additional time to take action should the need arise . because sec was primarily concerned with promoting and assessing awareness of the year 2000 problem , its june 1997 report focused on the early stages of the industry's preparations for the year 2000 and did not provide specific information on the status of particular systems . however , as the year 2000 approaches , information similar to that required by omb , but reported more frequently , would provide a better indication of the progress being made to ensure the readiness of systems critical to the continued functioning of the u.s. securities markets . we recommend that the chairman , sec , include in sec's year 2000 status reports to congress information similar to that required of other federal agencies by omb . specifically , sec reports should include information on the systems critical to the continued functioning of the u.s. securities markets ; the progress made in moving critical systems through the various phases of achieving year 2000 compliance ; the time frames required to complete each phase of the process ; the efforts necessary to address systems that are behind schedule ; and the contingency plans for systems that may not be ready in time . sec should also report such information more frequently , such as quarterly update briefings , to keep congress informed as the year 2000 approaches . sec provided us with written comments on a draft of this report . ( see app . it said that it is currently providing briefings to certain congressional staff and would be willing to include the staff of any member of congress in such briefings . sros develop and enforce rules for their members . they include the new york stock exchange , the national association of securities dealers , and other regional securities exchanges that maintain the physical securities or their electronic equivalent . the sros directly oversee their member broker - dealers , which buy and sell securities on behalf of customers . sec oversees the sros as well as investment companies that sell mutual funds , investment advisers who dispense investment advice or manage customer funds , and transfer agents who maintain records on behalf of companies that issue securities . consequently , sec and the sros have primary responsibility for ensuring that year 2000 problems in the securities industry do not adversely affect individual investors or the securities markets . various organizations provide guidance for assessing , planning , and managing year 2000 readiness programs .