additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . accordingly , we do not express such an opinion . appendix i presents rtc's financial statements . appendix ii presents rtc management's report on internal controls . fdic's written comments on a draft of this report are included in appendix iii . major contributors to this report are included in appendix iv . the financial statements including the accompanying notes present fairly , in all material respects , in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles , the resolution trust corporation's assets , liabilities , and equity ; revenues , expenses , and accumulated deficit ; and cash flows . however , misstatements may nevertheless occur in other rtc - related financial information as a result of the internal control weakness described below . we evaluated rtc management's assertion about the effectiveness of its internal controls designed to safeguard assets against loss from unauthorized acquisition , use , or assure the execution of transactions in accordance with management's authority and with laws and regulations that have a direct and material effect on the financial statements ; and properly record , process , and summarize transactions to permit the preparation of reliable financial statements and to maintain accountability for assets . rtc management fairly stated that those controls in place on december 31 , 1995 , provided reasonable assurance that losses , noncompliance , or misstatements material in relation to the financial statements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis . no reportable noncompliance with laws and regulations we tested . the following section discusses each of the above conclusions in more detail . in addition , with the termination of rtc on december 31 , 1995 , an important phase of the savings and loan crisis has ended . accordingly , the report also presents an historical perspective on the savings and loan crisis and rtc , the costs of the crisis , and remaining fiscal implications of the crisis . rtc management made this assertion , which is included in appendix ii , based upon criteria established under the federal managers' financial integrity act of 1982 ( fmfia ) . rtc management , in making its assertion , recognized the need to improve internal controls . our work also identified the need to improve internal controls , as described in the following section . the weakness in internal controls , although not considered a material weakness , represents a significant deficiency in the design or operation of internal controls which could have adversely affected rtc's ability to fully meet the internal control objectives listed above . rtc acted during 1995 to resolve the reportable condition related to the weaknesses in general controls over some computerized information systems identified in our audit of its 1994 financial statements . however , as reported by rtc , many of those corrective actions were not completed until late in 1995 . in addition , our audit of rtc's 1995 financial statements identified additional weaknesses related to general controls over its computerized systems such that this reportable condition continued to exist .