, systems environment ) . thus far , customs has defined its current ( i.e. each business area is described below . ( 5 ) have steps been taken to ensure the integrity of the estimating process ? ( 6 ) is the organization's historical evidence capable of supporting a reliable estimate ? ( 7 ) has the situation remained unchanged since the estimate was prepared ? we analyzed the approach that customs followed in deriving its $1.05 billion ace life - cycle cost estimate using sei's criteria . among these criteria were several very significant and closely intertwined requirements that are at the core of effective cost estimating . specifically , embedded in several of the aforementioned seven questions are requirements for using ( 1 ) formal cost models , ( 2 ) structured and documented processes for determining the software size and reuse inputs to the models , and ( 3 ) relevant , measured , and normalized historical cost data ( estimated and actual ) to calibrate the models . instead , it used an unsophisticated spreadsheet to extrapolate the cost of each ace increment . further , customs' approach to determining software size and reuse was not documented and was not well supported or convincing . customs estimated the size of each ace software increment ( most of which were still undefined ) by extrapolating from the estimated size of the first increment based on individuals' undocumented best judgments about increment functionality and complexity . last , customs did not have any historical project cost data at the time it developed the $1.05 billion estimate , and it did not account for relevant , measured , and normalized differences among the increments . for example , it did not account for ( 1 ) the change in ace's architecture from a mainframe system written in cobol and c++ to a combined mainframe and internet - based system written in c++ and java and ( 2 ) the change in ace from an in - house software development project ( ncap 0.1 ) to a software acquisition ( ncap 0.2 ) . clearly , such fundamental changes can have a dramatic effect on system costs , and should have been addressed explicitly in customs' cost estimates . table 3.1 summarizes the complete results of our assessment of customs' cost estimating process . for each of sei's questions and supporting criteria , customs was rated as demonstrating a strength , i.e. , effectively implementing the criterion ; a weakness , i.e. , ineffectively implementing the criterion ; or , where evidence was inconclusive and could not support characterization as either a strength or a weakness , an observation was noted . ( see appendix ii for further detail on sei's criteria and our findings ) . software and systems development experts agree that early project estimates are by definition imprecise , and that this inherent imprecision decreases during the project's life - cycle as more information becomes known about the system . these experts emphasize that , to be useful , each cost estimate should include an indication of its degree of uncertainty , possibly as an estimated range or qualified by some factor of confidence .