there was no advanced warning for any of the 18 events . however , from january 1995 through february 1998 , advanced warnings were issued for 17 of the 22 reported events ; and the average warning lead time for these was just over 2 hours . for the 17 events , the warning lead time ranged from 8 minutes to 3 hours and 50 minutes , and exceeded the fiscal year 1999 flash flood warning lead time goal of 42 minutes for 14 of the 17 events . figure 3 displays flash flood warning lead times for the 40 flash flood events that occurred in ventura and los angeles counties from january 1992 through february 1998 . concerning the five events since january 1995 that were not preceded by a warning , los angeles / oxnard wfo officials stated that two of the events were incorrectly recorded as flash floods and two were flash flood warning extensions that were issued after the initial warning and , therefore , none of the four should be counted as missed events . according to the los angeles / oxnard wfo meteorologist - in - charge , one of the incorrectly recorded events was an urban flood event , while the other was the result of a controlled water release into the los angeles river . however , because no documentation was provided to substantiate nws' statements , we classified all five as missed events . another measure of accuracy is the number of false warnings that occurred . from january 1992 through december 1994 , nws data shows that there were three false flash flood warnings , while from january 1995 through february 1998 , nws data shows five false flash flood warnings . see appendix i for details on each of the 40 events listed in figure 3 ( eg , date of the event , time of the flash flood , time the warning was issued ) , as well as the dates of the false warnings . although nexrad is not the only source of data on which storms are tracked , los angeles / oxnard wfo officials told us that the sulphur mountain nexrad is the primary reason for the increase in advanced warning lead time because it provides advanced warning of heavy precipitation oftentimes before severe weather hits the california coast . nws officials told us that well before the nexrad imagery is used to issue a flash flood warning , forecasters use other sources of information to track storms as they approach the west coast , primarily high resolution satellite imagery from the goes - next satellites and detailed numerical models . however , as storms approach the counties covered by the los angeles / oxnard wfo , the detailed imagery from the sulphur mountain nexrad is used to issue flash flood warnings , along with the neighboring nexrads ( i.e. visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . southern california has some of the steepest terrain in the united states . the steep mountains and the pacific ocean create ideal conditions for the orographic enhancement of rainfall .