we agree . as stated in our report , it was not our intention that goals or objectives for reducing improper payments be universally included in agency strategic plans . specifically , within the framework of the cfo and results acts , and as shown in figure 5 , judgment needs to be exercised so that only mission - critical management problems are addressed in agency strategic and performance plans . to avoid any misconception regarding this issue , we have clarified our recommendation accordingly . with regard to our recommendation to consult with the congress on specific goals and targets for improper payments , omb noted that congressional consultation is required by the results act and said that agencies interact with the congress throughout the year as part of the normal appropriations and oversight processes . omb stated that this level of interaction provides the opportunity for both the agency and the congress to raise and discuss improper payment issues and should be adequate . in this regard , it will be important that these interactions take place . as discussed in our report , several agencies have not reported improper payments in their performance plans even when they could reasonably be considered mission critical . omb's comments are reprinted in appendix iv . omb also provided informal technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from its date . then , we will send copies to senator joseph lieberman , ranking minority member , senate committee on governmental affairs ; representative dan burton , chairman , and representative henry a. waxman , ranking minority member , house committee on government reform ; senator pete v. domenici , chairman , and senator frank r. lautenberg , ranking minority member , senate committee on the budget ; representative john r. kasich , chairman , and representative john m. spratt , jr. , ranking minority member , house committee on the budget . we will also send copies to the honorable jacob j. lew , director of the office of management and budget ; the heads of the 24 cfo agencies ; and respective agency cfos and inspectors general . copies will also be made available to others upon request . this report was prepared under the direction of gloria l. jarmon , director , health , education , and human services accounting and financial management , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-4476 or by e - mail at jarmong.aimd@gao.gov if you or your staff have any questions . staff contacts and other key contributors to this letter are listed in appendix v . the u.s. agency for international development ( aid ) was established in 1961 pursuant to the foreign assistance act of 1961 . aid manages u.s. foreign economic and humanitarian assistance programs and helps countries recover from disaster , escape poverty , and become more democratic . aid's mission is to contribute to u.s. national interests by supporting the people of developing and transitional countries in their efforts to achieve enduring economic and social progress and to participate more fully in resolving the problems of their countries and the world .