ii ) . the committee employs four full - time staff , paid from nonappropriated funds , including a business manager who is responsible for day - to - day operations . the current manager , who had extensive experience with the army and air force exchange service , has been employed in his current capacity for more than 10 years . the concessions committee does not receive appropriated funds . we will make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . committee activities at the navy annex chateau's annex ladies store defluri's card and gift shop market place ( periodic rover ) . chairman deputy chief financial officer , office of the secretary of defense ( dod ) comptroller 2 . representative for director of administration and management , office of the secretary of defense deputy director , real estate and facilities directorate , washington headquarters services , office of the secretary of defense 3 . army member office of the secretary of the army , administrative assistant 4 . army member chief , executive actions division management directorate , office of the chief of staff of the army 5 . navy member assistant for administration , office of under secretary of navy 6 . marine corps member secretary of the general staff , headquarters united states marine corps 7 . air force member secretary of the air force , administrative assistant 8 . air force member vice commander headquarters 11th support wing ( air force district of washington ) legal advisor senior counsel , office of general counsel , washington headquarters services ( nonvoting member ) business manager ( nonvoting member ) . william t. woods behn miller the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . although the committee's operations are reviewed by a high level official within the office of the secretary of defense , the committee is not subject to the reporting and oversight requirements of other nonappropriated fund instrumentalities . information on the financial activities of the other nonappropriated fund instrumentalities is reviewed centrally within the office of the secretary of defense and submitted to the congress through the military services .