it has not borrowed from the u.s. treasury since then . under this provision , which originated before the enactment of the home rule act , the mayor of the district of columbia may requisition the secretary of the treasury for “such sums as may be necessary , from time to time , to meet the general expenses of said district , as authorized by congress , and such amounts so advanced shall be reimbursed by the said mayor to the treasury out of taxes and revenue collected for the support of the government of the said district of columbia.” the interest rate to be applied , if any , and the term of these borrowings are not specified . these borrowings are not subject to the 14-percent limitation on long - term debt . all general obligation and trans offering documents refer to this section of the d.c. code and specify that the mayor shall request funds from the u.s. treasury as may be necessary to pay the principal and interest on the bonds when due . as calculated by the district treasurer's office , total debt service for these long - term obligations is expected to be $409 million in fiscal year 1998 , the highest projected year , or 11.42 percent of total expected fiscal year 1994 revenues . this debt service percent is projected to grow in the future . the budget office estimates that capital borrowing will be $250 million annually from fiscal years 1995 through 1998 and $190 million in each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000 . ( 3 ) how does the district's level of debt compare with other selected jurisdictions ? to answer the three questions , we analyzed information provided by the district of columbia on past , current , and projected borrowing and met with district officials to discuss the district's debt . we also analyzed applicable laws that authorize borrowing and impose limitations on that borrowing . we obtained information on other jurisdictions debt limitations , debt ratios , and bond ratings from moody's investors service , standard & poor's corporation , and fitch investors service , inc. and discussed this information with officials of those organizations . we did not independently verify the information provided by the investor service organizations on other jurisdictions . we conducted our work from august 1994 to october 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the district of columbia provided comments on a draft of this report . these comments are discussed in the “agency comments and our evaluation” section . we have incorporated agency views where appropriate . the home rule act authorizes and sets limits on various types of short - and long - term debt that is backed by the full faith and credit of the district . the limits have not been revised since enactment of the provisions in the home rule act that authorized the various types of debt . the district also is authorized to issue revenue bonds that are not backed by the full faith and credit of the district . finally , the district is authorized to borrow from the u.s. treasury to meet the district's general expenses .