we disagree . as we reported in prior years , improved internal controls and systems would allow irs to more effectively manage its tax accounts receivable . for example , irs could better manage its collection efforts if it had readily available detailed subsidiary records of collection activity to augment data used to establish collection priorities . also , not having available relevant supporting documentation , such as tax returns filed and collection files , can impact the collection process when taxpayers dispute amounts owed . the results of our efforts to audit irs' fiscal year 1992 , 1993 , 1994 , and 1995 principal financial statements were presented in our reports entitled financial audit: examination of irs' fiscal year 1992 financial statements ( gao / aimd - 93-2 , june 30 , 1993 ) , financial audit: examination of irs' fiscal year 1993 financial statements ( gao / aimd - 94-120 , june 15 , 1994 ) , financial audit: examination of irs' fiscal year 1994 financial statements ( gao / aimd - 95-141 , august 4 , 1995 ) , and financial audit: examination of irs' fiscal year 1995 financial statements ( gao / aimd - 96-101 , july 11 , 1996 ) . in these prior reports , we made numerous recommendations to improve irs' custodial accounting operations . we determined the status of recommendations based on our audit work on irs' fiscal year 1996 custodial financial statements and on our discussions with irs officials . our assessments of irs' actions for several recommendations are discussed in the report . however , we have not fully assessed the effectiveness of all of the responses identified in the following table . financial audit: irs significantly overstated its accounts receivable ( gao / afmd - 93-42 , may 6 , 1993 ) provide the irs chief financial officer authority to ensure that irs accounting system development efforts meet its financial reporting needs . at a minimum , the chief financial officer's approval of related system designs should be required . take steps to ensure the accuracy of the balances reported in irs financial statements . in the long term , this will require modifying irs systems so that they are capable of ( 1 ) identifying which assessments currently recorded in the master file system represent valid receivables and ( 2 ) designating new assessments that should be included in the receivables balance as they are recorded . until these capabilities are implemented , irs should rely on statistical sampling to determine what portion of its assessments represent valid receivables . clearly designate the chief financial officer as the official responsible for coordinating the development of performance measures related to receivables and for ensuring that irs financial reports conform with applicable accounting standards .