sffas no . 6 , accounting for property , plant , and equipment , issued on november 30 , 1995 , requires the disclosure of deferred maintenance in agencies' financial statements for the fiscal year beginning october 1 , 1997 . sffas no . 6 defines deferred maintenance as “maintenance that was not performed when it should have been or was scheduled to be and which , therefore , is put off or delayed for a future period.” it includes preventive maintenance and normal repairs , but excludes modifications or upgrades that are intended to expand the capacity of an asset . the deferred maintenance standard applies to all property , plant , and equipment , including mission assets — which will be reported on the supplementary stewardship report . for dod , mission assets , such as submarines , ships , aircraft , and combat vehicles , is a major category of property , plant , and equipment . in fiscal year 1996 , dod reported over $590 billion in this asset category , of which over $297 billion belonged to the navy . in comments on a draft of this report , the department of defense agreed that it must consider the key issues identified in the report as it develops implementing guidance and policy for reporting deferred maintenance . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on appropriations , the house committee on appropriations , the senate committee on armed services , the house committee on national security , the senate committee on governmental affairs , and the house committee on government reform and oversight . we are also sending copies to the director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of defense , the assistant secretaries for financial management for the air force and army , and the acting director of the defense finance and accounting service . copies will be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9095 if you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report . sffas no . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . 6 recognizes that there are many variables in estimating deferred maintenance amounts . for example , the standard acknowledges that determining the condition of the asset — condition rating — is a management function because different conditions might be considered acceptable by different entities as well as for different items of property , plant , and equipment held by the same entity . amounts disclosed for deferred maintenance may be measured using condition assessment surveys or life - cycle cost forecasts . therefore , sffas no . 6 provides flexibility for agencies' management to ( 1 ) determine the level of service and condition of the asset that are acceptable , ( 2 ) disclose deferred maintenance by major classes of assets , and ( 3 ) establish methods to estimate and report any material amounts of deferred maintenance . sffas no . 6 also has an optional disclosure for stratifying between critical and noncritical amounts of maintenance needed to return each major class of asset to its acceptable operating condition .