we disagree with va on these issues . first , our february 1997 exposure draft of the year 2000 assessment guide called for agencies to develop realistic contingency plans to ensure the continuity of their core business processes . second , our may 1997 report reiterates the need for agencies , including va , to develop contingency plans for their major mission - critical business processes . since our may 1997 report , only va's insurance service has developed such a plan . third , because va is dependent upon information from service providers and / or manufacturers who have yet to report on the compliance status of their services and / or products , it is critical that va develop business continuity plans and contingency plans to address these services and / or products in the event that va does not receive the information on the date promised . further , if service providers and / or manufacturers provide assurance that their services and / or products are compliant , va still needs to develop business continuity and contingency plans in the event that these services and / or products do not operate or do not function properly when processing data related to the year 2000 . lastly , va described actions it has taken and planned to implement our recommendations , as well as a number of technical suggestions to this report . these comments have been incorporated into the report as appropriate and are reprinted in appendix i . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we will not distribute it until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to the ranking minority member of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations , house committee on veterans' affairs , the chairmen and ranking minority members of the subcommittee on benefits , house committee on veterans' affairs , and the subcommittee on health , house committee on veterans' affairs . we will also provide copies to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate and house committees on veterans' affairs and the senate and house committees on appropriations , the secretary of veterans affairs , and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6253 or by e - mail at willemssenj.aimd@gao.gov if you have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on the department of veterans affairs' letter dated july 31 , 1998 . discussed in “agency comments and our evaluation” section of report . our report now refers to “core business processes” as used in our business continuity and contingency planning guide . as we stated in our report , the detailed results of our review of va's and fda's year 2000 biomedical devices will be provided in a separate report . we modified the report to reflect “limited progress” as communicated during our briefing before the senate committee on veterans' affairs staff .