these errors are being corrected . the overall problems with the system implementation are reflective of the lack of complete integrated testing of the system , including its reporting capability , prior to implementation in the pilot units . our prior work at other agencies has shown that the lack of adequate testing of systems before piloting and implementation is one of the primary causes of new systems implementation failures . as a result of the reporting problems , the ocfo and the forest service are revising the scheduled completion of ffis implementation in the pilot units from february 23 , 1998 , to march 30 , 1998 . the acting director of financial management has a team , including region and forest - level staff , at the national finance center working on correcting the identified reporting deficiencies . according to the usda acting cfo , the team plans to initially focus on monthly and quarterly reporting requirements and will address year - end and other reporting demands later in the fiscal year . if these problems are not resolved , ffis cannot be successfully implemented in the remaining units as scheduled on october 1 , 1998 . further , the inability to produce budget and financial reports for the three pilot units subjects the assets of these units to a high level of risk and vulnerability to misuse . another issue that must be addressed is to ensure that ffis , as well as all other mission critical computer systems , is year 2000 compliant . the year 2000 problem is rooted in the way dates are recorded and calculated in many computer systems . for the past several decades , systems have typically used two digits to represent the year in order to conserve on electronic data storage and reduce operating costs . with this two - digit format , however , the year 2000 is indistinguishable from the year 1900 . as a result , system or application programs that use dates to perform calculations , comparisons , or sorting may generate incorrect results when working with years after 1999 . the version of ffis purchased in 1994 and piloted in october 1997 is not year 2000 compliant . forest service officials and the usda acting cfo told us that the ffis pilot would have been delayed up to 1 year if the agency had waited for the vendor to release a year 2000 compliant version of ffis . we did not assess the decision - making process for procuring ffis or the level of effort required to make the system year 2000 compliant . the office of management and budget reported that as of november 15 , 1997 , usda had demonstrated insufficient evidence of adequate year 2000 progress . however , the usda acting cfo said that usda is taking steps to ensure that ffis , as well as all other mission critical financial systems , becomes year 2000 compliant before january 1 , 2000 . he further stated that ffis will be year 2000 compliant by the summer of 1998 .