this report contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on these recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight within 60 days after the date of this letter . a written statement also must be sent to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made over 60 days after the date of this letter . we are sending copies of this report to director of the office of management and budget , the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of transportation , the secretary of labor , and the inspectors' general of the department of transportation and department of labor . copies of this letter will be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-9505 or steven j. sebastian , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-9521 . the objective of the agreed - upon procedures work was to assist the inspectors general of the department of transportation and department of labor in ascertaining whether the net excise tax collections and excise tax certifications reported by irs for the fiscal year ended september 30 , 1997 , were supported by the underlying records . we did not perform work on excise taxes collected by other treasury bureaus , such as the customs service and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms . we did include in our review the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund because irs uses different procedures to certify this trust fund . in performing the agreed - upon procedures , we gained an understanding of the internal controls over the excise tax collection and certification process . these adjustments are recorded by bpd . there is typically a 6-month lag between the quarter end and the excise tax certification by irs . figure 1 provides an overview of the entire process of collecting , distributing , and certifying excise tax revenue reported to the trust funds . irs relies on a combination of manual and automated procedures to prepare its certification of excise taxes to be distributed to the trust funds . irs calculates the trust fund distributions based on assessment information in the master file . as quarterly excise tax returns are received , irs personnel input the liability amounts by type of excise tax , such as diesel fuel tax , into its master file . the tax types are identified by irs numbers , or abstract numbers , which are preprinted on the form 720 . it is these abstract numbers that ultimately determine how amounts are distributed to the appropriate trust funds . the assessment information by type of excise tax is electronically transmitted from the master file to irs' automated quarterly excise tax listing ( aqetl ) system . an irs analyst , who has sole responsibility for preparing the excise tax certifications , accesses this system , analyzes the data for reasonableness by , for example , comparing current period assessments to amounts reported in prior periods , and makes adjustments , as necessary .