, an appropriation ) . an ifms official stated that current budget rules do not lend themselves to the efficient financial management of business - oriented revolving funds , and that ifms would like to manage its revolving fund on a “balance - sheet basis” instead . the official stated that limiting the revolving fund's obligations to those that can be made with the unobligated balances of its budget authority constrains capital spending when balance sheet analysis would suggest that the fund possesses highly liquid resources that could be made available to fund capital acquisition . managing on a balance sheet basis means that budgetary resources would be re - defined to include the book value of vehicles . allowing ifms to manage on a balance sheet basis would be comparable to giving it a line of credit or authority to borrow from the treasury . this would enable ifms to purchase vehicles when expanding the fleet , rather than using more costly operating leases . the ifms official indicated that , in general , authority to borrow would enable them to hold lower cash balances and to manage the fleet in ways that more closely parallel those of private - sector rental car companies . pbs would also like to use borrowing authority to fund capital assets . one pbs official noted that although pbs is often compared with private - sector real estate providers , pbs lacks the financing tools the private sector uses to manage efficiently . for example , private - sector real estate companies can borrow against the value of their long - term leases , but pbs cannot . if pbs could borrow from the treasury to finance a purchase , pbs officials believe that budgetary resources spent on operating leases could instead be used to repay the mortgage — and at less cost to the government in the long - run . pbs has found that lease - purchases can be more cost - effective in the long - term than operating leases and had used them prior to bea to finance asset acquisition over time . borrowing from the treasury would enable pbs to do the same but at lower cost . permitting agencies to borrow against the value of their assets is , in effect , allowing them to create budget authority , thus diminishing congressional control and oversight . officials at omb and appropriations committee staffs felt that such a practice would inhibit control of total federal expenditures and increase government borrowing . officials also expressed concern about the consequences if an agency were unable to repay a loan from rental collections and was forced to sell agency assets to make repayments . this is not solely due to the limitations noted above . neither the overall federal data nor the case study trend data provide any indication as to whether the past levels of capital obligations or outlays were deficient , adequate , or excessive . nor can the data indicate whether there is a bias in one direction or another . trends could reflect changes in priorities between capital and other spending or changes in underlying needs for capital . economies of scale in operations may suggest that in some cases operating expenses should decline relative to capital .