the questions were as follows . ( 1 ) is the primary skill or knowledge required in the position uniquely available in the military ? ( 2 ) does the position have a mission to deploy to a theater of operations in wartime or during a contingency ? ( 3 ) does any law require that the position be staffed by a military person ? ( 4 ) is the position needed to support the normal rotation of service members deployed overseas or afloat to assignments in the continental united states ? dod's response to our october 1996 report acknowledged the potential savings and other advantages of military - to - civilian conversions . dod also noted impediments to placing civilians in certain positions , such as the lack of consistent funding for the hiring of civilian replacements , the ongoing civilian personnel draw - down , and military strength floors . a well - educated and experienced cadre of comptrollers , whether military or civilian , is critical to managing a large organization such as the navy . while dod anticipates that the qdr will concentrate on identifying methods to overcome the impediments to large - scale military - to - civilian conversions for all the military services , steps need to be taken to address the navy's lack of a career path for military comptrollers . as the air force and the army have recognized , financial management and comptrollership is a professional career track that requires highly trained and skilled individuals . in the military combat operations environment one would not expect an officer with only 3 to 4 years experience to command a ship , squadron , or fleet . similarly , one would not expect a comptrollership , responsible for billions of dollars , to be staffed temporarily by a less than fully experienced financial manager . this would be true whether the comptroller was a military officer or a civilian . however , that in effect is the unintended consequence of the navy's present personnel practices with respect to assigning its military officers to comptroller positions . therefore , if the navy is to be successful in meeting the objectives of the various governmentwide financial management reform initiatives , it must have a highly skilled and experienced financial management staff in place to help guide and manage its efforts . we recommend that the secretary of defense ensure that the following steps are taken by the navy . identify which key military comptroller positions can be converted to civilian status in order to gain greater continuity , technical competency , and costs savings . for those comptroller positions identified for conversion to civilian status , ensure that those positions are filled by individuals who possess both the proper education and experience needed to meet the jfmip core competencies . for those comptroller positions that should remain as military billets , establish a career path in financial management that ensures that military officers are prepared , both in terms of education and experience , for comptrollership responsibilities . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod generally agreed with the report findings . these comments are summarized below and reprinted in appendix iv .