this is not the case . although we reviewed previous reports in order to obtain background information on past irm problems at nasa , all of our audit findings were derived from a thorough data collection activity and numerous interviews with senior officials at nasa headquarters and key field centers from september 1995 through april 1996 . the details of our methodology are explained in appendix i . our background review of prior reports was used , both in our audit and in the report , chiefly as a means to establish the context of long - standing irm problems that the newly - appointed cio faced when he began work . we note in our report that the cio has already made significant improvements over past nasa irm practices , such as instituting a management framework for enhanced irm coordination and initiating projects to standardize or consolidate agencywide information resources . nasa mentions several initiatives that it says have been underway over the past year . however , several of these activities are very recent and were not mentioned by irm officials during our interviews . for example , the reassignment of irm policy , planning , and oversight staff to the office of the cio was first announced in may 1996 and has not yet been completed . further , the cio council , intended to be responsible for overseeing investment strategies and decisions , was just established on july 16 , 1996 . given the newness of these actions , we believe that our findings and recommendations remain useful as a framework for measuring continued progress in improving irm . due to the recent organizational changes discussed above , the chart on the cio management structure has been deleted from the report . in addition , we deleted from our draft report a proposal that nasa clarify the linkage of the irm organization to the cio office since nasa is in the process of addressing this relationship . we have made other changes throughout the report to include updated information where appropriate . nasa states that it does not believe that the agency cio must have budget authority over all agency it investments in order to be effective . we agree with nasa on this point . in fact , we are not making any recommendation to give the cio such authority . rather , we believe that a more authoritative cio , participating in the budget process , would be in a better position both to advise an investment review board on potential it investments and to coordinate implementation of the prioritized decisions of the board . the new cio council , intended to be responsible for it investment review and oversight , may address this concern . accordingly , we have not included our earlier proposal that nasa establish such a council . nasa states that gao used previous reports on nasa's irm activities to substantiate its findings in the current report . this is not true . the previous reports are referenced in order to characterize the problems that nasa has faced in the irm area in the past .