additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . we provided a draft of this report to interior and usda for comment . interior's and usda's comments are discussed in the report and are included in full in appendixes ii and iii , respectively . to its credit , interior has undertaken a number of cost - saving initiatives to eliminate some unused telephone lines and unnecessary data services . while significant savings have been achieved in some cases , such efforts have generally been isolated and ad hoc rather than departmentwide . without information such as this that describes types of telecommunications equipment and services at individual bureau offices , interior cannot easily determine where it has opportunities to consolidate and optimize telecommunications resources among multiple bureau offices . in addition , neither oirm nor the bureaus have used telecommunications tools such as usda's network analysis model to help identify potential savings opportunities across the department . usda developed and successfully used this model to identify millions of dollars in cost - effective options for reducing telecommunications costs at the department and at other agencies . usda gave its model to interior over a year ago , but interior never used it . until oirm and the bureaus develop the basic information and use the tools available to systematically identify cost - reduction opportunities at collocated bureau offices , interior will not be able to determine where and to what extent similar savings opportunities may exist in washington , d.c. , and at the department's hundreds of offices across the country . some bureau officials said that , through the normal course of their duties , they have sometimes become aware of opportunities to consolidate and share telecommunications resources . even in such cases , however , savings opportunities may not be pursued because getting the separate interior bureaus to agree to make changes in telecommunications arrangements is difficult and time - consuming . in one case , for example , three small bureau offices in cheyenne , wyoming , gave up trying to consolidate and share services because no one bureau was willing to spend the approximately $2,000 needed to purchase the required equipment , even though services would have been upgraded and overall bureau savings would have paid for this equipment in a few months . appendix i provides further details on our scope and methodology . we conducted our review from august 1996 through march 1997 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .