additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there is no appropriation account specific to nws . table 1 provides a snapshot of the development of the nws fiscal year 1997 budget . this process began when the department submitted a fiscal year 1997 budget request of nearly $2 billion to omb for noaa operations , research , and facilities , including a request of $693 million for nws . omb reviews each department and agency budget request based on presidential priorities and other factors and makes an initial proposal on how resources will be allocated . departments and agencies are notified of omb's initial resource allocation decisions about 2 months after making their initial budget submissions . this notification is commonly referred to as a “passback.” agencies may appeal their passbacks . the omb passback to the department of commerce resulted in overall reductions for noaa as well as a specific reduction of about $22 million for nws' portion of noaa's operations , research , and facilities request . as required by omb circular a - 11 , noaa revised its budget request to bring it into accord with these decisions . both omb and noaa budget preparation guidance instruct staff to support the ultimate request in the president's budget . in response to the passback , nws revised its fiscal year 1997 budget to about $671 million , the amount contained in the president's budget request to the congress . the final step in the budget formulation process is congressional review of the agency's budget and the enactment of appropriations . after holding hearings and deliberating on noaa's budget request , the congress reduced the amount for noaa's operations , research , and facilities request by about $117 million and specified that nws absorb about $33 million of the cut , resulting in a fiscal year 1997 budget for nws of $638 million . after an agency's appropriation is enacted , the agency receives an apportionment from omb . apportionment and subsequent allotmentswithin the agency are established , often by calendar quarter and by program or major activity , to prevent obligations in a manner or at a pace that would result in the agency exceeding appropriated levels . many of these systems and processes are outdated . nws began a nationwide modernization program in the 1980s to upgrade observing systems , such as satellites and radars , and design and develop advanced computer workstations for weather forecasters . the goals of the modernization are to achieve more uniform weather services across the nation , improve forecasts , provide better detection and prediction of severe weather and flooding , permit more cost - effective operations through staff and office reductions , and achieve higher productivity . in conjunction with its modernization , nws plans to restructure its field offices , reducing their number from 256 to 119 . however , delays in implementing the advanced weather interactive processing system have slowed progress in office restructuring . nws now expects the modernization to be completed before the end of fiscal year 1999 .