one such area was transportation . we reported in 1996 that even though defense recognized that its military transportation processes were fragmented , outdated , inefficient , and costly , it focused on technology solutions rather than the need to identify and correct the root causes of its transportation problems . because reengineering took a backseat to migration in other business areas as well , cim has never been able to achieve the level of cost savings and process improvements originally intended . a recent reportconducted by rand , a consulting organization , notes that “the cim effort is today widely viewed as a failure in most quarters of the dod . it has not resulted in either significant process reengineering or visible savings in the hardware and software required to support all the varied information systems in the defense infrastructure.” defense is still planning to invest at least $18 billion in its migration effort from fiscal years 1995 through 2000 . because this investment is significant , we were asked for information on the status and progress of migration and whether defense has significant controls in place to manage and oversee the effort . defense reported that it has selected 363 systems for migration . forty - nine of the 363 migration systems are large - scale , or major , systems that are expected to cost at least $13 billion — or about 72 percent of the total $18 billion cost estimate — to develop , deploy , and maintain over fiscal years 1995 through 2000 . currently , the assistant secretary of defense for command , control , communications and intelligence ( asd c3i ) also acts as the cio . defense has identified 1,938 legacy systems for potential termination . as of april 1996 , its defense integration support tools ( dist ) database showed that 281 had already been terminated , 886 were scheduled for termination by the year 2000 , and 771 more were identified for potential elimination after the year 2000 . table 1.1 provides the number of systems selected by each functional area , the number of legacy systems identified for potential termination , and dod's estimated costs of developing , deploying , and maintaining the migration systems . we excluded costs for 27 systems for which dod collected costs because the systems were classified . and costs for the remaining 121 of 363 systems were not included in the table because the office of the asd c3i had not collected the costs for these systems . table 1.2 provides the name , status , and cost for each of the 49 major systems . we were asked ( 1 ) for information on the number and cost of systems designated for migration , the number of legacy systems already terminated or scheduled for termination , and savings resulting from terminations of legacy systems and ( 2 ) whether defense's management control and oversight processes for migration systems are ensuring that the investments are economically sound and in compliance with defense's technical and data standards .