these comments are presented in appendix i . in commenting on the draft report , defense concurred with our recommendation . we are encouraged that defense intends to develop cost estimates and performance measures for major disn components from this point forward . it is likewise important that defense does so for the disn - conus component currently being implemented . as stated in our report , these actions are critical in order for defense to have an objective cost and performance baseline for measuring the success of this acquisition . as agreed with your office , we will send copies of this report to the ranking minority member of the senate committee on governmental affairs , chairman and ranking minority member of the house committee on government reform and oversight , other interested congressional committees , the secretary of defense , and the director of the office of management and budget . copies will be sent to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-6240 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . linda d. koontz , associate director franklin w. deffer , assistant director kevin e. conway , senior information systems analyst mary t. marshall , information systems analyst cristina t. chaplain , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . the dctn contract expired in february 1996 . since then , these services have been provided through a follow - on , sole - source disn transition contract ( dtc ) with at&t until defense can fully implement its new disn services . defense estimates that dtc costs are approximately $18.5 million per month . in july 1995 , we reported on defense's efforts to plan and implement disn . at that time , we recommended that defense ensure that disn plans and program decisions were based on a validated statement of disn's operational requirements . by defining the minimal acceptable requirements for disn as well as the critical technical characteristics , the operational requirements document would provide the basis for determining disn's effectiveness . we also recommended that defense develop an estimate of the acquisition , operations , maintenance , and support costs for disn over its life - cycle .