personal leave . cmb adopted a policy allowing personal days off , or personal leave , at the discretion of each executive director , to compensate employees for extra hours worked.while this policy is reasonable in substance , we found several examples in which there was inadequate documentation over the granting of personal leave . one congressional cmb employee was awarded a total of 23 personal leave days during 1998 and 1999 as compensation for travel days occurring on weekends . however , as previously discussed ( see “annual leave accounting” ) , this individual had also taken 27 personal side trips while on cmb business travel and , as discussed below , had been inappropriately awarded military leave . another congressional cmb employee was awarded a total of 18 personal leave days during 1998 and 1999 . tell me who do you think these people might be: democrat or republican members of congress ? ” “now if i say to you the people who believe it's better to employ you to help with the census are republicans , what do you think ? ” according to congressional cmb officials , these two questions were asked to determine how minority views of political parties affected current efforts by both parties to improve census undercounts . was there a verbal confrontation by a congressional cmb contractor , and how was the matter subsequently resolved ? we found some evidence of a verbal confrontation between a congressional cmb contractor and bureau of the census employees in a local census office ( lco ) . cmb employees and contractors made numerous lco visits as part of the cmb mission to monitor the 2000 census and to identify potential problems and issues to bring to the attention of the bureau of the census . a congressional cmb contractor met with lco officials during a march 22 , 2000 , visit to obtain information on census activities . in his report , the contractor , a former criminal investigator , observed that during a 3-hour interview , the local manager appeared evasive in responding to his questions , with repeated looks at the two area managers who were present . the contractor stated that he asked the managers to provide honest answers to his questions and , if they did not , it may not look good later . words to that effect were also confirmed by a detailed e - mail of the visit by the lco area manager , who referred to the 3 hours of detailed questions as “a deposition that was relatively painless , but extremely taxing.” the congressional cmb and the contractor mutually terminated their agreement effective 14 days after the visit due to a variety of reasons , including the lco visit . shortly thereafter , the congressional cmb adopted a conduct policy for field visits . lco managers prepare brief reports on cmb visits and the bureau of the census chief of field decennial oversight and communications indicated that there were no further incidents regarding cmb visits . the vast majority of cmb disbursements were supported and related to official business.however , we could not evaluate about $119,000 of disbursements , all but about $1,000 of which were the presidential cmb's .