these problems have persisted . for example , two key projects in the modernization effort — the wide area augmentation system and the standard terminal automation replacement system — have encountered significant cost increases , delays , and changes in requirements . in the case of the wide area augmentation system , between september 1997 and january 1998 , total estimated costs increased by $600 million , or 25 percent , from $2.4 billion to $3 billion . the increased costs were attributable to faa's including previously overlooked costs for periodically updating the project's equipment and to higher - than - expected operations and maintenance costs . in the case of the standard terminal automation replacement system , although faa has not officially changed the project's baseline approved in february 1996 , the baseline is in jeopardy of being breached because of unions' concerns surrounding human - factor and design issues , the refinement of requirements , and the interjection of a new project phase . faa estimates that these issues have the potential to increase the project's costs from $294 million to $410 million above the approved baseline . faa also estimates that the project's initial completion could be delayed by almost 2-1 / 2 years . because of faa's contention that some of its modernization problems were caused by federal acquisition regulations , the congress enacted legislation in november 1995 that exempted the agency from most federal procurement laws and regulations and directed faa to develop and implement a new acquisition management system that would address the unique needs of the agency . on april 1 , 1996 , in response to the congress's action , faa implemented a new acquisition management system . the system is intended to reduce the time and cost to field new products and services by introducing ( 1 ) a new investment management system that spans the entire life cycle of an acquisition , ( 2 ) a new procurement system that provides flexibility in selecting and managing contractors , and ( 3 ) organizational and cultural reform that supports the new investment and procurement systems . the acquisition management system ( ams ) provides high - level acquisition policy and guidance for selecting and controlling faa's investments throughout all phases of the acquisition life cycle , which is organized into a series of phases and decision points , including ( 1 ) mission analysis , ( 2 ) investment analysis , ( 3 ) solution implementation , ( 4 ) in - service management , and ( 5 ) service life extension . ams provides guidance on the documents and decisions that result from each of these phases . for example , through the mission analysis process , faa identifies critical needs that the agency must meet for improving the safety , security , capacity , efficiency , and effectiveness of the nas . approval of a mission need statement by the joint resources council — faa's corporate decision - making body — signifies that the agency agrees that the need is critical enough to proceed to the next phase , investment analysis .