internal controls . management did not assert that irs controls were effective and we noted major weaknesses in recordkeeping and systems . compliance with laws and regulations . we were unable to test the laws we considered necessary ; accordingly , we are unable to report on the internal revenue service's compliance with laws and regulations . the report discusses irs' continuing financial management problems and certain related matters . it also contains our formal opinions and reports on irs' financial statements , internal controls , and compliance with laws and regulations and our audit objectives , scope , and methodology . we make no new recommendations in this report . appendix i describes the status of irs' efforts to implement the 59 recommendations we made in prior years . we are sending copies of this report to the commissioner of internal revenue , the secretary of the treasury , the director of the office of management and budget , the chairmen and ranking minority members of the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight , and other interested congressional committees . copies will be made available to others upon request . this report was prepared under the direction of gregory m. holloway , director , governmentwide audits , with the support of irs' internal audit staff and staff from the accounting and information management division's governmentwide audits group and audit support and quality assurance group . mr. holloway may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-9510 . charles a. bowsher comptroller general of the united states united states general accounting office washington , d.c. 20548 comptroller general of the united states to the commissioner of internal revenue in accordance with the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) prepared the accompanying principal financial statements for the fiscal years ended september 30 , 1995 and 1994 . in our attempt to audit these principal financial statements for fiscal year 1995 , we found the following . we are unable to give an opinion on the fiscal year 1995 principal financial statements of the irs because of the limitations on the scope of our work , which are discussed below . we are unable to report on compliance with laws and regulations because of limitations on the scope of our work . the following five financial management problems , which have undermined our ability to attest to the reliability of irs' financial statements for the past 4 fiscal years , provide the basis for these conclusions . one , the amounts of total revenue ( $1.4 trillion ) and tax refunds ( $122 billion ) cannot be verified or reconciled to accounting records maintained for individual taxpayers in the aggregate . two , the amounts reported for various types of taxes collected ( social security , income , and excise taxes , for example ) cannot be substantiated . three , the reliability of reported estimates of $113 billion for valid accounts receivable and $46 billion for collectible accounts receivable cannot be determined . four , a significant portion of irs' reported $3 billion in nonpayroll operating expenses cannot be verified .