we are encouraged by these statements . our intent was to neither advocate a particular tool nor to ignore the value of expert judgment in deriving software cost estimates . rather , our aim was to convince faa to follow accepted industry cost estimating practices of augmenting expert judgment with the kind of objective , verifiable analysis that structured estimating techniques and methods offer . and what features would you like to see ? on the basis of the 375 survey responses received and experience with the air force's airline safety analysis system , faa and vntsc generated an initial set of spas requirements . next , faa began validating and refining the requirements . first , faa , in collaboration with vntsc , held a series of group discussions and one - on - one visits with aircraft safety inspectors throughout the country . according to spas documentation , these discussions and visits allowed spas developers to see first - hand what the inspectors do on a daily basis and to listen to their ideas , thus giving the developers a keener understanding of the inspectors' needs and helping them to refine spas requirements accordingly . in october 1991 and december 1993 , two expert panels consisting of dozens of experienced aviation safety inspectors and members of the spas management team were established to determine whether users' needs were adequately being captured . these panels were charged with developing and recommending spas safety indicators and revalidating spas functional requirements . to further validate spas requirements , faa's next step was to implement the spas steering committee's recommendation to build a prototype system for users . system prototyping is an effective method of defining and refining user requirements . by quickly providing users with a system model ( that is , something less than the full complement of envisioned system features and functions ) with which to interact and react , prototyping allows needed adjustments to be made before making large investments in developing the final system . in our 1994 report on how leading organizations improved mission performance through strategic information management and technology , we noted that these organizations make effective use of rapid prototyping to minimize system risks and maximize benefits . the spas prototype evaluation focused on the effectiveness and ease of use of the user interface , the adequacy of source systems' data quality , and the impact of spas on inspectors' daily activities . in late 1993 , at the conclusion of the spas prototyping phase , faa was scheduled to discontinue prototype support . however , faa elected to continue the prototype to help in ongoing requirements refinement , early user familiarization with spas , and testing of new spas concepts . in march 1993 , faa issued order 1810.1f , which established its policy for initiating and managing acquisition programs like spas . prior to 1810.1f , the spas program office was following vntsc's information systems development guidelines for development and acquisition programs . the program office has elected to supplement the vntsc guidelines with order 1810.1f .