these problems are not confined to government . for example , a private company in texas was billed $25,000 in 1 month for improper calls and , by instituting minor controls over employee use of telephones , a major utility company in the southeast was able to reduce its telephone bill by over $60,000 per year . usda and its 29 component agencies spend over $100 million on telecommunications annually , including more than $50 million for commercial telecommunications services obtained from over 1,500 telephone companies . these companies provide local telephone service as well as international and domestic long - distance services that are not available on the fts 2000 network . usda headquarters offices and other usda agency and staff offices within the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area pay for over 24,000 separate telephone lines each month . the federal information resources management regulation governs use of telecommunications services for all government agencies and states that telephone calls paid for by the government shall be used to conduct official business only . unauthorized calls , which are calls that are not necessary in the interest of the government , are prohibited , and agencies are required to collect for any unauthorized calls if it is cost - effective to do so . usda's telecommunications policy ( dr - 3300-1 ) requires that usda agencies ensure that government - provided telephones are used only for official business and for calls the agency considers necessary . under dr - 3300-1 , the office of information resources management ( oirm ) is responsible for establishing policy and procedures for the management and cost control of telecommunication systems and each component agency and staff office is responsible for ensuring compliance with departmental policy and that government telephones are used for authorized purposes only in accordance with this policy . usda's chief financial officer ( cfo ) is responsible for overseeing all financial management activities relating to the programs and operations of the department , including managing usda's national finance center ( nfc ) . to assess usda's controls over telephone use , we examined usda's policies and procedures governing the use of government telephones . we also obtained and reviewed commercial telephone billing records for usda agency offices in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area for 4 months in fiscal year 1995 , which totaled about $580,000 or 1 percent of the $50 million usda spends annually for commercial telecommunications costs . the 4 months were selected from early , mid , and late parts of the fiscal year to adjust for any seasonal variations in calling patterns , and we reviewed billing records of all collect calls accepted by the department during the 4 months as well as selected long - distance calls made during the month of august 1995 . in cases where billing records disclosed instances of telephone abuse , we discussed these cases with usda officials and telephone company representatives and provided billing records of the calls to usda officials for appropriate action . we also discussed cases involving collect calls from prisons with correctional facility personnel and usda officials .