id . at 458 – 465 ( president's privacy interest in private documents and tape recorded conversations outweighed by limited intrusion by archivists to separate private from non - private materials , the lack of an alternative for separating private from other materials , the public interest in preserving historical materials mixed with private materials , and other factors ) ; nixon v. freeman , 670 f.2d 346 , 354 , 362-3 ( d.c. cir . 1982 ) , cert . denied , 459 u.s. 1035 ( 1982 ) ( president's privacy interest in tape recorded conversations and in tape recorded diaries outweighed by limitations on proposed intrusions and other factors ) ; dellums v. powell , 642 f.2d 1351 , 1354 , 1362-3 ( d.c. cir . 1980 ) ( president's common law privacy interests entitled to considerable measure of deference by courts , but may be outweighed by competing interests ) . the power of congress to investigate and obtain records in aid of its investigation is as broad as its power to legislate . mcgrain v. daugherty , 273 u.s. 173 ( 1926 ) . when the executive branch withholds information from congress based on an assertion of presidential privacy or other protected interest , the courts have balanced this interest against the congressional need for the information . see , eg , united states v. at&t , 567 f.2d 121 ( d.c. cir . 1977 ) , in which the court sought to balance the congress' interest in assuring the proper expenditure of appropriated funds and the executive branch's interest in protecting the national security ( requests from fbi to at&t for warrantless wiretaps ) . seeking workload information — how many people are staying overnight — for a taxpayer funded establishment , the executive residence , by the relevant subcommittee of the house committee on appropriations is clearly a suitable congressional inquiry . see united states v. at&t , 551 f.2d 384 , 393 ( d.c. cir . there is no allegation that congress is seeking to “expose for the sake of exposure,” id . ; in fact , the request is tailored to include aggregate numbers of executive residence guests and stays — not the identification of personal visitors or other private information . it is also significant that the intrusion here is at most minimal . gao has proposed that it would not remove copies or original documents from the white house premises , but would merely use the materials to determine aggregate numbers . gao's record of protecting confidential information is exemplary ; careful observation of confidentiality restrictions is necessary for gao to do its work . finally , access to what the white house considers “private” materials is only necessary if they are the only source for the requested information . it is important to make clear the authority under which gao is performing the review of overnight guests and stays at the executive residence . as previously stated , your request asked gao to conduct several assignments . the first — an audit of five categories of unvouchered expenditures of the president and the vice president — is conducted pursuant to sections 105 ( d ) and 106 ( b ) of title 3 , united states code .