we disagree . by any measure , the problems we identified are material financial and management control weaknesses . the problems discussed in this report are so pervasive that they resulted in qualified opinions by va's office of the inspector general on va's financial statements for both fiscal years 1997 and 1998 . the $3 billion in loans and va - owned property and $9 billion in potential liability on loan sales represent guaranteed loans previously serviced by private lenders that went into default and were acquired by va. va now bears the primary responsibility for insuring prudent management of these assets , in an effort to recoup losses and to preclude additional losses on the properties for which loans were originally guaranteed . va stated that it had initiated a number of corrective actions . in our report , we recognize that va is taking good first steps to correct these problems , and our recommendations for improvements are intended to assist the agency in attaining the level of accountability and control envisioned in the growing body of financial and program management legislation . va did not concur with our recommendation that it test the validity of contractor billings for property taxes paid on va's behalf . va stated that its portfolio loan oversight unit uses the property management system to verify these payments . we agree that verifying va ownership of property in order to determine whether va had any responsibility for taxes on individual properties is a good first step . however , the thrust of our recommendation is that va verify that amounts paid for property taxes were accurate . as pointed out in our report , va could accomplish this by obtaining tax data through readily available means . the verification could be accomplished efficiently by testing selected transactions that provided a statistically valid sample . verifying the amounts in sample transactions would provide adequate assurance that the billings from the contractor were reasonable . finally , va pledged to modify its processes to adhere to cash management principles established in federal legislation and other guidance . it did not take issue with our view that federal law does not authorize va to contractually or otherwise permit the contractor to retain interest earned by depositing federal collections in the contractor's account . regarding the matter of recouping of interest earned by the contractor , va neither concurred nor disagreed with our recommendation , stating that its general counsel is reviewing the issue of recoupment . we are sending copies of this report to senator arlen specter , senator ted stevens , senator robert c. byrd , senator fred thompson , senator joseph lieberman , senator john d. rockefeller iv , representative c. w. bill young , representative lane evans , iii , representative bob stump , representative david obey , representative dan burton , and representative henry a. waxman in their capacities as chairmen or ranking minority members of senate and house committees . we are also sending copies to togo d. west , jr. , secretary of veterans affairs , the honorable jacob j. lew , director of the office of management and budget , and the honorable joseph thompson , under secretary for benefits of the department of veterans affairs .