op . provides continued support for the coast guard's existing microcomputer infrastructure . op . provides a consolidated accounting and pay system . in doing so , this phase helps ensure that the organization ( 1 ) selects those it projects that will best support mission needs and ( 2 ) identifies and analyzes a project's risks and returns before spending a significant amount of project funds . a critical element of this phase is that a group of senior executives makes project selection and prioritization decisions based on a consistent set of decision criteria that compares costs , benefits , risks , and potential returns of the various it projects . key question: what controls are you using to ensure that the selected projects deliver the projected benefits at the right time and the right price ? once the it projects have been selected , senior executives periodically assess the progress of the projects against their projected cost , schedule , milestones , and expected mission benefits . the type and frequency of the reviews associated with this monitoring activity are usually based on the analysis of risk , complexity , and cost that went into selecting the project and that are performed at critical project milestones . if a project is late , over cost , or not meeting performance expectations , senior executives decide whether it should be continued , modified , or canceled . steps of the control phase use a set of performance measures to monitor the developmental progress for each it project to identify problems . take action to correct discovered problems . key question: based on your evaluation , did the system deliver what was expected ? the evaluation phase provides a mechanism for constantly improving the organization's it investment process . the goal of this phase is to measure , analyze , and record results , based on the data collected throughout each phase . senior executives assess the degree to which each project met its planned cost and schedule goals and fulfilled its projected contribution to the organization's mission . the primary tool in this phase is the postimplementation review ( pir ) , which should be conducted once a project has been completed . pirs help senior managers assess whether a project's proposed benefits were achieved and refine the it selection criteria . the following sections briefly describe the information technology management processes at each of the five agencies we reviewed . these descriptions are intended to characterize the general workings of the agency processes at the time of our review . we used the selection / control / evaluation model ( as summarized in appendix iii and described in detail in omb's evaluating information technology investments: a practical guide ) as a template for describing each agency's it management process . the coast guard had an it investment process used to select it projects for funding . it project proposals were screened , evaluated , and ranked by a group of senior irm managers using explicit decision criteria that took into account project costs , expected benefits , and risk assessments .