modify interfaces . validation - test , verify , and validate converted or replaced platforms , systems , databases , and utilities . test the performance , functionality , and integration of converted or replaced platforms , systems , databases , utilities , and interfaces in an environment that faithfully represents the operational environment . implementation - implement converted or replaced platforms , systems , databases , utilities , and interfaces . implement any and all contingency plans needed . we also assessed state's efforts against our year 2000 business continuity and contingency planning guide , which was issued as an exposure draft in march 1998 . the guide provides a conceptual framework for helping large agencies manage the risk of potential year 2000-induced disruptions to their operations . like our assessment guide , it offers a structured approach for reviewing the adequacy of agency year 2000 business continuity and contingency planning efforts . to determine the overall status of state's year 2000 program , we analyzed the department of state's year 2000 database , which includes data collected on a monthly basis from all of state's bureaus , for four separate reporting periods: august 1997 , december 1997 , march 1998 , and may 1998 . state uses this database to track and measure program progress . we also reviewed the status reports state provided to the office of management and budget ( omb ) on a quarterly basis . to determine how state's bureaus were implementing department policy and managing their year 2000 program efforts , we interviewed year 2000 coordinators at bureaus including consular affairs , financial management and planning , personnel , diplomatic security , and information management . we met with officials from the diplomatic telecommunications service program office to determine what steps they were taking to ensure that telecommunications systems were year 2000 compliant . we also reviewed internal state documents and reviews . we conducted our work from april 1997 through july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested written comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of state or her designee . adsystech is also responsible for collecting and analyzing data on the remediation process , and coordinating technical matters between state department management and individual bureaus . using its assessment methods , state has identified a total of 262 systems , 64 mission critical and 198 nonmission critical . state has also determined that 40 mission - critical systems need to be remediated — 27 of these need to be replaced and 13 need to be converted . in addition , state reports that 146 nonmission - critical systems need to be converted , replaced , or retired . details of state's assessment of its systems , as reported for may 1998 , are shown in table 2 . state's progress in remediating systems has been inadequate . of the 40 systems state has identified as mission - critical and is either converting or replacing , only 17 ( about 42.5 percent ) have completed renovation , 11 have completed validation , and only two have completed implementation .