va concurred with our recommendation . to formulate an approach for developing an integrated architecture , va in march 1997 established an architecture team consisting of representatives from va's office of information resources management , vba and vha . this team issued a report to the va cio council in may 1997 adopting the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) five - layer model for its departmentwide information technology architecture . the five layers — business processes , information flows and relationships , applications processing , data descriptions , and technology — provide a framework for defining an information technology architecture . va can use this model to help it document the baseline architecture , identify a target architecture , and develop a migration plan showing how the department will make the necessary transition from its existing architecture to the target architecture . despite the va architecture team's efforts , va does not yet have a departmentwide target architecture and migration plan . while a baseline architecture has been established , va has not addressed key aspects of the target architecture , such as information flows , data descriptions , and common technical standards that would apply to vba , vha , and ncs . according to va's cio , the department has not addressed these aspects because it is waiting for the strategic management steering committeeto take a position on the proposal to develop a departmentwide target architecture and establish a program office to implement the architecture and related efforts , including business process reengineering and customer service improvements . while information technology represents $625 million or 80 percent of va's proposed $786 million capital investment budget for fiscal year 1999 , the department lacks an effective process for selecting , controlling , and evaluating its information technology projects as investments . va's newly developed selection process , used for the first time in the fiscal year 1999 budget cycle , is incomplete , undisciplined , and does not satisfy the selection process requirements specified in the clinger - cohen act . for example , decisionmakers did not have adequate information pertaining to project cost , benefits , risk , and performance measures to make well - informed decisions . also , va's process for monitoring and controlling its investment portfolio was incomplete and provided little information to va decisionmakers reviewing ongoing projects . finally , va's process for evaluating completed projects did not include reviews to ( 1 ) determine the causes of major differences between actual and expected results in terms of cost , schedule , and performance , and ( 2 ) revise investment processes on the basis of lessons learned . this report provides the results of our review . the clinger - cohen act and other related legislative reforms provide guidance on how va and other agencies should plan , manage , and acquire information technology as part of their overall information resources management responsibilities . they also require federal agencies to appoint chief information officers ( cios ) responsible for providing leadership in the acquisition and management of information resources .