customs commented on a draft of this report . these comments are discussed in the agency comments section and are reprinted in appendix ii . customs' responsibility includes ( 1 ) enforcing the laws governing the flow of goods and persons across the borders of the united states and ( 2 ) assessing and collecting duties , taxes , and fees on imported merchandise . as of march 1996 , customs had spent $25 million on ace . customs plans to begin deploying ace in october 1998 . finally , until ace is deployed , customs plans to enhance its existing import processing system — the automated commercial system — which operates in the existing centralized computing environment , to provide selected ncap - mandated functions critical to meeting agency and trade community needs . for example , customs is modifying this system to allow importers to file documentation at a port of entry other than where the goods are to arrive or be examined . rather than wait for this function to be deployed with ace , customs plans to add this function to ( 1 ) facilitate inspections and import processing and ( 2 ) reduce the importers' administrative burden by eliminating the need of having importer staff at the port of entry . customs is currently testing this capability with seven importers at selected locations . customs is also enhancing its current automated commercial system to provide electronic filing capabilities for drawback claims . to date , customs has modified the system to enable electronic ( 1 ) filing of such claims by the trade community and ( 2 ) comparison of key information on drawback claims to the original import entries . this board consists of senior officials who represent the import process and related systems . however , while the board's charter makes it accountable for the redesigned import process , it does not establish accountability for successfully implementing ncap . customs' deputy commissioner agreed that the agency needs to assign accountability and requisite authority to ensure that the functions mandated in ncap are successfully implemented . customs recognizes that it ( 1 ) cannot afford to fail in its effort to redesign and automate critical ncap processes and ( 2 ) needs to make a more concentrated effort to implement best practices . however , customs has not assigned responsibility for ensuring that ncap is successfully implemented . further , customs has no assurance that continued buying of cdc - 2000 equipment is the best way to accomplish its mission or that the hardware selected for ace and other systems is appropriate . customs is in the early stages of its modernization and has time to implement these best practices . while customs is starting to take corrective action , the agency is at serious risk and vulnerable to failure until such action is completed . we recommend that , prior to additional cdc - 2000 equipment purchases ( except those for office automation needs ) and before beginning to develop any applications software that will run on this equipment , the commissioner of customs should: assign accountability and responsibility for implementing ncap .