additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . hud initiated a number of reforms and downsizing efforts in the 1990s . in february 1993 , then secretary cisneros initiated a “reinvention” process under which task forces were established to review and refocus hud's mission and identify improvements in the delivery of program services . hud also took measures in response to the national performance review's september 1993 report , which recommended that hud eliminate its regional offices , realign and consolidate its field office structure , and reduce its field workforce . following a july 1994 report by the national academy of public administration that criticized hud's performance and capabilities , secretary cisneros issued a reinvention proposal in december 1994 that called for major reforms , including a consolidation and streamlining of hud's programs coupled with a reduction in staff . building upon the earlier reinvention efforts , secretary cuomo initiated the 2020 planning process in early 1997 to address , among other things , hud's downsizing goals and management deficiencies . hud has taken important steps to strengthen its internal controls and financial reporting , improve its information and financial management systems , consolidate its operations , and appropriately deploy and train its staff . while hud has initiated actions under the 2020 management reform plan that could help to address its management deficiencies , the reforms are not fully implemented or it is too soon to assess their effectiveness . hud faces significant material internal control weaknesses , including weaknesses in the control structure intended to help ensure that rental assistance payments of $18 billion are based on accurate reports of tenants' incomes . as reform efforts are fully implemented , hud needs to ensure that the actions being taken under the 2020 reform plan and related efforts will address the remaining material internal control weaknesses . hud will continue to be adversely affected by inadequate systems and information until its systems integration efforts are successfully completed . in the meantime , we believe hud needs to strengthen its management and oversight of efforts to integrate its financial systems and the management of its information technology investments . in addition , hud needs to continue its efforts to bring nonconforming systems into conformance with fmfia requirements .