no official prioritization has yet been made . the program's annual report to the congress describes ongoing work in a number of technical areas , but does not prioritize among competing technical goals . for example , the annual report states that the five broad component areas of the program are considered equally important . within the new iita component , the document identifies a range of technologies that will be needed for the nii , but does not prioritize them or offer an overall strategy for developing them . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii . the federal high performance computing and communications ( hpcc ) program began in fiscal year 1992 as a joint effort among nine federal agencies to significantly accelerate the availability and utilization of the next generation of high performance computers and networks . the overall goals of the program are to extend u.s. technological leadership in high performance computing and provide wide dissemination and application of the technologies to speed the pace of innovation and to improve national economic competitiveness , national security , education , health care , and the global environment ; and provide key parts of the foundation for the national information infrastructure ( nii ) and demonstrate selected nii applications . four agencies — the advanced research projects agency ( arpa ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) — developed the original program plan for hpcc in 1989 , and they remain the program's dominant participants . in fiscal year 1995 these agencies together will spend more than $900 million , or 81 percent of the official budget . led by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , programs at each of these agencies were drawn together to form the governmentwide hpcc program . ten federal agencies currently participate in the hpcc program . ostp has designated the national science and technology council ( nstc ) to oversee the hpcc program , through its committee on information and communications . the nstc , a cabinet - level organization created by the president in november 1993 , is intended to serve , in part , as a mechanism for coordinating research and development strategies across the government and for monitoring agency research and development spending plans . since the nstc has only recently been established , it is still too early to gauge its impact on the hpcc program . table 1.1 presents an overview of reported hpcc spending to date and budgeted amounts for fiscal year 1995 by participating agency . the 1989 program plan laid out the original framework and parameters for the government's investment in hpcc , proposing that the program grow in even increments from a base of approximately $500 million to approximately $1.1 billion in its fifth year . in budgeting for the actual program , hpcc managers have adhered closely to these original targets . spending is anticipated to continue at over $1 billion annually until 1998 . to date , the hpcc program and its predecessor agency programs have been highly successful .