plans and supports unit deployments . also builds and maintains a database of force and equipment data on support assets and requirements . plans the routes and obtains permission to use state highways for truck convoys . provides shipment information on clearing or challenging air - eligible cargo , supports asset visibility , and performs cargo manifesting and transportation billing processes . performs passenger reservation services for amc , including flight and reservation processing and passenger processing . manages dod personal property movement and storage information . provides in - transit visibility of patients , monitors patient medical equipment pools , and plans transportation for patients . performs water port terminal management functions . denice m. millett , evaluator - in - charge michael w. buell , staff evaluator david r. solenberger , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . appendix i details our scope and methodology . defense provided written comments on a draft of this report . these comments are reprinted in appendix ii and are discussed in the agency comments and evaluation section of the report . defense relies on transportation services and information systems to help ensure that cargo , supplies , and people are conveyed to designated locations as quickly as possible during peace and war . information is needed to perform functions like deploying troops for wartime , packing and shipping cargo for transport , and drawing plans for ship loading . because today's defense strategies use fewer forward deployed troops and equipment , the transportation function and the information systems supporting it have become increasingly important . during fiscal year 1995 , the total cost of common - user defense transportation amounted to about $6 billion . for the same period , ustranscom spent approximately $164.5 million on information technology to support transportation services . while transportation is crucial to achieving u.s. military objectives , defense transportation business operations are very similar or identical , in some cases , to those of the commercial transportation industry . this commonality enables defense to rely on the commercial transportation industry to meet about 85 percent of its peacetime and wartime transportation needs . moreover , commercial transportation providers and port management authorities have developed or purchased their own automated information systems to perform many of the same functions as defense transportation performs , such as those for moving passengers , documenting and reporting on cargo , and operating sea and aerial ports .