these problems are discussed below . dod has acknowledged that its failure to develop policies and procedures has been one of the most significant weaknesses of the fund's implementation . in its september 1993 plan , dod identified several actions to address this problem . in december 1994 , dod completed and issued the financial management regulation ( fmr ) on the fund , which contains the fund's financial policies . this regulation is a major step toward standardizing the fund's operations . it consolidates all policies of the old industrial and stock funds , changes that have been made to those policies , and new policies that have been issued since the fund was established . however , confusion exists within dod regarding the need for implementing procedures to accompany the various policies that have been issued . as a result , the five policies that the deputy comptroller for financial systems stated were to be effective october 1 , 1994 , had not been implemented throughout dod as of january 1995 . according to dfas officials , they are responsible for developing implementing procedures for each fund policy approved by the dod comptroller . dfas' position is supported by a memorandum from the deputy comptroller for financial systems that states that dfas is developing accounting procedures as necessary to ensure the policies can be implemented . dod comptroller officials informed us that it was not necessary for dfas headquarters to develop implementing procedures because the fmr already contains them . the officials further stated that dod is trying to avoid the proliferation of procedures by dfas and its field activities so that the fund's policies will not be implemented inconsistently as a result of different interpretations , as has happened in the past . in fact , the improvement plan notes that the fund's financial reports reflect the results of applying policies inconsistently across business areas . given the october 1994 memorandum , other dod documents on fund policy implementation , and the opinion of dod comptroller officials , it is evident that dod has not resolved this issue . until it does so , the fmr may not be implemented in a timely manner . given the immense size , complexity , and scope of the fund's $77 billion operation , the need to complete the development of the policies and consistently implement them is particularly acute . until consistent implementation is achieved , the benefits of the new policies will not be realized . without standard policies and procedures , fund managers are forced to make their own interpretation regarding how to report on the respective operations of their business areas . therefore , it is imperative that dod put in place a process which will provide a mechanism for ensuring that fund policies are implemented in a timely , consistent manner . in addition to implementation issues discussed above , we have concerns about the provisions in several fund policies that dod has developed and approved thus far . these concerns are highlighted below and discussed in detail in appendix i. dod's policy requires that prior year losses be recovered by increasing the prices charged customers . dod increased fiscal year 1995 fund prices by $1.7 billion to recover prior year losses .