army guard soldiers . army guard soldiers in our case studies told us that they were confused about their responsibilities in the travel voucher reimbursement process because they had not been sufficiently trained in travel voucher processes related to mobilization . for example , prior to september 11 , 2001 , most travel guidance addressed the criteria for single trips or sequential trips and was not always clearly applicable to situations in which army guard soldiers could be authorized short intervals of travel for temporary duty at different locations within their longer term mobilization . this “overlapping travel” proved to be problematic for army guard soldiers trying to understand their travel voucher filing requirements and travel computation office examiners responsible for reviewing travel vouchers . in addition , we found indications that some soldiers were not aware of dod's requirement to complete a travel voucher within 5 days of the end of travel or the end of every 30-day period in cases of extended travel . for example , as shown in figure 5 , in our selection of 139 vouchers , 99 ( 71 percent ) of the army guard soldiers did not meet the 5-day requirement . for example , according to a dfas cto official , it took from 1 to 3 months for a voucher examiner to reach established standards . the dfas cto official told us that , in some cases , on - the - job training proved to be inadequate and contributed to travel reimbursement errors during this period . our work indicated that mistakes by dfas cto contributed to reimbursement problems . for example , our california case study indicated that 33 soldiers were initially underpaid a total of almost $25,000 for meals , lodging , and incidental expenses when personnel at dfas cto based travel cost calculations on an incorrect duty location and a corresponding incorrect per diem rate . although these soldiers eventually received the amounts they were due , the corrections took months to resolve . the lack of integrated and automated systems results in the existing inefficient , paper - intensive , and error - prone travel reimbursement process . specifically , the army does not have automated systems for some critical army guard travel process functions , such as preparation of travel vouchers , snas , and tcs orders , which precludes the electronic sharing of data by the various travel computation offices . in addition , system design flaws impede management's ability to comply with ttra , analyze timeliness of travel reimbursements , and take corrective action as necessary . the dod task force to reengineer travel stated in a january 1995 report that the travel process was inefficient because systems involved with travel authorizations were not integrated with systems involved with travel reimbursements . similarly , as we have reported and testified , decades - old financial management problems related to the proliferation of systems , due in part to dod components receiving and controlling their own information technology investment funding , result in the current fragmented , nonstandardized systems .