( see fig . similarly , states varied widely — from nearly 0 to about 45 percent — in the percentages of high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees' expenditures that were for non - institutional support services other than acute or long - term support services . these other support services include hospice benefits , private duty nursing , rehabilitative services , and targeted case management . about 17 percent of nationwide expenditures were for enrollees in this category . ( see fig . states also varied in the percentages of high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees' expenditures in other categories , if not as widely . states varied least — from 0 to 11 percent — in the percentage of expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees that were for psychiatric facility care , which accounted for about 2 percent of nationwide expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees . the percentage of a state's expenditures for high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees varied in other categories from 0 to 33 percent for acute care services,11 percent of nationwide expenditures ; 0 to 25 percent for prescription drugs , which accounted for 14 percent 0 to about 23 percent for long - term non - institutional support services,expenditures ; and which accounted for about 6 percent of nationwide 0 to 22 percent for long - term institutional care , 9 percent of nationwide expenditures . long - term institutional care includes nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities . see gao , medicaid: assessment of variation among states in per - enrollee spending , gao - 14-456 ( washington , d.c.: june 16 , 2014 ) , and gao , medicaid: alternative measures could be used to allocate funding more equitably , gao - 13-434 ( washington , d.c.: may 10 , 2013 ) . percentage of expenditures reported in the msis summary file that was attributable to prescription drugs was lower on average in states that included some or all drugs in the package of services provided by managed care plans than in states that paid for all drugs on a fee - for - service basis , and the three states in which the share of expenditures that went to drugs was lowest — arizona , hawaii , and new mexico — included all drugs in their managed care packages . states vary widely in the distribution of their expenditures among service categories ; for state - by - state information about the percentage of high - expenditure medicaid - only enrollees' expenditures for selected categories of services in fiscal year 2011 , see appendix v . hhs reviewed a draft of this report and provided technical comments , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of hhs and other interested parties . the report also will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staffs have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report .