pt . in addition , we used gao's standards for internal control in the federal government and internal control management and evaluation tool . we also reviewed prior work from dhs's office of the inspector general ( oig ) and gao on the dhs s&t directorate and ethics - related issues . we interviewed officials in the s&t directorate , including the deputy secretary for s&t and head of programs , plans , and budgets ( ppb ) ; director of the office of research and development ( ord ) ; acting director of the homeland security advanced research projects agency ( hsarpa ) ; s&t portfolio managers , five of whom were employed by dhs on ipa agreements from the national laboratories ; and the human capital director for s&t . we did not interview the director of systems , engineering , and development ( sed ) because sed works with mature technologies at or near the deployment stage , rather than technologies needing r&d by an entity like the national laboratories . more specifically , we examined the role of the ipa portfolio managers from the national laboratories in determining where r&d projects and associated funds were directed during the period from december 2004 through may 2005 . in addition , we interviewed dhs's designated agency ethics officer , attorneys in dhs's general counsel's office , and dhs's oig . we judgmentally selected two portfolios within the s&t directorate to examine in more detail the existence of their process and management controls and compare any differences in the application of such processes and controls . these portfolios were: ( 1 ) the biological countermeasures portfolio , which is the largest portfolio in the s&t directorate and is run by an ipa ; and ( 2 ) the border and transportation security ( bts ) portfolio , a smaller portfolio managed by a career federal employee . we interviewed the members of these integrated project teams , which included representatives of ppb , hsarpa , ord and sed . in addition , we reviewed the fiscal years 2004 and 2005 execution plans for the biological countermeasures portfolio , the fiscal year 2004 execution plan for the bts portfolio , and the fiscal year 2004 bts portfolio funding allocations by type of entity . ( eg , national laboratory , university , private industry , etc. ) we also met with the acting director of the office of government ethics ( oge ) and her staff to discuss the ethics issues we were reviewing at dhs . oge exercises leadership in the executive branch to prevent conflicts of interest on the part of government employees and to resolve those conflicts of interest that do occur . the responsibilities of the director of oge include , among other things , consulting with agency ethics counselors and other responsible officials regarding the resolution of conflict of interest problems in individual cases , and ordering corrective action on the part of agencies and employees which the director deems necessary . written comments from dhs are included in appendix iii . we performed our work from september 2004 through december 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .