we continue to believe that it should do so . we found in our september 2017 report that nnsa had not developed a complete scope of work , a life - cycle cost estimate , or an integrated master schedule for its overall uranium program — of which the uranium processing facility is only one part — and had no time frame for doing so . we recommended that nnsa should set a time frame for when the agency would develop a complete scope of work , a life - cycle cost estimate , and an integrated master schedule for the overall uranium program . nnsa generally agreed with our recommendation and has taken actions to respond to it . we expect to issue a report on the uranium processing facility and nnsa's plans for its uranium program in march 2020 . as we reported in february 2020 , the plutonium program has begun to develop a schedule for pit production . however , nnsa allows strategic materials programs such as the plutonium program to tailor their approach to developing schedules and does not require that they meet best practices for schedule estimating . we recommended that nnsa ensure that the plutonium program develop a schedule for pit production consistent with best practices for schedule development . nnsa agreed with our recommendation . our ongoing work includes reviews of nnsa's management of other efforts essential to ongoing weapon modernization programs , such as the production of radiation - hardened microelectronics at sandia national laboratories in new mexico and of depleted uranium at the y - 12 national security complex in tennessee . nnsa's weapon modernization programs and enabling infrastructure efforts have significant interdependencies that require integrated management across the portfolio of programs to effectively manage cost , schedule , and risk . portfolio management best practices developed by the project management institute state that organizations can optimize their portfolios of programs and projects by assessing their capability and capacity to finance specific portfolio components ; determining which portfolio components should receive the highest priority ; and identifying components to be suspended , reprioritized , or terminated . in our april 2017 report on nnsa's budget materials and modernization plans , we found that nnsa did not clearly identify the extent to which its long - range budget estimates for its overall modernization program fell short of specific annual budget requests anticipated in this plan . we concluded that nnsa had not addressed the projected bow wave of future funding needs and the mismatch between those needs and the potential funding available in the years in question . by not addressing the risks associated with the potential funding shortfall , we concluded , nnsa raised questions about its ability to achieve its modernization program goals at cost and on schedule . as a result , as discussed above , we recommended that nnsa include an assessment of the affordability of its portfolio of modernization programs in future versions of the stockpile stewardship and management plan — for example , by presenting options nnsa could consider to bring its estimates of modernization funding needs into alignment with potential future budgets , such as potentially deferring the start of or canceling specific modernization programs . nnsa did not explicitly agree or disagree with our recommendation .