jwst . the jwst project continues to make progress towards launch , but the program is encountering technical challenges that require both time and money to fix and may lead to additional delays , beyond a delay recently announced . while the project has made much progress on hardware integration and testing over the past several months , it also used all of its remaining schedule reserves to address various technical issues , particularly on the spacecraft element . in september 2017 , the jwst project requested from the european space agency — who will contribute the ariane v launch vehicle — a launch window from march to june 2019 , or 5 to 8 months later than the planned october 2018 launch readiness date , established in 2011 . the project based this request on the results of a schedule risk assessment that incorporated inputs from the contractor on expected durations of ongoing spacecraft element integration work and other challenges that were expected to increase schedule . with the later launch window to june 2019 , the project expected to have up to 4 months of new schedule reserves . however , shortly after requesting the revised launch window , the project learned from its contractor that up to another 3 months of schedule reserve use is likely , due to lessons learned from conducting deployment exercises of the sunshield , such as reach and access limitations on the flight hardware . as a result , and pending further examination of the schedule , the project now has approximately one month of schedule reserve to complete environmental testing of the spacecraft element and the final integration phase . the final integration phase is where the instruments and telescope will be integrated with the spacecraft and sunshield to form the completed observatory . as i previously noted , our work has shown the integration and test is the riskiest phase of development , where problems are most likely to be found and schedules slip . given the risks associated with the integration and test work ahead , coupled with a level of schedule reserves that is currently well below the level stated in the procedural requirements issued by the nasa center responsible for managing jwst , additional delays to the project's revised launch readiness date of june 2019 are likely . tess . the tess project is currently holding cost and schedule reserves consistent with nasa center requirements , but there are no longer headquarters - held cost reserves to cover a delay if the project cannot launch as planned in march 2018 . according to a project official , the project is holding 16 days of schedule reserve to its target march 2018 launch readiness date , which includes 6 days for the completion of integration and test , and 10 days for launch operations . the project previously used schedule reserves to accommodate the delayed delivery of its ka - band transmitter , which is essential for tess as it transmits the mission data back to earth , due to continued performance and manufacturing issues .