education . the primary goal of usaid's largest program in this sector is to improve access to quality education and mitigate challenges to youth development in marginalized areas of the west bank . according to usaid , since september 2015 , the usaid mission has reorganized its work along three new lines: ( 1 ) governance and civic engagement ; ( 2 ) water , energy , and trade ; and ( 3 ) social services and humanitarian assistance . in march 2006 , the usaid west bank and gaza mission approved and issued various antiterrorism policies and procedures for program assistance for the west bank and gaza in a document known as mission order 21 , which it last updated in october 2007 . in 2008 , the usaid mission developed a key compliance review process to monitor compliance with antiterrorism policies and procedures . this process is reflected in formal mission notices . in response to federal laws and executive orders prohibiting assistance to entities or individuals associated with terrorism , in march 2006 , the usaid mission adopted a key administrative policy document known as mission order 21 . the stated purpose of mission order 21 , last amended in 2007 , is to describe policies and procedures to ensure that the mission's program assistance does not inadvertently provide support to entities or individuals associated with terrorism . such procedures include ( 1 ) vetting , ( 2 ) obtaining antiterrorism certifications , and ( 3 ) including specific mandatory provisions in award documents . mission order 21 is intended to balance development efforts in the west bank and gaza with ensuring that the assistance does not benefit entities or individuals who engage in terrorist activity , according to a senior usaid official . the vetting requirements in mission order 21 apply to certain contractors and subcontractors , recipients of grants and cooperative agreements , trainees / students , and recipients of cash or in - kind assistance , with some exceptions . all program awards are required to have a reference to mission order 21 , according to usaid . mission order 21 requires that certain individuals and non - u.s. organizations undergo vetting , which involves checking their names and other identifying information against databases and other sources to determine if they have any identified links to terrorism . non - u.s. organizations are cleared by vetting their key individuals regardless of nationality , including u.s. citizens . the vetting process provides reasonable assurance that program assistance is “not provided to or through any individual , private or government entity , or educational institution that is believed to advocate , plan , sponsor , engage in , or has engaged in , terrorist activity.” applicable vetting is required before an award is made or assistance is provided . appendix ii provides more detailed information on usaid's vetting process . mission order 21 vetting requirements mission order 21 requires usaid's west bank and gaza mission to vet the following: all non - u.s. prime awardee and subawardee organizations or individuals proposed for a contract or subcontract above $25,000 . the $25,000 threshold is cumulative for multiple awards to the same organization or individual within a rolling 12-month period .