gao - 06-576r . washington , d.c.: march 28 , 2006 . we clarified the report in this regard . dhs agreed with our recommendation regarding the need to coordinate with regulatory agencies such as usda and fda in advance to prevent the receipt of items that could not be distributed in the united states . dhs noted that fema coordinated with these agencies during hurricane katrina , and made constant requests to dos to obtain more information from the donors about the donations to determine whether or not they could be properly accepted . we agree that more specificity is needed about the nature and content of items the united states can accept and foreign nations are offering through dos channels , such as mres , and reflected dhs's comment in the final report . without such information , it may not be possible to undertake appropriate coordination with regulatory agencies such as usda and fda and make a sound determination as to whether the items should be accepted and could be used in the united states before they arrive . dhs also agreed that all foreign military offers of assistance for domestic disasters should be coordinated through dos for official acceptance or denial . however , we continue to believe that clear procedures are needed regarding which agency — fema or dod — accepts and maintains oversight of such donations in advance . we adjusted our draft report to reflect the apparent confusion over the acceptance of foreign military donations . we also received technical comments from dos , dod , usaid / ofda , fema , fda , and usda , which we incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of homeland security , defense , and state and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / www.gao.gov . please contact davi m. d'agostino at ( 202 ) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao.gov or mccoy williams at ( 202 ) 512-9095 or williamsm1@gao.gov if your staff have any questions concerning this report . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv .