additional appropriations . in fiscal year 2009 , doe received a $5 million appropriation to carry out a remedial action of the highway 160 site . the 2008 5-year plan included a target for assessing the site and identifying the best path forward , but not for completing cleanup at the site . according to doe and nnepa officials involved with the project , having the resources available to fund assessment and cleanup work allowed the agencies to move forward and complete the cleanup more quickly than they had anticipated . moreover , nnepa and doe also used the appropriated funds to begin to address recently discovered , contaminated structures in the area of the highway 160 site and the nearby rare metals processing site . in addition , atsdr officials we spoke with said they would not have been able to fund the navajo birth cohort study without additional appropriations for such research . these officials said atsdr received an increase of $2 million in funding for fiscal year 2010 to begin the study , and that the agency has subsequently put that amount toward the study . leveraging funding from private , potentially responsible parties and other federal agencies . for example , ihs has two staff members who engage with communities on uranium issues , in addition to their other responsibilities , and doe has one staff member who performs outreach activities in addition to her site management responsibilities . the navajo abandoned mine lands reclamation / umtra department's public affairs staff , under the umtra program's cooperative agreement with doe , has engaged navajo communities to discuss concerns about former processing sites located on the reservation . according to epa officials , the agency was able to complete some of the work that went beyond the targets in the 2008 5-year plan , including conducting the interim time - critical removal actions at the quivira mine and others , because of funding that came from private , potentially responsible parties . specifically , epa issued an administrative order to one of the former operators of the quivira mine to conduct and pay for the interim removal action . in addition , epa and nnepa used funds from a bankruptcy settlement with another potentially responsible party to pay for the interim actions at three other mines or mine - related sites . typically , according to our 2009 cost estimating and assessment guide , an estimate should be revised and contain more detail as the agency obtains more site - specific information and the effort becomes better defined , and the estimate should become more certain as actual costs begin to replace earlier estimates . for example , as epa obtains more detailed information about the site - specific characteristics at each of the highest priority mines , it would be able to update the scope of its estimate , bringing more certainty . according to our 2009 cost estimating and assessment guide and our 2012 schedule assessment guide , agencies can also create high - level schedules that are linked to cost estimates , based on stated assumptions , and that incorporate uncertainties regarding future activities through a schedule risk analysis .