attorneys . one of eousa's key responsibilities is managing the usaos' it resources , including preparing their annual it budget submissions and supporting their acquisition and maintenance of it assets . it plays an important role in helping the usaos meet their mission objectives and , according to eousa planning documents , the usaos' reliance on it is to increase in response to expected growth in the number and complexity of their cases . currently , eousa manages an it environment consisting of central and distributed computing and communication resources in washington , d.c. , and 93 usaos , respectively . connectivity among these offices , justice headquarters , and justice's data center in rockville , md , is through a virtual private network ( vpn ) connection on the justice consolidated network ( jcn ) , with such security safeguards as firewalls between usao local area networks and jcn . the vpn / firewall combination , which provides the foundation for secure communications between eousa and the sites mentioned above , is currently being replaced . figure 1 generally depicts eousa's network topology . the usaos' support is also provided by such application systems as the legal information office network system , which is a case management system that compiles , maintains , and tracks information about defendants , crimes , criminal charges , court events , and witnesses , and the victim notification system , which notifies crime victims of the status of their cases and assists with checking compliance with regulations and policies concerning victim notification . recognizing the importance of it to achieving the usaos' mission , eousa appointed a chief information officer ( cio ) in may 2001 and assigned the cio accountability and responsibility for managing central and distributed it resources and services , including managing the it budget for the office and all of the usaos ; developing and acquiring new systems , including case management systems , and providing support for existing systems ; managing network , telephone , and video communications ; and securing it assets ( data , applications , and supporting networks ) . in fiscal year 2003 , eousa reports that it plans to spend approximately $125 million on about 20 initiatives . roughly $110 million of this amount is to be spent on it infrastructure and office automation projects ( eg , telecommunications programs ) . the remainder is to be spent on acquiring mission support systems ( eg , enterprise case management system ( ecms ) , victim notification system ) and maintaining existing ones . figure 2 shows the breakdown of estimated expenditures for fiscal year 2003 . research into the it management practices that are employed by leading public - and private - sector organizations has identified key institutional it management disciplines that are interrelated and critical to ensuring , among other things , the integrity , security , and efficiency of it systems . these disciplines are also addressed in legislation and federal guidance . 1. enterprise architecture management , which involves defining , maintaining , and implementing an institutional blueprint that defines both the business and the supporting technology of the organization's current and target operating environments and a roadmap to achieve the target environment ; 2 .