( see fig . serious accidents resulting in injuries , deaths , and property damage continue to occur . my remarks center on work we have recently completed on fra's overall safety oversight strategy . specifically , we examined how fra ( 1 ) focuses its efforts on the highest priority risks related to train accidents in planning its safety oversight , ( 2 ) identifies safety problems on railroad systems in carrying out its oversight , and ( 3 ) assesses the impact of its oversight efforts on safety . our findings are discussed in more detail in our report , which was released last week . our work was based on a review of laws , regulations , and fra plans and guidance as well as discussions with fra officials and with a range of external stakeholders , including railroads , unions , and state railroad safety organizations . we reviewed fra inspection and enforcement data for 1996 through 2005 . in addition , we examined risk management principles and safety oversight approaches used by other modal administrations within the department of transportation and other organizations that have similar safety missions in order to determine their possible application to fra . our work focused on fra oversight efforts to reduce the rate of train accidents rather than those to reduce highway - rail crossing and trespassing accidents because ( 1 ) the department of transportation's inspector general has recently assessed efforts to reduce highway - rail crossing accidents and ( 2 ) trespassing accidents primarily involve issues not related to railroad safety performance . as part of our review , we assessed internal controls and the reliability of the data elements needed for this engagement and determined that the data elements were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . it also can help in ensuring that the most appropriate alternatives to prevent or mitigate the effects of hazards are designed and implemented . a framework for risk management based on industry best practices and other criteria that we have developed divides risk management into five major phases: ( 1 ) setting strategic goals and objectives , and determining constraints ; ( 2 ) assessing risks ; ( 3 ) evaluating alternatives for addressing these risks ; ( 4 ) selecting the appropriate alternatives ; and ( 5 ) implementing the alternatives and monitoring the progress made and results achieved . other transportation oversight organizations have developed and implemented approaches for overseeing industries' overall management of safety risks . the remainder of these inspections ( 14 percent ) consisted of other types of activities , such as investigations of accidents and complaints . this approach to oversight enables fra inspectors and managers to identify a wide range of safety problems . inspectors identify specific compliance problems — conditions that do not meet fra's standards — at sites they visit by citing defects . phmsa requires that pipeline operators develop “integrity management” programs to manage risk in areas — such as those that are densely populated — where leaks or ruptures could have the greatest impact on public safety and inspects operators' compliance with these requirements .