determination process is complete . as summarized in table 2 , of the 10 plans with the greatest number of overpayments , 9 also had large numbers of participants , including many who were subject to the guarantee limits and who were retired and receiving estimated benefits . in addition , all these plans had assets or recoveries allocated to pay some , but not all , of retirees' nonguaranteed benefits , which are generally some of the first nonguaranteed benefits to be paid from the allocation process — before , for example , future retirees' nonguaranteed benefits . according to pbgc officials , uncertainty about how much a plan's assets or recoveries will be able to contribute toward a retiree's benefit that the agency does not guarantee , under law , can make it difficult to calculate an accurate benefit amount until the benefit determination process is complete . finally , a lengthy benefit determination process can exacerbate the impact of inaccurate estimates . the total overpayment can become substantial over a long period of time , even if the difference between the estimated and final monthly benefit amount is small . also , when plans are terminated involuntarily , there can sometimes be lengthy delays before pbgc reduces estimated benefits to reflect guarantee limits . among the 10 plans with the most overpayments , all were involuntary terminations , and we found that the length of time between plan termination and when estimated benefits were adjusted to reflect guarantee limits varied widely . in some cases , estimated benefits were adjusted within 9 months of termination , while in other cases , more than 6 years elapsed before estimated benefits were adjusted — and in general , the longer the delays , the larger the overpayments . in contrast , when plans are terminated at the sponsor's request as distress terminations , the sponsors are required to impose these limits themselves so that participants' benefits are reduced as of the date of termination . the following examples illustrate how the above circumstances can combine to create large numbers of cases with overpayments among some plans . we chose these two case examples from among the cases sampled in the 10 plans with the most overpayments to illustrate the two types of situations that can result in overpayments outlined previously: ( 1 ) delayed adjustment of the retiree's estimated benefit to reflect applicable limits ; and ( 2 ) timely , but inaccurate adjustment of the retiree's estimate to reflect applicable limits . we also chose these two case examples specifically because they had similar benefit amounts prior to termination .