conf . and omb staff . to determine how the dod components have implemented dod's conference policy , we identified the dod components' processes and procedures for approving conference requests and reporting conference costs . we also developed , administered , and analyzed responses to a combination of structured interviews and questionnaires completed by officials within dod components , including those at the major command - level in all four military services . we obtained 563 approved requests for conferences hosted by dod or attended by dod personnel in the second and third quarters of fiscal year 2013 and used a standardized checklist to assess whether the information identified by dod's september 2012 policy was included . we analyzed conference requests for this time period because the approval process established by dod's september 2012 policy was not fully implemented until the second quarter of fiscal year 2013 . further , conference requests for the fourth quarter of 2013 were not widely available during our review . also , we reviewed dod's fiscal year 2012 annual conference report and dod's quarterly conference reports for the first three quarters of fiscal year 2013 . we provide additional information about our detailed scope and methodology in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2013 to january 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . beginning in 2011 , omb issued one of two memorandums establishing oversight requirements for conferences as part of a larger effort to help promote efficient spending in executive agencies . first , in september 2011 , omb issued a memorandum directing all executive agencies and departments to conduct a thorough review of the policies and controls associated with conference - related activities and costs , and report to omb on the results . further , omb's memorandum required that all conference - related activities and costs be approved by the deputy secretary until he or she could certify that the appropriate policies and controls were in place for mitigating the risk of inappropriate spending practices regarding conferences . then in may 2012 , omb issued a second memorandum to executive agencies and departments , outlining new policies for conference sponsorship , hosting , and attendance . this memorandum states that conference costs should be appropriate , necessary , and managed in a manner that minimizes costs to taxpayers . omb's may 2012 memorandum , among other requirements , outlines a series of new policies and practices to ensure that federal funds are used appropriately on conference - related activities and that agencies reduce spending on conferences when practicable . these policies include the initiation of deputy secretary - level review of all planned conferences costing more than $100,000 each and of all future conferences estimated to cost more than $100,000 each . during these reviews , agencies also should ensure that conference attendance and costs are limited to the levels required to carry out the mission of the conference .