navy . navy officials reported having particular difficulty finding data on transportation costs for the most recent rate review . after unsuccessfully requesting more specific guidance or assistance from dsca and dfas , according to navy officials , navy found a spreadsheet dsca had provided navy for an unrelated purpose that contained the costs for navy fms shipments moved by transcom's air mobility command . according to navy officials , because researching the individual transportation fees for each fms shipment was time - consuming and they lacked clear guidance about how much data dsca needed for its rate review , they decided to provide related fee data on 103 , or 3 percent , of the 3,536 air shipments for which navy had cost data . air force . the u.s. air force security assistance and cooperation directorate has developed a detailed process , described in a 280- page internal guidance document , to respond to dsca's requests , but following this process does not yield much data . for the most recent review , air force provided dsca with data for 639 , or 2 percent , of 28,886 shipment orders for which they reviewed data because of the difficulty of finding relevant matching cost and fee data across the different systems used , as shown in table 3 . not only were the data dsca reviewed not indicative of all fms shipments since they included no navy or air force data , the data were also not indicative of army's shipments and included older data because the dsca data requests were unclear . in particular , dsca's data requests stated that each military department should provide at least 20 cost and fee comparisons for each fee rate for each of the fms transportation accounts , and requested that these data include as many different foreign partners or fms cases as possible . as a result , according to army officials , the data army provided to dsca included a mix of different partners and cases of different dollar values ; however , no systematic sampling methods were used that would have ensured that the resulting data were indicative of overall army shipments during the time period covered . also , dsca's request did not specify a time period the data should cover . army provided data for cases that likely were at least 5 to 7 years old . according to dsca officials , if the rate review is to analyze case - level data , such as army provided , it is necessary to analyze data on cases for which the fms agreements were signed multiple years prior , because shipments may not take place until multiple years into cases . however , the army officials we spoke to about the data army provided were unaware how long ago the shipments occurred for the related cases , and stated that some may have occurred years before . transcom pricing changes annually , so cost information that is multiple years old and not adjusted to reflect such changes would be unlikely to predict future costs . as a result , dsca set rates to cover future costs based on a sample of cases that was not systematically sampled and may have included shipments over the past 5 or more years .