these teams report to the cmo . in august 2017 , the secretary of defense issued a memorandum authorizing its first cross - functional team in response to section 911 to address challenges with personnel vetting and background investigation programs . the memorandum notes that a backlog of background investigations affects dod's mission readiness , critical programs , and operations . according to the memorandum , this cross - functional team will conduct a full review of current personnel vetting processes to identify a redesigned process for dod's security , suitability and fitness , and credential vetting . dod can request waivers from the president for this requirement . the chief management officer ( cmo ) is leading the department's efforts to implement section 911 . section 911 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2017 also included a provision for us — every 6 months after the date of enactment on december 23 , 2016 , through december 31 , 2019 — to submit to the defense committees a report setting forth a comprehensive assessment of the actions that dod has taken pursuant to section 911 during each 6-month period and cumulatively since the ndaa's enactment . ocmo officials told us that they have not completed the strategy because they want to align it with the national defense strategy , which was issued in january 2018 , and the national defense business operations plan , which was issued in may 2018 . ocmo officials told us that , once the organizational strategy is reviewed internally to align with the national defense strategy and the national defense business operations plan , the cmo plans to coordinate the review and approval of the strategy across components within the department . we previously recommended , and dod concurred , that the cmo should obtain input on the development of the strategy from key stakeholders , such as the military departments and defense agencies . the officials estimated that dod components would have about 2 to 3 weeks to provide input on the strategy and that the strategy could be issued as early as july 2018 . we found that , consistent with our recent recommendations , a revised version of the draft organizational strategy addresses the requirements in section 911 , including outlining steps for advancing a collaborative culture within the department . in february 2018 , we found that the august 2017 version of the draft organizational strategy that we reviewed addressed the two required elements under section 911 , but did not outline how it would achieve several future outcomes that advance a collaborative culture within the department , as required by the ndaa . we recommended , and dod concurred , that the cmo should revise the organizational strategy to outline how it would achieve these outcomes and , in doing so , should consider our nine leading practices on mergers and organizational transformations . based on our review of a february 2018 version of the draft organizational strategy , we found that ocmo officials have taken steps to address our recommendation , including identifying potential action steps for the department that align with each of the nine leading practices .