general . research in this category includes efforts to synthesize information and identify broad applications of dispersant knowledge , such as improving dispersant decision making processes and educational efforts . for example , three agencies — the coast guard , bsee and noaa — provided funding for the 2005 national academy of sciences report . this report provided an expert evaluation of the adequacy of existing information and ongoing research regarding the effectiveness and effects of dispersants and recommended steps to be taken to better support policymakers with dispersant decision making . in addition , bsee funded three other general projects , including one that focused on developing a training package on the use of chemical dispersants for the ohmsett wave tank testing facility . another bsee project studied the operational and environmental factors associated with the use of chemical dispersants to treat oil spills in california waters , with a goal toward expediting dispersant use decision making and planning for such spills . in addition to federally funded dispersant research , the oil industry has funded a number of past and ongoing research projects related to the use and effects of chemical dispersants . these projects have been conducted collaboratively through industry trade associations or across multiple companies , by individual companies , and through an independent research initiative . according to industry representatives , the industry has committed over $20 million to fund american petroleum institute and international association of oil & gas producers' dispersant programs . these projects generally began in 2011 and are anticipated to end by 2016 . specifically , the american petroleum institute is currently leading a set of dispersant - related projects involving several oil companies and oil spill response organizations , among others . according to industry representatives , a significant part of this research will focus on the subsurface use of dispersants in deep water , ice - free environments . in addition , the international association of oil & gas producers is pursuing two dispersant research initiatives . one initiative — the oil spill response joint industry project — will focus on the fate and effects of subsurface dispersant use and the tracking and modeling of dispersed oil , among other things . a second initiative — the arctic oil spill response technology joint industry programme — includes research on dispersant use in the arctic . specifically , the dispersant portion of this project is investigating the fate and transport of chemically dispersed oil under ice and dispersant effectiveness testing in arctic environments , as well as the environmental impacts of arctic spills and options for responding to them . shell representatives told us that there are nine oil companies participating in the arctic research project , and that this project is building on earlier arctic research conducted by a norwegian research institute called sintef . individual oil companies , including exxonmobil and shell , have also invested in dispersant research projects together and separately . for example , shell , exxonmobil , statoil , british petroleum , and conocophillips have funded a project to study the biodegradation of physically and chemically dispersed oil and its toxicity on arctic species in alaska .