much has been done to facilitate the drawdown . dod has conducted detailed planning for the sequence of actions and associated resources necessary to mitigate risk and to achieve its goals of transferring and removing personnel and equipment from the remaining bases in iraq . in addition , dod has taken steps to improve its management and oversight of contracts in iraq by issuing new guidance , developing metrics and milestones for tracking key dates and progress , establishing a cell to provide a common operating picture for all contracts in iraq , and working to ensure a sufficient number of cors are available to conduct oversight . to help facilitate the transition to a civilian - led presence in iraq , dod has engaged in interagency coordination with state at various levels , and both agencies are working closely to coordinate the provision of equipment and services needed to support the transition . however , without taking further action in regards to its visibility over cmgo equipment and in tracking equipment that is brought to record during the completion of base transitions , dod may not be able to take advantage of further opportunities to reduce the likelihood of unanticipated requirements and to refine its drawdown projections . further , challenges dod faces in implementing its contractor demobilization guidance , including providing key information to contractors and ensuring robust contractor demobilization planning , may hinder the base transition process if contractors miss key dates or demobilize in a less than orderly fashion . finally , dod and state's ability to ensure a timely , coordinated approach to defining and implementing osc - i may suffer absent an official clarification on the scope of dod's activities in post - 2011 iraq in accordance with the anticipated engagement model and the extent to which all dod government personnel will receive status protections such as privileges and immunities , since dod may lack a status of forces or other agreement after december 31 , 2011 . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following four actions . to help ensure that dod will be able to complete the orderly and efficient retrograde and transfer of its equipment and transition of its bases in iraq by minimizing unanticipated requirements ,  direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , in conjunction with the secretary of the army and the commander , u.s. central command , to approve and implement , as appropriate , a process , to include associated policy and training , for acquiring and maintaining real - time visibility of cmgo equipment before it is delivered to the u.s. government that meets the needs of operational forces while retaining oversight features inherent to dod's current accountability processes ; and  direct the commander , u.s. forces - iraq take steps to collect accurate data on equipment that is found during the large base closure process but not recorded in any property book , and , as appropriate , refine the projection for equipment needing to be retrograded and transferred based on these data .