responsibility for quality is more diffused in the navy . program offices , navsea , supship , insurv , and others all have roles , and concerns about schedule , costs , or other strategic needs may supersede the focus on quality . while supship's quality assurance department is closest to the work being performed , the organization has limited authority to make or exert influence on the shipbuilder and on decisions made early in the contracting process that could have a direct impact on quality . the first ship was delivered in 1991 . currently , the navy has received funding to construct an additional four ships . despite being a well established program , the arleigh burke class continues to have a large number of open deficiencies at various points in time . we analyzed data provided by the supervisor of shipbuilding , conversion , and repair ( supship ) to determine the number of open deficiencies at delivery , 120 days after delivery , and one year after delivery . the applicable classification rule sets . upon completion of all requirements , abs issues a classification certificate . recognizing that it has experienced significant quality problems with several ship classes , the navy has focused on reducing the number of serious deficiencies , particularly “starred” deficiencies , which require a waiver from the chief of naval operations to defer correction until after delivery . the number of uncorrected deficiencies at delivery , including starred deficiencies , has generally dropped for ships delivered over the past few years due , at least in part , to the back to basics quality improvement initiative . even so , the navy still accepts some ships with large numbers of open deficiencies . navy policy states that ships are to be delivered based on acceptance trials and satisfactory correction or resolution of deficiencies . instead , correction of deficiencies is often deferred until after the navy accepts delivery of the ship , which can interfere with post - delivery activities . further , one product of the back to basics initiative , a quality management provision for inclusion in navy shipbuilding contracts , has not been implemented on any navy shipbuilding contract . the navy has reduced the total number of uncorrected starred deficiencies at delivery on both established and newer ship classes for which multiple ships have been delivered . it is up to insurv inspectors to categorize deficiencies identified by severity during acceptance trials . because there can be ambiguity regarding who is responsible for correcting the deficiencies , the program office , supship , and the shipbuilder collectively determine whether the government or the shipbuilding contractor is responsible . deficiencies that the government is responsible for correcting can include , among other things , problems requiring a change to the ship design or ship specification , or equipment that the government is responsible for providing . for example , during the acceptance trial of lcs 2 , the rescue boat could not be properly deployed and insurv inspectors categorized the problem as a starred deficiency . it was subsequently determined that , as designed , the rescue boat system did not have the ability to meet requirements and that the navy would assume responsibility for the corrective work .