the depots planned accordingly to support this requirement . however , since the supplemental was submitted to congress , the army has requested that congress shift $480 million in hmmwv reset funds to new procurement . this change has reduced the planned depot workload by almost 6,000 hmmwvs creating disruptions in depots' workforce structure plans . until the reduction , red river depot anticipated hiring additional employees to perform the hmmwv and bradley workloads , and letterkenny army depot recently reduced its contract workforce by 150 employees due to declining work on the hmmwv and the patriot missile system . prior to the global war on terror , the department of defense , the army , and the marine corps faced significant challenges in sustaining and modernizing legacy equipment as well as funding the procurements of replacement weapons systems . with the advent and continuation of military operations over the past several years in afghanistan and iraq , the challenges of sustainment and modernization of legacy weapons systems , and procurement of new and replacement weapons systems has been significantly exacerbated . stir also includes other routine maintenance . although the terms may be slightly different , the marine corps equipment repair and replacement process and equipment standards parallel the army process and standards for equipment maintenance . the marine corps equivalent to the army's reset process is termed “recovery.” marine corps equipment returning from combat theaters is evaluated and transported to either a maintenance depot or to a marine corps unit's home station for repair . the marine corps's equipment recovery process entails restoring all equipment used in global war on terror ( gwot ) operations to its pre - gwot condition . for equipment in the marine corps prepositioning fleet , this means restoring to a “like new condition,” for all other equipment , this means is restoring to a mission capable status . the marine corps also applies procedures similar to the 3d as appropriate . the department of defense ( dod ) reported in april 2005 that they expected a new set of protocols to emerge based on experience with equipment used in oif and oef . these protocols may be similar to 3d and stir which emerged as maintenance procedures based on experience from operation desert storm . dod , as part of its ongoing effort to assess stress on equipment , plans to look for unusual wear patterns and methods to address them as well as examining maintenance trends . depot maintenance is defined as the highest level of maintenance activity , where the most complex maintenance work is done , from overhaul of components to complete rebuilds . military depots and defense contractors throughout the united states perform depot - level maintenance . in response to the harsh operating environments in iraq and afghanistan and the unanticipated and prolonged length and pace of sustained operations , the army and marine corps have developed and implemented several initiatives to equip their forces and maintain extensive amounts of equipment in theater .