in addition , p.l . ( washington , darfur crss: deah estmaes demonstrate severiy of crisis , but their accuracy and credibility could be enhanced , gao - 07-24 . lengthy processes for resolving transportation disputes discourage both carriers and implementing organizations from filing claims . according to kcco officials , obtaining needed documentation for a claim can require several years and disputed claims must be resolved by the department of justice . usaid's inspector general reported that inadequate and irregular review of claims by usaid and usda has also contributed to delayed resolution . currently , kcco has over $6 million in open claims , some of which were filed prior to fiscal year 2001 . for ocean carriers , the process is burdensome and encourages them to factor potential losses into freight rates rather than pursue claims . incentives for most implementing organizations are even weaker given that monies recovered from claims reimburse the overall food aid budget rather than the organization that experienced the loss . according to kcco and wfp officials , transportation claims are filed for less than 2 percent of cargo . however , several experts and implementing organizations suggested that actual losses are likely higher . in 2003 , kcco proposed a new administrative appeals process for ocean freight claims that would establish a hearing officer within usda and a 285-day timeframe . while dot and some carriers agreed that a faster process was needed , dot officials suggested that the process for claims review should include hearing officers outside of usda to ensure independent findings . to date , kcco's proposed process has not been implemented . lengthy payment time frames and burdensome administration . payment of food aid contracts is slow and paperwork is insufficiently streamlined . when carriers are not paid for several months , they incur large interest costs that are factored into freight rates . while usda now provides freight payments within a few weeks , several ocean carriers complained that usaid often requires 2 to 4 months to provide payment . usda freight payments are timelier due to a new electronic payment system , but usaid officials said this system is too expensive , so they are considering other payment options . in addition , a few carriers suggested that paperwork in general needs streamlining and modernization . the 2002 farm bill required both usda and usaid to pursue streamlining initiatives that the agencies are in the process of implementing . kcco officials indicated that they are updating food aid information technology systems ( to be in place in fiscal year 2009 ) . through structured interviews , ocean carriers confirmed the cost impact of food aid transportation contracting practices . for example , 9 ( 60 percent ) and 14 ( 100 percent ) of the carriers reported that “inefficient claims processes” and “liabilities outside the carriers' control” increase costs , respectively . to quantify the impact , two carriers estimated that non - standardized freight terms increase costs by 5 percent ( about $8 per metric ton ) while another carrier suggested that slow payment increases costs by 10 percent ( about $15 per metric ton ) . over 70 percent of the carriers strongly recommended actions to address contracting practices .