verify outcomes . officials from seven local boards that provided services for gig workers and three state boards also said that the requirements to document employment and earnings outcomes are a disincentive to serving those workers . in addition , officials from three state boards said that , because of the challenges in obtaining supplemental information , outcomes of self - employed workers , including gig workers , are not included in the performance reports that their states forward to dol , with officials from one state specifically pointing to cost and data reliability issues . american job center director in san francisco and local workforce board officials in seattle and dallas . | gao 17 561 . what is known about the characteristics of gig workers and the work they perform , including its benefits and downsides ? however , if states use supplemental wage information to verify employment , they must also use it to verify earnings outcomes , a change from prior dol policy . dol officials said they did not believe the new supplemental wage information requirements would limit boards in serving self - employed workers . what non - occupational skills and training do stakeholders indicate are needed by gig workers , and how are they provided ? what challenges , if any , do selected federal agencies and workforce development boards cite in providing supports for gig workers ? to address our objectives we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations , including the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) , which brought changes to many of the programs in the workforce development system , and dol and education regulations and guidance on its implementation . we also searched dol's technical assistance website portal , workforcegps , using terms related to gig work and reviewed federal internal control standards to assess how information related to gig workers was being communicated to workforce boards . on the one hand , this newfound access to gig work can help individuals across many industries , skill levels , and motivations seek and earn extra sources of income . on the other hand , some of these individuals may not be aware of its risks , such as financial insecurity and lack of benefits , and responsibilities , such as tax implications . easier online access to gig work is relatively new , but federal agencies such as dol and sba have had ongoing programs designed to assist people with the challenges of self - employment , such as marketing , pricing , and tax implications . in recent years , dol has funded several grants and programs to gather information specific to improving self - employment programs . however , dol's system for receiving and sharing data with workforce boards , workforcegps , does not consistently link relevant resources for these workers to terms that are currently being used to describe the gig economy , such as “gig.” although there is no universally accepted term or definition for this type of work , workforcegps's organization of information under topical headers does not capture the connection between gig work and self - employment , making this information less readily available .