lender exit . in response to the turmoil in the financial markets , some lenders exited the student loan industry altogether , according to a study by cfpb . these actions changed the market from one with many lenders to a smaller market dominated by a few large lenders . more stringent lending criteria . lenders responded to the crisis by tightening their lending criteria , making it more difficult for some students to obtain these loans , according to a study by the cfpb which was echoed by lenders and subject matter specialists we interviewed . the cfpb study found that in the years leading up to the 2007-2009 recession when private student lending was increasing , lenders were making a higher percentage of loans to borrowers with weaker credit qualifications . this trend reversed during the recession . in the aftermath of the credit crisis and recession , private lenders changed their criteria for making student loans . for example , the cfpb study found that lenders began to rely more heavily on criteria that had been traditionally used to determine a borrower's creditworthiness , such as the borrower's ability to repay the loan and individual repayment history as reflected by a borrower's fair isaac corporation credit score ( fico ) . many lenders also required or strongly encouraged students to have a co - signer for their private student loans . while students could still obtain loans without a co - signer , lenders said student borrowers with a co - signer are more likely to secure a lower interest rate and more favorable loan terms . new consumer protections . in addition , the fallout from the turmoil in the national financial markets in 2008 increased scrutiny of the private student loan market , and subsequent statutory changes increased consumer protections ( see table 4 ) . enacted in 2008 , the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ) amended the truth in lending act ( tila ) and the higher education act of 1965 to add new disclosure requirements related to private student loan rates , terms , and the availability of federal student loans . for example , it provided for a 3-day period after consummation of the loan during which a borrower may cancel a loan without penalty and also provided that a borrower has 30 days after a loan is approved to accept the loan , during which time the lender generally cannot change the loan rates or terms . the new disclosures were accompanied by new borrower responsibilities . in an effort to prevent over - borrowing , applicants for private student loans must now complete a self - certification form that includes a calculation of how much the student needs to borrow , and attest that they are aware of the federal loan options available to them . see appendix iv for a sample self - certification template . several of the officials we interviewed noted that the self - certification forms helped to keep students from borrowing more funds than they actually need for educational costs . furthermore , the heoa amended the tila to prohibit certain practices by private lenders , including revenue sharing between creditors and educational institutions . ( see table 4 for more information ) .