ratesetting information . the bureau prepares a ratebook each year that details the o&m rate applicable to each customer . customers and cvp water association staff review and comment upon the ratebook , which specifically identifies the customer's water marketing costs . the ratebook also includes tables showing each customer's capital and energy costs for the year ; historical and projected water deliveries ; and prior year actual cost data . in addition , the bureau: responds to frequent written and telephonic questions from customers about rates . regularly attends cvp water association meetings , at which rates are a primary subject of discussion . the cvp water association includes representatives of the cvp's largest customers , and is the customers' focal point for interaction with the region on rates . prepares an analysis , which is summarized in the ratebook , that identifies significant changes from the preceding year's budget and determines if any significant changes have occurred in the budget as of the time that the annual water rates are computed . water marketing costs have increased significantly , but we found no evidence that the costs were derived from activities other than normal o&m activities that are recoverable under applicable law . however , our analysis of the information provided to water customers confirmed that the customers were not able to determine whether ( 1 ) budgeted activities were ones that would actually be charged to them , and ( 2 ) budgeted amounts for the coming year's activities represented increases in previous estimates . reviewed selected water marketing activities to determine whether any law exists that excludes the specific activity from being recovered in rates . interviewed bureau officials regarding water marketing cost recovery . ( 4 ) information provided to customers reviewed documentation of meetings between the bureau and customers in fiscal year 2000 regarding water marketing charges . analyzed documents provided to customers to determine whether they described the types of work being charged to customers as a cost of water marketing . interviewed bureau officials and representatives of the cvp water association , which represents cvp customers , to determine whether more detailed water marketing cost information was warranted . we also reviewed information provided by the cvp water association . we conducted our review at the bureau's mid - pacific region , which operates and manages cvp , from june 2000 through april 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . to the extent practical , we corroborated data provided by the bureau through interviews and by comparing amounts to amounts shown on audited financial statements . however , in most cases we did not verify the accuracy of the data provided . we have considered written comments from the department of the interior and revised our report , as appropriate . president's budget sent to congress ( feb ) ( oct ) ( 60 days ) . in addition to the individual named above , dave bogdon , brian eddington , edda emmanuelli - perez , larry feltz , jeff jacobson , mary merrill , and maria zacharias made key contributions to this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv .