3 in ch . under the pma , the current administration has set an ambitious agenda for performance budgeting , calling for agencies to better align budgets with performance goals and focus on capturing full budgetary costs and matching those costs with output and outcome goals . all this suggests that agencies will need to develop integrated financial and performance management systems that will enable the reporting of the actual costs associated with performance goals and objectives along with presentations designed to meet other budgetary or financial purposes , such as the accounts and program activities found in the president's budget and responsibility segments found in financial statements . of the six agencies we reviewed , only education's report clearly linked its budgetary information to the achievement of its performance goals or objectives . education's report laid out , using both graphics and text , the estimated appropriations associated with achieving each of its 24 objectives . in addition the report provided the staffing in full - time equivalent employment ( ftes ) and an estimate of the funds from salaries and expenses contributing to the support of each of these objectives . sba's report contained crosswalks that showed the relationship between sba's strategic goals , outcome goals , performance goals , and programs . because sba shows the resources for each program , a reader can infer a relationship between sba's resources and performance goals . however , the linkage between resources and results would be clearer if results and resources were presented by performance goal as well . ssa provided a limited view of the costs of achieving its performance goals by providing the costs associated with four out of five of its strategic goals . however , as reported by the ig , ssa needs to further develop its cost accounting system , which would help link costs to performance . doe also provided a limited view of the costs of achieving its performance goals by organizing its performance information by budget program activity and associated net costs . according to doe officials , the department plans to link its individual performance measures to the costs of program activities in future reports . neither hud nor dot provided information on the cost of achieving individual performance goals or objectives . to assess the degree to which an agency's report provided full confidence that the agency's performance information was credible , we examined the extent to which the reports discussed the quality of the data presented . as shown in table 3 , only dot's report provided a full level of confidence in the quality of the data . the other agencies provided general or limited confidence in their data . all six agencies in our current review complied with the reports consolidation act of 2000 by including assessments of the completeness and reliability of their performance data in their transmittal letters . in contrast , we found that only 5 of the 24 cfo act agencies included this information in their fiscal year 2000 performance reports . of the six agencies in our current review , only doe provided this assessment in its fiscal year 2000 report .