the 14 we identified are 5 . surface transportation security 7 . emergency preparedness and response 8 . critical infrastructure and key resources protection 9 . science and technology 12 . human capital management 13 . information technology management 14 . real property management for each mission and management area , we identified performance expectations and vetted them with dhs officials . these performance expectations are a composite of the responsibilities or functions — derived from legislation , homeland security presidential directives and executive orders , dhs planning documents , and other sources — that the department is to achieve . our analysts and subject matter experts reviewed our prior work , dhs ig work , and evidence dhs provided between march and july 2007 , including dhs officials' assertions when supported by documentation . on the basis of this analysis and our experts' judgment , we then assessed the extent to which dhs had achieved each of the expectations we identified . we made preliminary assessments for each performance expectation based solely on gao and dhs ig work . in march through july , we received additional information from dhs , which we reviewed and used to inform our final assessments . in some cases the assessments remained the same as our preliminary ones , and in other cases they changed . we used these performance expectation assessments to determine dhs's overall progress in each mission and management area . after making an assessment for each performance expectation , we added up those rated as generally achieved . we divided this number by the total number of performance expectations for the mission or management area , excluding those performance expectations for which we could not make an assessment . if dhs generally achieved more than 75 percent of the identified performance expectations , we identified its overall progress as substantial . when the number achieved was more than 50 percent but 75 percent or less , we identified its overall progress as moderate . if dhs generally achieved more than 25 percent but 50 percent or less , we identified its overall progress as modest . for mission and management areas in which dhs generally achieved 25 percent or less of the performance expectations , we identified overall progress as limited . we and the dhs ig have completed varying degrees of work for each mission and management area , and dhs's components and offices provided us with different amounts and types of information . as a result , our assessments of dhs's progress in each mission and management area reflect the information available for our review and analysis and are not equally comprehensive across all 14 mission and management areas . it is also important to note that while there are qualitative differences between the performance expectations , we did not weigh some more heavily than others in our overall assessments of mission and management areas . we also recognize that these expectations are not time bound , and dhs will take actions to satisfy these expectations over a sustained period of time .