lidar . while nfip defines elevation difference as the difference between lowest occupied floor elevation and base flood elevation , north carolina's lidar data measures first floor elevation , which is inconsistent with nfip's measure for lowest floor elevation . according to north carolina officials , its lidar does not measure the lowest floor elevation because it is measured from the outside of the structure to the bottom of the front door . without measuring from the inside of the structure , north carolina's lidar data do not take into account a precise measurement of the lowest floor . for example , the bottom of the front door may be higher than the bottom of the lowest occupied floor , such as a furnished basement . fema's national flood hazard layer . fema's national flood hazard layer data lack precision to correctly align the data to a property . the data are a geospatial file that shows the base flood elevations of areas , among other things . however , it simply shows them as lines on a map , which cannot be used to determine the base flood elevation for a particular building unless the building is intersected by the line . for all other buildings , base flood elevation would have to be estimated using the closest elevation lines . for example , if a building were located halfway between a 100 foot line and a 110 foot line , a base flood elevation of 105 feet could be estimated for the building . however , this estimate is not precise enough for purposes of our analysis . due to the unavailability of accurate estimates for lowest floor elevation and base flood elevation to calculate full - risk rate , we were unable to estimate with any precision the potential cost of implementing certain options we identified for targeting assistance to policyholders who may experience difficulty paying full - risk rates . however , we developed a rough estimate of the cost by multiplying the estimated percentage of subsidized policyholders likely to be eligible for assistance under the various options and thresholds and estimates on forgone premium net of expenses we had previously developed . specifically , in our december 2014 report on forgone premiums for subsidized policies , we noted several limitations to using these statements to produce our estimates . we presented three separate estimates: ( 1 ) fema's statement about the impact of eliminating subsidies on aggregate premiums , ( 2 ) the percentage of long - term expected losses covered by subsidized premiums , and ( 3 ) the percentage of long - term expected losses covered by subsidized premiums to estimate forgone premiums for only the policies that remained subsidized after hfiaa . the estimated total subsidy cost of implementing certain targeting options is based on the estimated lowest and highest forgone premium net of expenses in 2013 across the three estimates calculated in our 2014 report . we applied the range to the targeting options described earlier in this report . specifically , we applied the cost range ( $575 million to $1.8 billion ) to the various targeting options and their ranges of percentage of eligible policyholders .