roll over each below to view more information . the nation's communications infrastructure also provides the networks that support the internet . in order for data to move freely across communications networks , the internet network operators employ voluntary , self - enforcing rules called protocols . two sets of protocols — the domain name system ( dns ) and the border gateway protocol ( bgp ) — are essential for ensuring the uniqueness of each e - mail and website address and for facilitating the routing of data packets between autonomous systems , respectively . dns provides a globally distributed hierarchical database for mapping unique names to network addresses . it links e - mail and website addresses with the underlying numerical addresses that computers use to communicate with each other . it translates names , such as http: / / www.house.gov , into numerical addresses , such as 208.47.254.18 , that computers and other devices use to identify each other on the network and back again in a process invisible to the end user . this process relies on a hierarchical system of servers , called domain name servers , which store data linking address names with address numbers . these servers are owned and operated by many public and private sector organizations throughout the world . these networks include wireline , wireless , cable , and satellite . we did not address broadcast access networks because they are responsible for a smaller volume of traffic than other networks . additionally , we focused on the internet support components that are critical for delivering services: the border gateway protocol ( bgp ) and domain name system ( dns ) . to identify the roles of federal entities , we collected , reviewed , and analyzed relevant federal law , policy , regulation , and critical infrastructure protection - related strategies . sources consulted include statutes such as the communications act of 1934 , homeland security act of 2002 , and the defense production act of 1950 , as well as other public laws ; the code of federal regulations ; national communication system directive 3-10 ; the national infrastructure protection plan ; the communications sector - specific plan ; the information technology sector - specific plan ; the communications sector risk assessment ; the information technology sector risk assessment ; homeland security presidential directives ; selected executive orders ; and related gao products . using these materials , we selected the departments of commerce , defense , and homeland security , and fcc to review their respective roles and actions related to the security of the privately owned communications network because they were identified as having the most significant roles and organizations for addressing communications cybersecurity . to identify the actions taken by federal entities we collected , reviewed , and analyzed relevant policies , plans , reports , and related performance metrics and interviewed officials at each of the four agencies . for example , we reviewed and analyzed department of commerce agreements detailing the process for how changes are to be made to the authoritative root zone file and internet policy task force reports on cybersecurity innovation and the internet .