determinations . however , hud's database does not have the capability to generate reports on properties or data for the purpose of analyzing the properties reported for the title v homeless assistance program . for example , when we asked hud for reports from the database in order to perform our own analysis , such as the total number of properties reviewed for suitability and the total number published as suitable and available since program inception , the agency was unable to provide these data to us . the database was designed , and is primarily used , to generate listings of properties for publication in the federal register . the pdf format of the federal register reports poses challenges for automated analysis , and as a result , we had to manually count numbers of properties in specific categories to ensure the validity of our analysis , such as those for off - site use only reported in table 4 . standards for internal control in the federal government states that managers are responsible for providing reliable , useful , and timely information for transparency and accountability of programs and their operations . reliability also means that for any computer processing of the data elements used , the results are reasonable , complete , and accurate . in addition , federal information technology guidance for publicly available data states that accessible data should be made available in convenient , modifiable formats that can be retrieved , downloaded , indexed , and searched . as the database cannot produce reports on the properties , hud relies on hard - copy record keeping , which limits hud's ability to make information on properties readily available , requiring labor intensive use of resources to find needed data . this capability is important because title v requires hud to make available to the public upon request all information in its possession about all properties reviewed and not identified as suitable for the homeless — about 30,000 properties according to hud's estimate — including the reasons such properties were not so identified.litigation , the plaintiffs hired a contractor to make copies of the requested moreover , hud officials told us that during the recent data from hud's hard copy files , and it took three individuals several weeks to complete the task . without a comprehensive database that maintains this information , hud would need to respond to such a request on up to 30,000 properties by manually looking through files , which would not be an efficient use of resources . because hud uses the database primarily for generating listings , it has not assessed the extent to which the benefits of modifying the database to generate electronic reports for the purposes of responding to information requests or performing analysis , or if developing a new database to do so would outweigh the costs . modifying its database , or developing a new one that is electronically searchable , would better position hud to respond to information requests . while it is hud's role to assess the suitability of properties for use to assist the homeless , some federal landholding agencies report many properties to hud that may not , in the landholding agencies' estimation , be useful to assist the homeless .