appeals . a beneficiary can file an appeal in response to an mco's decision to , among other things , reduce services , terminate services , or deny payment for services . for example , a beneficiary could appeal an mco's decision to deny coverage for a specific type of mltss care , such as personal care services , or to reduce the number of personal care attendant hours a beneficiary will receive . after the beneficiary submits an appeal , the mco will either approve the appeal ( meaning that the mco , through its internal appeals process , overturns its original decision and resolves the appeal in favor of the beneficiary ) , or deny the appeal ( meaning that the mco upholds its original decision ) . if an mco denies the appeal , the beneficiary can request that the state review the mco's decision through the state's fair hearing process , in which state officials rule on whether the mco's decision should be upheld . grievances . a beneficiary can file a grievance with an mco to express dissatisfaction about any matter not covered by appeals . for example , a beneficiary could file a grievance about difficulty getting an appointment with an mltss provider , concerns about the quality of mltss care , a provider or mco not respecting a beneficiary's rights , or a provider not treating the beneficiary respectfully . beneficiaries may also submit grievances directly to the state , in a manner determined by the state , such as to the state medicaid agency or state long - term care ombudsman . after receiving information about the beneficiary's grievance , the mco conducts an independent review and determines what , if any , steps are needed to resolve the grievance . appeals and grievances processes are slated to change , beginning in july 2017 , due to changes specified in cms's may 2016 medicaid managed care final rule . for example , there is a new requirement that mcos maintain records about each grievance or appeal , including a general description of the reason for the appeal or grievance , the date received and reviewed , and the resolution at each level of the grievance or appeal . mcos must maintain these records in a manner accessible to the state and provide them to cms upon request.previously , states have been required to maintain information on appeals and grievances , and the final rule specified what those records must include . the six states we reviewed used a range of methods to oversee mltss beneficiaries' access to and quality of care . states' oversight methods included implementing external quality reviews , tracking performance measures , surveying beneficiaries , and reviewing medical charts , among other activities . in some cases , these oversight methods were specific to mltss programs , while in other cases the methods addressed mltss as well as other state managed care programs . examples of state oversight methods included the following: external quality reviews: all six states implemented the external quality reviews that cms requires , which involves assessments of mcos' compliance with requirements related to quality , and validating mco performance measures and performance improvement projects .