provision . consequently , onr has chosen to use the statement of assurance to meet the c.f.r . provision , and we found no other documentation that would otherwise meet the requirement . we revised the body of the report to avoid suggesting that omb requires a certification and to specifically cite the statement of assurance , and similarly revised the recommendation for clarification , but our overall finding stands.therefore , we continue to believe that onr needs to develop supervisory review procedures to reasonably assure that these statements of assurance are obtained . further , dod did not agree that onr lacks procedures to ensure supervisors confirm that negotiators adequately performed and documented key controls . dod noted that both the primary and secondary supervisors are required to review and approve the business clearance memorandum , which records steps performed by the negotiator . while we agree that the business clearance memorandum documents steps performed by the negotiator , these steps are documented at a high level and do not include detailed procedures for supervisors to follow to reasonably assure that the negotiator has performed and documented all key control activities , such as obtaining all required certifications and assurances . dod agreed in its response that onr's business clearance memorandum can be improved and stated that onr will update it to require the negotiator to cross - reference the review steps to the proposal to facilitate the supervisor's review process . however , it is not clear whether the planned business clearance memorandum revisions will include providing detailed procedures for supervisory review as we recommended . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 21 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of health and human services and defense and the director of the office of management and budget . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2623 or davisbh@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who make key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . the objective of this review was to determine the extent to which the cognizant agencies have designed internal controls to mitigate fraud , waste , and abuse in the indirect cost rate - setting process for national institutes of health ( nih ) grants . pt . 200 , appendix . iii ( formerly located in omb circular a - 21 , 2 c.f.r . pt . 220 , app . a prior to december 2014 ) , which states that each institution must describe the process it uses to ensure that federal funds are not used to subsidize industry and foreign government programs , and stated that a certification is only one way to accomplish this .