both tables are for 2012 . we note that the ultimate impact of such limited production cost increases on farmers' income would depend on their individual profit margins . however , for the industry as a whole , the impact on farmers' income appears to be minimal . for example , as noted in table 2 , for a 5 to 20 percentage point reduction in subsidies , total farm costs in 2012 would have increased from about $0.4 billion to $1.8 billion . further , as discussed , farm sector income in 2012 was about $114 billion . thus , these increased costs , as a percentage of farm sector income , would have been about 0.4 to 1.6 percent . information on the impact to farmer participation from reductions in federal crop insurance premium subsidies is limited , but the economic literature and government information that is available suggest the impact may be minimal . farm industry groups and some researchers have stated that changes to crop insurance premium subsidies could result in reductions in farmer participation and insurance coverage levels . however , available economic literature on the impact on farmer participation due to premium subsidy reductions indicates that farmers' response to changes in premium subsidies may be small due to factors such as their heavy reliance on crop insurance , the attractiveness of revenue policies , and the increasing importance of crop insurance as other farm programs are reduced or eliminated . government studies of this issue have reached similar conclusions . a limited rma analysis in support of the president's 2014 budget proposal determined that a 5 percentage point premium subsidy reduction for yield and revenue policies would result in a limited number of farmers leaving the crop insurance program ; that analysis determined that it was more likely that some farmers would purchase lower levels of policy coverage . according to rma's chief actuary , it is difficult to determine the effect of a premium subsidy change in part because of the lack of data . the task of determining the effect of a change is easier if there has been a major change in premium subsidy rates , and the impact can be assessed , this official said . a major change in premium subsidy rates creates a “natural experiment” in which to better analyze the impact to farmer participation from a change in subsidy rates . according to the chief actuary , this “natural experiment” last occurred with the passage of the agricultural risk protection act in 2000 that significantly raised premium subsidy rates . this in turn led to an increase in farmer participation in the crop insurance program . however , there has been no “natural experiment” to analyze how reduced premium subsidy rates impact farmer participation because , since 2000 , premium subsidy rates generally have not been reduced . in the event that premium subsidy rates were reduced , actual information on the impact on farmer participation would be available . according to an rma official , it would be a good idea to monitor the impact on farmer participation if congress reduced premium subsidy rates . cbo , options for reducing the deficit: 2014 to 2023 ( washington , d.c.: november 2013 ) .