mark yoder . table 1 shows the status of gao's prior year recommendations for preparing the cfs . the abbreviations used are defined in the legend at the end of the table . in addition , omb circular no . statement of federal financial accounting concepts no . 4 , intended audience and qualitative characteristics for the consolidated financial report of the united states government , states that the consolidated financial report should be a general purpose report that is aggregated from federal entity reports . the treasury financial manual ( tfm ) provides guidance on how federal entities are to provide their financial data to treasury for consolidation . in accordance with the tfm , significant component entities are required to submit their financial data to treasury using a closing package . a significant component entity's chief financial officer must certify the accuracy of the data in the closing package and have it audited . because the closing package process requires that significant component entities verify and validate the information in their closing packages compared with their audited department - level financial statements and receive audit opinions , treasury is provided a level of assurance that it is compiling the cfs with reliable financial information . in addition , treasury stated that it will continue to collaborate with omb and federal entities on existing corrective actions . however , we continue to believe that the corrective action plans in these three areas do not include sufficient information to effectively address related control deficiencies involving processes used to prepare the cfs . for example , as discussed in our report , treasury and omb did not have specific actions in their corrective action plan to analyze all treaties and international agreements to help ensure that major treaty and international agreement information is properly identified and reported in the cfs . further , we believe that a formalized process for treasury to require the performance of additional audit procedures focused on intragovernmental activity and balances would provide increased audit assurance over the reliability of intragovernmental information and help address the hundreds of billions of dollars of unreconciled intragovernmental differences at the government - wide level . treasury also described various actions taken and planned to address long - standing material weaknesses , including improvements in accounting for and reporting on the general fund of the u.s. government activity and balances , strengthening internal controls in the preparation of the cfs , and validating material completeness of budgetary information included in the financial report of the united states government . treasury also indicated that it plans to work with gao as it fulfills its commitment to improving federal financial reporting . omb staff in the office of federal financial management stated in an e - mail that omb generally agreed with the findings in the report and with treasury's written response to the draft . the e - mail noted that the current administration is committed to continuing to work with treasury and federal agencies to achieve sound financial management across the federal government . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the fiscal assistant secretary of the treasury , and the controller of the office of management and budget's office of federal financial management .