developing jtrs is a significant challenge . because jtrs is intended to operate on the battlefield where there is no fixed infrastructure of cell towers , fiber optic lines , and other network components such as routers and switches , the radios must be powerful enough to transmit and relay information wirelessly over long distances , maintain network linkages and quality of service while on the move , and ensure that communications and the network itself are secure . development of the individual waveforms and their ability to function effectively on different jtrs sets is critical to the success of jtrs . the wideband networking waveform , for example , will require complex software development and include over 1.6 million lines of software code . to reflect the restructured approach of achieving jtrs requirements incrementally , it was necessary to develop an amendment to the april 2003 operational requirements document . the process to develop the amendment has been led by the joint staff and involved input from the requirements community , the services , and other stakeholders ; the joint requirements oversight council has provided oversight of the process . through the process of developing the operational requirements document amendment , some ‘”gaps” in requirements have been identified by some stakeholders . in particular , the proposed amendment to the operational requirements document includes a requirement for certain jtrs sets to be able to interface with a new satellite system called the mobile user objective system . some stakeholders , however , have identified a need for the manpack and handheld radios to also have this capability . according to agency officials , if the capabilities are deferred to later increments , then the mobile user objective system will have to consider options other than jtrs to meet its terminal requirements . also , according to agency officials , the amendment process is nearly complete . the amendment to the jtrs operational requirements document is awaiting final approval from the vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . acquisition strategies: individual acquisition strategies need to be developed for each jtrs component . an acquisition strategy outlines the business and technical management approach to achieve program objectives within the constraints imposed by resources . a well – developed knowledge - based strategy minimizes the time and cost required to satisfy approved capability needs , and maximizes affordability throughout the program lifecycle . until the acquisition strategies are complete , there is less assurance that a well - developed and executable approach is in place . this could affect program cost estimates , and fielding plans . furthermore , an acquisition strategy serves as the basis for other important activities such as testing plans and contract negotiations . as such , any delay in the acquisition strategy could have a ripple effect and delay these activities . test and evaluation plans: plans for the overall structure and objectives of the test and evaluation program are also under development and need to be completed . given the radio's unprecedented performance capabilities and technical complexity , it is critical that a well - developed test and evaluation plan be developed .