growth of women in dentistry is more recent . in 2005 , 19 percent of professionally active dentists were women , compared with almost 45 percent of graduating dental school students who were women . accurately projecting the future supply of primary care health professionals is difficult , particularly over long time horizons , as illustrated by substantial swings in physician workforce projections during the past several decades . few projections have focused on the likely supply of primary care physician or nonphysician primary care professionals . over a 50-year period , government and industry groups' projections of physician shortfalls gave way to projections of surpluses , and now the pendulum has swung back to projections of shortfalls again . from the 1950s through the early 1970s , concerns about physician shortages prompted the federal and state governments to implement measures designed to increase physician supply . by the 1980s and through the 1990s , however , the graduate medical education national advisory committee ( gmenac ) , the council on graduate medical education ( cogme ) , and hrsa's bureau of health professions were forecasting a national surplus of physicians . in large part , the projections made in the 1980s and 1990s were based on assumptions that managed care plans — with an emphasis on preventive care and reliance on primary care gatekeepers exercising tight control over access to specialists — would continue to grow as the typical health care delivery model . in fact , managed care did not become as dominant as predicted and , in recent years , certain researchers , such as cooper , have begun to forecast physician shortages . cogme's most recent report , issued in january 2005 , also projects a likely shortage of physicians in the coming years and , in june of 2006 , the aamc called for an expansion of u.s. medical schools and federally supported residency training positions . other researchers have concluded that there are enough practicing physicians and physicians in the pipeline to meet current and future demand if properly deployed . despite interest in the future of the health care workforce , few projections directly address the supply of primary care professionals . recent physician workforce projections focus instead on the supply of physicians from all specialties combined . specifically , the projections recently released by cogme point to likely shortages in total physician supply but do not include projections specific to primary care physicians . similarly , ada's and aapa's projections of the future supply of dentists and physician assistants do not address primary care practitioners separately from providers of specialty care . aanp has not developed projections of future supply of nurse practitioners . we identified two sources — an october 2006 report by hrsa and a september 2006 report by aafp — that offer projections of primary care supply and demand , but both are limited to physicians . hrsa's projections indicate that the supply of primary care physicians will be sufficient to meet anticipated demand through about 2018 , but may fall short of the number needed in 2020 . aafp projected that the number of family practitioners in 2020 could fall short of the number needed , depending on growth in family medicine residency programs .