we are not making any recommendations in this report . we provided a draft of our report to dod and dhs for their review and comment . dod provided written technical comments , which we incorporated into the report as appropriate . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on our website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions about this report , please contact john pendleton at ( 202 ) 512-3489 or pendletonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . in january 2012 , we found that the departments of defense ( dod ) and homeland security ( dhs ) had not established a collaborative forum to address long - term arctic capability gaps or identify opportunities for joint investments over the longer term . we stated that dod acknowledged the importance of collaboration with the u.s. coast guard over the long term in its 2010 quadrennial defense review , which states that the department must work with the coast guard and dhs to develop arctic capabilities to support both current and future planning and operations . we recommended that the secretary of defense , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security , establish a collaborative forum with the coast guard to fully leverage federal investments and help avoid overlap and redundancies in addressing long - term arctic capability needs . in response to our recommendation , dod cited the establishment of a number of collaborative forums that are intended to address a variety of arctic issues including arctic strategy and policy , capabilities , and requirements . officials we interviewed from dod and the coast guard identified three working groups that have been established to enhance coordination between the two organizations: the navy / coast guard arctic working group , the arctic operational working group , and the arctic capability advocacy working group . additionally , officials from u.s. northern command told us that the arctic collaborative workshop is another forum being used to bring together arctic stakeholders , including the coast guard . table 2 below provides a summary of the current structure and activities of each of these collaborative forums . according to dod and coast guard officials , there is currently no formal mechanism for the working groups to coordinate among each other . these officials told us that the number of people from each agency involved in arctic issues is currently small , and in some cases , the same participants are involved across these working groups . due to the familiarity with activities of the other groups , the members are able to share information on the activities among the working groups in order to avoid duplicative efforts . additionally , navy officials stated that some of these working groups were established in the last year and are still determining the focus of their efforts .