gao - 03-557t . to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact jess t. ford at ( 202 ) 512-4128 , or fordj@gao.gov . mr. chairman and members of the committee: i am pleased to be here to discuss our work on the security and overall conditions of u.s. embassy and consulate facilities around the world . the 1998 terrorist bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania , which killed more than 220 people and injured 4,000 , highlighted the compelling need for safe and secure overseas facilities . the 1998 terrorist bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania , which killed more than 220 people and injured 4,000 , highlighted the compelling need for safe and secure overseas facilities . following the bombings , three high - level independent groups cited physical security problems at numerous overseas facilities . in november 1999 , one of these groups , the overseas presence advisory panel , said that thousands of americans representing our nation abroad faced an unacceptable level of risk from terrorist attacks and other threats . the panel called for accelerating the process of addressing security risks to provide overseas staff with the safest working environment , consistent with the nation's resources and the demands of their missions . moreover , the panel concluded that many u.s. overseas facilities were insecure , decrepit , deteriorating , overcrowded , and “shockingly shabby,” and it recommended major capital improvements to redress these problems . you asked us to assess current facility conditions and what the state department is doing to improve them . today i will focus my comments on the security conditions at u.s. embassies and consulates . i will also discuss building maintenance , office space , and information technology conditions . our observations are based on an analysis of data from the state department's bureaus of diplomatic security , overseas buildings operations ( obo ) , and information resources management , and our visits last month to four posts where we examined how facility conditions affect security risks and mission effectiveness . for security reasons , i will not be identifying these posts . finally , i will discuss some preliminary observations regarding state's efforts to improve facility conditions by replacing existing buildings with new , secure embassy compounds . these observations are based on our ongoing review of state's multibillion - dollar embassy and consulate construction program on which we will report later this year . the united states maintains more than 250 diplomatic posts , including embassies , consulates , and other diplomatic offices , located around the world . more than 60,000 personnel — u.s . and foreign service nationals — work at these locations . about 50 government agencies and subagencies operate overseas , including the departments of state , defense , and justice ; and the u.s. agency for international development . since the 1970s , u.s. diplomatic personnel overseas have been increasingly at risk from terrorist attacks and other acts of violence . in response , the state department in 1986 began a substantial embassy construction program , known as the inman program , to protect u.s. personnel and facilities .