competition . according to our prior work , competition is a critical tool for achieving the best return on the government's investment . the acv acquisition approach has fostered competition in the acquisition process , both through competitive prototyping that took place prior to the start of development and with competition that continues through development until production . specifically , before the marine personnel carrier program was suspended , the government awarded a contract to test critical sub - systems including the engine , transmission , suspension and hydraulic hardware systems . the government also awarded four contracts for system - level prototypes demonstrating the swim capability , personnel carry capability , and survivability of each company's vehicle . the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics — the acv milestone decision authority — has certified to the congressional defense committees that the acv program had met the competitive prototyping requirement based on the work done under the marine personnel carrier program . in addition , after development begins , the program plans to award acv 1.1 development contracts to two vendors , maintaining competition until they select one vendor at the start of production . contract strategy . when development begins , the acv program plans to award hybrid contracts to each of the to - be - selected developers . according to program plans , each contract is to utilize three different pricing structures for different activities: fixed - price - incentive for acv 1.1 vehicle development , firm - fixed - price for the delivery incentive to deliver test vehicles early , and cost - plus - fixed - fee for test support and advanced capability improvements and studies . according to the federal acquisition regulation , it is usually to the government's advantage for the contractor to assume substantial cost responsibility and an appropriate share of the cost risk ; therefore , fixed - price incentive contracts are preferred when contract costs and performance requirements are reasonably certain . manufacturing the development vehicles is the largest anticipated portion of acv development contract costs . according to the acv 1.1 acquisition strategy , a fixed - price - incentive contract is considered the most appropriate contract type to utilize for the vehicle's development because the vehicles themselves are non - developmental in nature but there is some risk related to the integration of selected systems , such as the remote weapon station , and other modifications required to meet usmc requirements . meanwhile , the strategy states that the delivery incentive is to be a firm - fixed - price , as the fee is a set dollar amount based on how early the vehicles are delivered and is not subject to adjustment based on the vendor's costs . under cost - reimbursement contract types , such as a cost - plus - fixed - fee contract , the government bears the risk of increases in the cost of performance . cost - reimbursement contract types are suitable when uncertainties in requirements or contract performance do not permit the use of fixed - price contract types .