messrs . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittees may have at this time . for information about this statement , please contact robert dacey , director , information security issues , at ( 202 ) 512-3317 , or william ritt , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-6443 . you may also reach them by e - mail at daceyr@gao.gov or rittw@gao.gov . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include mark fostek , sophia harrison , and barbarol james . and these are only the reported attacks . the director of cert centers stated that he estimates that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated or there were no indications of penetration or attack or ( 2 ) the organization was reluctant to report . figure 1 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert coordination center from 1995 through the first half of 2003 . according to the national security agency , foreign governments already have or are developing computer attack capabilities , and potential adversaries are developing a body of knowledge about u.s. systems and methods to attack these systems . since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , warnings of the potential for terrorist cyber attacks against our critical infrastructures have also increased . for example , in february 2002 , the threat to these infrastructures was highlighted by the special advisor to the president for cyberspace security in a senate briefing when he stated that although to date none of the traditional terrorists groups , such as al qaeda , have used the internet to launch a known assault on the united states' infrastructure , information on water systems was discovered on computers found in al qaeda camps in afghanistan . also , in his february 2002 statement for the senate select committee on intelligence , the director of central intelligence discussed the possibility of cyber warfare attack by terrorists . he stated that the september 11 attacks demonstrated the nation's dependence on critical infrastructure systems that rely on electronic and computer networks . further , he noted that attacks of this nature would become an increasingly viable option for terrorists as they and other foreign adversaries become more familiar with these targets and the technologies required to attack them . since september 11 , 2001 , the critical link between cyberspace and physical space has also been increasingly recognized . in his november 2002 congressional testimony , the director , cert centers at carnegie - mellon university , noted that supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) systems and other forms of networked computer systems have been used for years to control power grids , gas and oil distribution pipelines , water treatment and distribution systems , hydroelectric and flood control dams , oil and chemical refineries , and other physical systems , and that these control systems are increasingly being connected to communications links and networks to reduce operational costs by supporting remote maintenance , remote control , and remote update functions .