( see fig . there also appears to be a communication problem between informal program instructors and the army transportation school . although the instructors believe their training programs are good ones , they also stated they do not have enough time to focus on improving and upgrading these programs and would like more input from “knowledgeable personnel,” such as those at the fort eustis transportation school who developed the formal training program . some said they could have avoided difficulties they encountered in developing a high - quality informal program if such expertise had been available . many suggested that standardized , army - wide training packages tailored for each type of vehicle would be an efficient and economical way of training informal drivers . however , none of the instructors we interviewed knew that the transportation school has a program available designed specifically for informal training of m939 drivers . in november 1999 , the transportation school distributed a cd - rom driver training program , which includes lessons on driving and performing operator maintenance on the m939 to army standards . transportation school officials stated that the program was sent to around 1,800 different army locations ( according to the number and location of m939 trucks ) and is also available through the army's web site . while facing similar instructor shortages and limited driving conditions , the informal and reserve training programs we reviewed must also try to train drivers in a shorter time than the formal programs . the reserves also have problems with their equipment . the 10 informal programs we reviewed ranged between 40 and 120 hours ( compared to 6 weeks for the formal program ) . as a result , instructors focus mostly on teaching the basics ( driving on surfaced roads , backing up on flat surfaces , and performing some required maintenance and service ) . instructors teach more difficult skills only if time and circumstances allow . several instructors questioned how their 40 to 80 hour programs could possibly teach as much as was taught in the 6-week formal course . the reserves have problems not only with instructor shortages , but also with training equipment . reserve officials said their 5-ton truck driver training programs are generally understaffed because of a lack of available senior noncommissioned officers to teach . also , because programs are usually not authorized a fleet of trucks exclusively for training , units must borrow trucks from the installation where training is taking place or from other nearby army installations . the training unit is responsible for picking up and returning the trucks or for paying to have the trucks delivered and returned . they also pay an established usage fee to the units that lend the trucks . this is costly , especially if a borrowed vehicle needs repair work before it can pass the required safety inspection so that it can be used for training . reserve training officials told us that this happens frequently and adversely impacts training . army regulations require that truck drivers undergo a so - called “check ride” and “sustainment training” once a year ( once every 2 years for the army reserve and national guard ) .