ii ) . in its comments , the census bureau expressed broad agreement with the overall theme of the report but did not directly comment on the recommendations . the bureau stated that it is putting together a team from throughout the organization to carefully review each finding and prepare a specific course of action to address them . however , it raised concerns about four specific aspects of the summary of findings which gao addressed as appropriate . specifically , with respect to our draft finding that the bureau had not updated and finalized its it security program and policies document since april 2010 , the bureau stated that subsequent to our field work ending in september 2012 , its updated policy document was published in october 2012 . the bureau stated that our finding should state that its policy is to be revised every other year , instead of annually as stated in the draft , but did not provide written documentation to support this statement . the census bureau's it security program policies document , dated april 2010 , that we were provided for review stated in the program management control family , which is applicable to the information security requirements for the bureau as a whole , that review and revision of the census bureau's information security program plan and certain supporting policies be done annually . accordingly , we believe our report is accurate . further , we believe the actions taken by the bureau meet the intent of our recommendation which was to establish a deadline for updating and finalizing the bureau's it security program policies document . with respect to our draft finding that the bureau's security assessment report for its pilot system did not include an assessment of the risks associated with the specified common controls , and that the data was not finalized or available , the bureau acknowledged that results of an assessment of the common controls were not presented on the risk assessment report that was provided to the authorizing official in the new risk management framework format . however , the bureau stated that it had assessed the common controls . we did not intend to imply that the bureau had not conducted an assessment of common controls only that it was not included in the security assessment report . accordingly , we have clarified our language and recommendation in the report to better reflect this scenario . regarding our draft finding that the bureau's continuous monitoring program did not include mechanisms for near real - time continuous monitoring , the bureau stated that the frequency at which it performs scans is based on the identified risk of the control or system being assessed , and that monthly scans were consistent with the risk level it had identified for title 13 data . however , this statement is inconsistent with the risk - based continuous monitoring plans that we were provided by the bureau during our review , which called for weekly scanning in several cases .