( see app . iii for details of utilities' drinking water infrastructure needs for the 10 cities. ) of the 10 utilities we reviewed that were responsible for drinking water infrastructure , representatives from 6 noted that they were aware that some portions of their or their customer - owned portions of service lines connecting individual houses or apartment buildings to the main water lines contain or may contain lead , although most of these utilities did not express concern about the risk of lead in their water . in addition , representatives we interviewed from 5 drinking water utilities out of the 10 we reviewed named treatment plant repair and replacement as one of their greatest needs . representatives from one utility told us that the utility's water treatment plant is over 100 years old and is in need of replacement or backup , which they said would cost an estimated $68.6 million . the clear well in the plant , that is , the storage tank used to disinfect filtered water , was built in 1908 . if the tank fails , the main source of potable water for customers would be interrupted , leaving the community without water . epa's 2012 wastewater needs survey found that the largest infrastructure needs for wastewater systems fell into three categories: combined sewer overflow correction ( i.e. , control of overflows in combined sewer systems ) ; wastewater treatment , or infrastructure needed to meet treatment under epa standards ; and conveyance system repair , or the infrastructure needed to repair or replace sewer pipelines and connected components to maintain structural integrity of the system or to address inflow of groundwater into the sewer system . consistent with epa's national estimates , utilities serving 7 of the 10 cities we reviewed face high costs to control combined sewer overflows . ( see app . iv for details of utilities' wastewater infrastructure needs for the 10 cities. ) according to epa's wastewater needs survey , estimated costs for infrastructure improvements to control combined sewer overflows for wastewater utilities serving 7 of the 10 cities we reviewed ranged from $7.1 million to $1.98 billion . in addition , representatives we interviewed from wastewater utilities that serve 5 of the 10 cities we reviewed said that they needed to repair or replace their treatment plants . for example , representatives from one utility said that 90 percent of the utility's original wastewater treatment plant , which was built in 1938 , was still in place and required constant attention to keep it running . finally , representatives we interviewed from wastewater utilities providing services to 9 of the 10 cities we reviewed discussed collection system repair as a major need . for example , representatives from one utility said that the city sewer lines date back to the mid - 1800s . they recently replaced two blocks of the oldest section of sewer lines for $3 million . our sample of 14 utilities in the 10 cities we reviewed used the traditional strategy of raising rates to increase revenues to address their infrastructure needs , although representatives from half of them said that they had concerns about rate affordability and their future ability to raise rates .