we did not make any recommendations in these reports . for example , the air force requests reset funding for mine resistant ambush protected vehicle depot - level reset . the officials explained that while they request funds for reset from congress , they do not track the execution of funds for reset maintenance separately , but rather they track the execution of equipment maintenance in general . dod financial management guidance includes various reset - related cost categories to be used by components to estimate and report contingency operations costs . if the air force does not develop an implementation plan that , among other things , articulates goals and strategies for retrograde and reset of equipment , reset - related maintenance costs may not consistently be included and resources and funding for retrograde and reset may not be consistently or effectively budgeted or distributed within the service . although dod and the services have identified various guidance and documents to guide their retrograde and reset activities , with the exception of the marine corps , no strategic policy or implementation plan has been developed that includes key elements of a strategic management planning framework . as a result , dod cannot ensure that it is effectively managing its retrograde and reset activities at the department - level nor does it have assurance that there is clear and consistent guidance for three of the services . furthermore , without consistent and reliable information and terminology in dod documents , such as guidance , that informs planning and accounting for retrograde and reset funding , congress may be limited in its ability to provide oversight for actual retrograde and reset costs . section 324 of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2014 required dod to establish a policy relating to the retrograde , reconstitution , and replacement of units and materiel used to support overseas contingency operations . dod was also to submit a plan for implementation of the policy within 90 days of enactment of the ndaa . the act included a provision that gao review and report on dod's policy and implementation plan and annual updates . we reported in april 2014 that dod had not established a policy or submitted an implementation plan to congressional committees within the mandated 90 days , but noted that dod was in the process of developing these documents and that we would continue to monitor dod's progress and review the policy and implementation plan as they became available . in november 2014 , dod completed a classified report and subsequently submitted it to the congressional defense committees in response to section 324 of the ndaa for fiscal year 2014 . in april 2015 , dod updated its report . in this report , we evaluate the extent to which ( 1 ) dod developed a strategic policy consistent with leading practices on sound strategic management planning for the retrograde and reset of operating forces that support overseas contingency operations and ( 2 ) the services developed implementation plans consistent with leading practices on sound strategic management planning for the retrograde and reset of operating forces that support overseas contingency operations .