messrs . chairmen , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or the other commissioners may have . for further information about this statement , please contact john p. hutton ( 202 ) 512-4841 or huttonj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this statement include johana r. ayers , assistant director ; noah bleicher ; raj chitikila ; christopher kunitz ; heather miller ; and morgan delaney ramaker . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . information on these contractors was included in a subsequent census . as a result , comparing third and fourth quarter data would incorrectly suggest that the number of contractors increased , while the increase is attributable to more accurate counting . conversely , there have also been instances of contractor personnel being double counted in the census . although state reported most of its contractor personnel are currently entered into spot , the agency relied on periodic inquiries of its contractors to obtain a more complete view of contractor personnel in the two countries . state reported 8,971 contractor personnel were working on contracts in iraq and afghanistan during the first half of fiscal year 2009 . such a lack of visibility can create challenges for planning and carrying out missions . further , knowledge of who is on their installation , including contractor personnel , helps commanders make informed decisions regarding force protection and account for all individuals in the event of hostile action . without incorporating information on contractors into planning efforts , agencies risk making uninformed programmatic decisions . as we noted in our 2004 and 2005 reviews of afghanistan reconstruction efforts , when developing its interim development assistance strategy , usaid did not incorporate information on the contractor resources required to implement the strategy . we determined this impaired usaid's ability to make informed decisions on resource allocations for the strategy . a lack of accurate financial information on contracts impedes agencies' ability to create realistic budgets . as we reported in july 2005 , despite the significant role of private security providers in enabling iraqi reconstruction efforts , neither state , dod , nor usaid had complete data on the costs associated with using private security providers . agency officials acknowledged such data could help them identify security cost trends and their impact on the reconstruction projects , as increased security costs resulted in the reduction or cancellation of some projects . lack of insight into the contract services being performed increases the risk of paying for duplicative services . in the balkans , where billions of dollars were spent for contractor support , we found in 2002 that dod did not have an overview of all contracts awarded in support operations .