( see app . ii for a detailed discussion of our statistical analysis. ) without the program , and with all other things remaining equal , cash flows into hud's insurance fund would have increased by that amount . as shown in table 2 , the overall and average reductions in net revenue varied according to the discount level . the properties sold with 10 percent discounts accounted for about two - thirds of the homes that hud sold through the program in calendar year 2002 , but for less than half the total estimated reduction in net revenue . in contrast , the properties sold with 30 percent discounts represented less than one - third of the total properties sold but more than 40 percent of the overall reduction in net revenue . finally , the properties with 15 percent discounts accounted for about 9 percent of the total properties and between 7 and 10 percent of the overall reduction in hud's net revenue . both methods allow discounts for nonprofits . under the competitive process , hud establishes a list price for the properties but will accept bids that are lower . hud posts the properties , with their list prices , on the internet in its general listings and accepts bids from prospective owner - occupants and nonprofits , but not investors , for a priority period of 10 to 30 days , depending on the geographic area . hud awards the property to the owner - occupant or nonprofit with the highest bid . if the highest bidder is a nonprofit , hud grants a 10 or 15 percent discount off the bid price when it closes on the home . for properties that fail to sell during this priority period , hud then accepts bids from the general public , including investors . the hoc with the lowest proportion — denver — had the smallest reduction in net revenue . hud officials told us they were aware that the program reduced the agency's net revenue from property sales . however , hud has not evaluated whether the program is reducing hud's property inventory in a timely , efficient , and cost - effective manner , as intended . to determine the impact of the discount sales program on hud's administrative costs in calendar year 2002 , we compared the administrative costs hud incurred under the program to what hud would have incurred had the discounted properties been sold through hud's regular process . according to hud , in administering the discount sales program , hoc staff perform tasks that are not part of hud's regular home - selling process . for example , for the discount sales program , center staff approve and recertify participating nonprofit organizations and monitor the nonprofits' compliance with program requirements — tasks they do not perform for the regular sales process . as a result , hud's administrative cost per property is lower for its regular sales process than it is for the discount sales program . hud officials told us that for this reason and the small volume of properties sold through the discount sales program , selling the discounted properties through hud's regular process would have had no measurable effect on the administrative costs for the regular sales process .