vi. ) hhs said that the report needed to reflect that newborn screening is a system that , in addition to testing , includes follow - up , diagnosis , disease management and treatment , evaluation , and education . however , the draft report did identify the various components of the newborn screening system . hhs said that there is a need to more comprehensively address components of the system beyond testing . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512- 7119 . an additional contact and the names of other staff members who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . to do our work , we surveyed the health officers in all the states during october and november 2002 about their newborn screening programs . we asked each state health officer to work with laboratory and program administration / follow - up staff in responding to the questions . the survey asked for information on the process for selecting disorders to include in newborn screening programs ; laboratory and follow - up activities ; parent and provider education efforts ; expenditures and funding sources ; efforts to evaluate the quality of laboratory testing and program administration / follow - up ; and states' retention and sharing of screening results . the survey focused only on screening for metabolic and genetic disorders . the information on exemptions from screening is based on our review of state newborn screening statutes and newborn screening regulations . information on privacy is based on our analysis of confidentiality provisions in state newborn screening statutes and , for those states that do not have confidentiality provisions in their newborn screening statutes , on confidentiality provisions in newborn screening regulations . we also analyzed confidentiality provisions in state genetic privacy statutes . to identify the newborn screening statutes and regulations that were within the scope of our review , we relied on research provided by the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) in fall 2002 and analyzed only those newborn screening statutes and regulations identified through that research . with regard to genetic privacy statutes , we analyzed only those statutes identified by ncsl in an april 2002 report identifying state genetic privacy laws . we contacted state officials as appropriate to obtain assistance in locating and interpreting statutory authorities . we also relied on ncsl's determination of the number of states that provide penalties for the violation of those statutes . newborn screening programs are governed by a variety of legal authorities . we did not research or analyze any case law interpreting state newborn screening statutes and regulations or genetic privacy statutes , and we did not research or analyze any written interpretive guidance issued by states .