consumers . california's shine the light law requires certain businesses to disclose , upon a california customer's request , whether those businesses have shared the customer's personal information with third parties for direct marketing purposes . pub . 106-102 , 113 stat . 1338 ( 1999 ) ( codified as amended in scattered sections of 12 and 15 u.s.c. ) institutions or that such institutions maintain . glba sharing and disclosure restrictions apply to entities that fall under glba's definition of a “financial institution” or that receive nonpublic personal information from such a financial institution . the act's privacy provisions restrict the sharing of nonpublic personal information collected by or acquired from financial institutions , which include those resellers covered by glba's definition of financial institution . under a “reuse and redisclosure” provision , a nonaffiliated third party that receives nonpublic personal information from a financial institution faces restrictions on how it may further share or use the information . for example , a third party that receives nonpublic personal information from a financial institution to process consumers' account transactions may not use the information for its marketing purposes or sell it to another entity for marketing purposes . glba requires financial regulators to establish appropriate standards for financial institutions relating to administrative , technical , and physical safeguards to ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information ; protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such records ; and protect against unauthorized access to or use of such records or information that could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any customer . pub . 104-191 , 110 stat . 1936 ( 1996 ) ( codified as amended in scattered sections of 18 , 26 , 29 , and 42 u.s.c. ) including marketing . according to guidance from the department of health and human services , the rule aims to strike a balance that permits important uses of information in the provision of health care while protecting patients' privacy . with some exceptions , the rule requires an individual's written authorization before a covered entity — a health care provider that transmits health information electronically in connection with covered transactions , health care clearinghouse , or health plan — may use or disclose that individual's protected health information for marketing . in addition , hipaa requires covered entities to safeguard protected personal health information and protect against any reasonably anticipated unauthorized uses or disclosures of such information , among the act does not directly restrict the use , disclosure , or other things.resale of protected health information by information resellers or other parties not considered hipaa - covered entities . pub . 105-277 , div . c , tit . xiii , 112 stat . 2681-728 ( 1998 ) ( codified at 15 u.s.c . parental consent . although coppa may not directly affect information resellers , coppa governs information collection by operators of websites and online services , both of which are potential sources of personal information for resellers and other parties . coppa would not apply to the collection of a child's information from the child's parent or other adults . electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) .