the plan consists of three volumes . volume i contains information on how the court will address case management issues , including organizational and human capital requirements . volume ii contains information on the development of ijis and its planned applications . volume iii addresses the physical space the court needs to house and operate the family court . courts interact with various organizations and operate in the context of many different programmatic requirements . in the district of columbia , the family court frequently interacts with the child welfare agency — the child and family services agency ( cfsa ) — a key organization responsible for helping children obtain permanent homes . cfsa must comply with federal laws and other requirements , including the adoption and safe families act ( asfa ) , which placed new responsibilities on child welfare agencies nationwide . asfa introduced new time periods for moving children who have been removed from their homes to permanent home arrangements and penalties for noncompliance . for example , the act requires states to hold a permanency planning hearing not later than 12 months after the child is considered to have entered foster care . permanent placements include the child's return home and the child's adoption . in that report , we made several recommendations designed to reduce the risks associated with this effort to acceptable levels . in april 2002 , we met with d.c. courts officials to discuss the actions taken on our recommendations and found that significant actions have been initiated that , if properly implemented , will help reduce the risks associated with this effort . for example , d.c. courts is beginning the work to provide the needed specificity for its system requirements . this includes soliciting requirements from the users and ensuring that the requirements are properly sourced ( eg , traced back to their origin ) . according to d.c. courts officials , this work has identified significant deficiencies in the original requirements that we discussed in our february 2002 report . the family court transition plan provides information on most , but not all , of the elements required by the family court act . for example , the plan describes the family court's method for transferring child abuse and neglect cases to the family court , its one family / one judge case management principle , and the number and roles of judges and magistrates . however , the plan does not ( 1 ) indicate if the 12 judges who volunteered for the family court meet all of the qualifications outlined in the act , ( 2 ) include a request for judicial nomination , and ( 3 ) state how the number of magistrates to hire under the expedited process was determined . in addition , the court could consider taking additional actions , such as using a full range of measures by which the court can evaluate its progress in ensuring better outcomes for children . the transition plan establishes criteria for transferring cases to the family court and states that the family court intends to have all child abuse and neglect cases pending before judges serving in other divisions of the superior court closed or transferred into the family court by june 2003 .