gao - 03-669 . defense internal efficiencies review . further , officials told us that the lack of senate - confirmed , presidentially appointed leadership also presented challenges in moving forward with governance changes . for example , the position of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness was vacant from january 2009 to february 2010 , and the position of assistant secretary of defense for health affairs was vacant from april 2009 to january 2011 . according to officials , these vacancies hindered progress toward greater unification , as someone temporarily filling the position may be reluctant to make major decisions to change the strategic direction of the mhs . without involved and sustained military and civilian leadership being held accountable to guide and sustain progress of its initiatives , it may be difficult for the department to fully and successfully achieve its governance transformation . overall , dod did not consistently employ key management practices to help improve the implementation of its mhs governance initiatives or to evaluate the extent to which it accomplished the initiatives' costs savings and other performance goals . as a result , the gaps we identified may have created risks that undermined dod's efforts as it began to implement its plans . specifically , without key management practices in place , dod lacks both a day - to - day and long - term focus on achieving its goals and accountability to guide and sustain progress of its initiatives . if military health care costs continue to rise at their current rate , they will consume an increasingly large portion of the defense budget and potentially divert funding away from other critical dod priorities . mhs medical - related and governance - related initiatives represent potential opportunities to implement more efficient ways of doing business , reduce overhead , and slow the rate of cost growth while continuing to meet the needs of military personnel , retirees , and their dependents . while dod has developed a number of medical initiatives aimed at slowing health care cost increases , successful implementation will depend upon incorporating characteristics of results - oriented management practices , sustaining top military and civilian leadership that holds officials accountable for achieving agency goals , and establishing clear cost savings targets where applicable . by fully employing the characteristics of results - oriented management with greater attention to its investments and resources and key external factors that could affect the achievement of its goals , dod will gain more assurance that it is effectively managing its health care initiatives and saving money . additionally , opportunities exist for an improved governance structure that can result in direct cost savings but also help to drive clinical savings . as dod moves forward with its governance , clinical , and other initiatives , significant financial savings as well as other efficiencies may be possible with the appropriate level of management attention to ensure success .