1351 , and implementing guidance . dod agreed with our recommendations and outlined its ongoing and planned actions to identify , reverse , and correct illegal and otherwise improper fiscal year 2000 and 2001 closed appropriation account adjustments . dod pointed out that this process may create adverse accounting conditions for a large number of contracts that will require either complete or partial reaudit to determine the correct accounting necessary to resolve the illegal or otherwise improper closed account adjustments we identified . we did not determine for each of these contracts why and for what purpose the numerous acrns were being used . however , it is clear that simplified contract accounting will be a key element to reform dod's financial management . for example , as we pointed out in our july 2001 report , even a simple purchase could cause extensive and costly rework if assigned numerous acrns . the reversal identified other accounting errors on the contract that now must be corrected . according to dfas contract accounting records , as of april 2002 , the contract had nulos totaling over $100 million that will need to be researched and corrected . dfas columbus officials estimate that a reaudit of this contract will take over 1,850 hours to complete . dod officials told us they plan to complete all 30 reaudits to correct the fiscal year 2000 illegal and otherwise improper adjustments by september 30 , 2002 . in addition to dfas's reaudit of the contract , air force officials have also initiated an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the initial $79 million illegal adjustment to determine if personnel responsible for monitoring and administering the contract acted improperly , including the possibility that the adjustments may have resulted in antideficiency act violations . dod agreed that the adjustment was illegal and reversed the $79 million . air force officials told us that they plan to complete the investigation and issue their report before the end of fiscal year 2002 . we noted that dod was in the process of upgrading crs and correcting other control problems that significantly contributed to many of the illegal or otherwise improper adjustments to closed accounts . we previously reported that the dfas contract reconciliation system ( crs ) and other controls necessary to ensure that adjustments to closed appropriation accounts were proper were not in place . however , because dod did not complete many of these actions until the end of fiscal year 2001 , controls were not in place to ensure that the $1.9 billion of closed account adjustments made during fiscal year 2001 were legal and proper . further , on october 1 , 2001 , the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics issued a memorandum in response to our recommendation that he issue a policy to prohibit the writing of contract modifications to change the payment terms of a contract if the change would result in illegal or otherwise improper adjustments . the memorandum instructed the military service secretaries and defense agency directors to make certain that all contracting activities have procedures in place that ensure compliance with the department's financial management policies , which currently preclude the improper adjustments we identified in our report .