i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time . most of the regulators with whom we spoke indicated that national servicing standards could be beneficial . for example , staff from one of the regulators said that the standards would create clear expectations for all servicers , including nonbank entities not overseen by the banking regulators , and would help establish consistency across the servicing industry . the regulators' report on the coordinated review also states that such standards would help promote accountability and ways of appropriately dealing with consumers and strengthen the housing finance market . although various agencies have begun discussing the development of national servicing standards , the content of such standards and how they would be implemented is yet to be determined . according to cfpb staff , whatever the outcome of the interagency negotiations , cfpb will have substantial rulemaking authority over servicing and under the dodd - frank act is required to issue certain rules on servicing by january 2013 . we reported that problems involving financial institutions and consumers could increase when activities are not subject to consistent oversight and regulatory expectations . including specific expectations regarding foreclosure practices in any standards that are developed could help ensure more uniform practices and oversight in this area . to help ensure strong and robust oversight of all mortgage servicers , we recommended that the banking regulators and cfpb include standards for foreclosure practices if national servicing standards are created . in written comments on our report , the agencies generally agreed with this recommendation , and most provided additional details about the ongoing interagency efforts to develop servicing standards . the servicers subsequently resumed some foreclosure actions after reviewing their processes and procedures . however , following these allegations , some homeowners challenged the validity of foreclosure proceedings against them . questions about whether documents for loans that were sold and packaged into mortgage - backed securities were properly handled prompted additional challenges . my statement today focuses on ( 1 ) the extent to which federal laws address mortgage servicers' foreclosure procedures and federal agencies' authority to oversee servicers' activities and the extent of past oversight ; ( 2 ) federal agencies' current oversight activities and future oversight plans ; and ( 3 ) the potential impact of foreclosure documentation issues on homeowners , servicers , regulators , and investors in mortgage - backed securities . it is based on the report we issued on may 2 , 2011 , on foreclosure documentation problems that chairman menendez , senator franken , and ranking members conyers , gutierrez , and capuano requested . in written comments on the report , the agencies generally agreed with our recommendation and said that they would continue to oversee servicers' foreclosure processes . in addition , cfpb noted that it has already been engaged in discussions with various federal agencies to coordinate oversight responsibilities . as part of addressing the problems associated with mortgage servicing , including those relating to customer service , loan modifications , and other issues , various market participants and federal agencies have begun calling for the creation of national servicing standards , but the extent to which any final standards would address foreclosure documentation and processing is unclear .