attorneys . furthermore , the officials said , violations of the act are misdemeanors , and u.s . attorneys generally pursue only felony cases , although they would prosecute a misdemeanor if circumstances warranted . in commenting on a draft of this report , the president of abc said that abc had made two referrals to u.s. attorneys' offices . what actions have the department of justice and the federal trade commission taken under the act ? to identify the fundamental elements that are considered important to address major health and safety , economic , and integrity problems facing professional boxing , we reviewed congressional testimony and studies on professional boxing conducted by a task force of the national association of attorneys general , the department of health and human services , and the department of labor . from these sources , which documented problems in the boxing industry and recommended actions to address them , we identified major problems facing the sport and consolidated the recommendations into 15 fundamental elements that are considered important in helping to provide an adequate level of health , safety , and economic protection to boxers and enhance the integrity of the sport . we discussed these elements with the association of boxing commissions , which agreed that the elements could help provide the desired protection and enhancement . to assess the extent to which the act covers the elements we identified , we analyzed the act's provisions and determined how many address the fundamental elements , either fully or partially . to assess the extent to which selected state and tribal boxing commissions have documented their compliance with the act's provisions , we selected 8 of the 46 state boxing commissions and 2 of the 8 tribal boxing commissions for review . these 10 commissions accounted for 383 , or 49 percent , of the 777 professional boxing events held in the united states in 2001 . ( see app . to what extent have the selected states and tribes adopted provisions that cover fundamental elements that are not covered in the act ? i for a listing of the professional boxing events held by state and tribal commissions in 2001. ) at 2 state ( indiana and michigan ) and the 2 tribal ( miccosukee and mohegan sun ) commissions , we reviewed the case files for all professional boxing events held in 2001 , the most recent year for which we could obtain complete information , and at the remaining commissions , we randomly selected a sample of case files for review . from our reviews of these case files , we determined the extent to which each of the 8 state and 2 tribal boxing commissions had documentation indicating compliance in 2001 with provisions in the act that related to the fundamental elements . we did not independently verify that the provisions were met . our findings for these 10 commissions cannot be generalized to all 46 state and 8 tribal boxing commissions . to assess the extent to which selected states and tribes have provisions that cover fundamental elements in addition to those covered in the act , we reviewed the boxing provisions of the eight states and two tribes and identified fundamental elements that do not appear in the act .