usaid has since terminated this activity . however , usaid officials noted that because of delays in the installation of the dfid system , the usaid database is the only functional system in use by mof's afghanistan revenue department to collect and report revenue data . additionally , usaid's evaluators noted that usaid and dfid did not adequately coordinate efforts related to creating a medium taxpayer office in herat . we reviewed documents and records from the u.s . departments of state ( state ) , the treasury ( treasury ) , and defense ( dod ) , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . according to evaluations by usaid and the afghan government's independent administrative reform and civil service commission , acss training contributed to improvements in civil servants' performance . however , usaid evaluators noted that a lack of baseline data makes it impossible to measure the extent of these improvements . in addition , usaid's evaluation of acss cites several challenges resulting from the project's afghan - led approach , which involved afghan officials in making decisions related to project implementation . some afghan officials viewed the afghan - led approach to mean that they did not need to ensure accountability for some inventory . as a result , in some cases , usaid inventory stickers were reportedly removed from assets before the items were transferred to afghan control , causing accountability issues , according to usaid's evaluation . in addition , some afghan managers interpreted the concept of afghan - led to mean that they could prevent the project's monitoring and evaluation team from obtaining data needed to assess project results , according to usaid's evaluation . for example , when acss staff requested monitoring and evaluation data , some afghan managers responded that they were not required to provide data and that such requests represented an inappropriate desire to exert control over their operations . as a result , the quality of monitoring and evaluation of the project suffered . to assess the effect of treasury advisers' technical assistance to mof , treasury's office of technical assistance requires each adviser to submit monthly reports and an annual evaluation . for the period october 2009 to september 2010 , treasury advisers assessed that although their assistance related to budget and financial management at mof had a positive effect , the results were less than what they were trying to accomplish . for instance , the advisers gave a low score for results related to their efforts to design management reports to improve communication of financial information and enhanced budget control . however , the advisers assigned a high rating for results related to developing training materials to support capacity building . the advisers also assessed the level of commitment and involvement of their afghan counterparts as being above average , with room for improvement . cstc - a has established a process to assess progress on key objectives and rate the capacity of mod and moi , in areas including finance and budget functions , on a quarterly basis .