measuring quality . cms faces the challenge of incorporating into its feedback reports quality measures that are available , apply to specialists , and provide information on patient outcomes . phase i reports did not contain quality measures . in phase ii , cms included 12 gem measures in feedback reports . these measures have the advantage of being readily available because they are based on claims data . for phase iii , cms is considering 28 claims - based quality measures , which are endorsed by nqf . these 28 measures , most of which are hedis® measures , were vetted by an interagency committee composed of medical officers and other internal experts who reviewed the specifications of each measure , including whether the measure was an appropriate reflection of physician care and whether it was evidence based . while a number of quality measures available to cms for use in feedback reports are applicable to primary care physicians , there are fewer measures for specialists . for example , the gem measures used in phase ii reports are only applicable to primary care physicians and a limited number of specialists , such as cardiologists . according to cms's estimate , the majority of individual physicians did not contact their macs to request their reports . in february 2011 , cms mailed hard copies of the 1,596 feedback reports that had not yet been electronically accessed by individual physicians . in theory , the electronic distribution method for physician groups should have been more straightforward since groups were instructed to download their feedback reports from the individuals authorized access to cms computer services ( iacs ) system , which is the same system used to distribute pqrs reports . however , 8 of the 32 physician groups cms reached in its follow - up calls reported difficulty downloading their reports from the iacs system . for example , some groups did not know that they needed to register for an iacs account — a process that takes approximately 10 business days to complete — while others reported not being able to download their feedback reports even after logging onto the iacs system . cms subsequently e - mailed feedback reports directly to those physician groups that had trouble downloading their reports through iacs . cms officials recognized the limitations with the distribution method for phase ii reports , and they plan to use a new distribution method for phase iii reports . cms currently plans to distribute reports to 20,000 individual physicians in one four - state region — nebraska , missouri , iowa , and kansas . according to cms officials , the mac serving this region has e - mail addresses for most physicians in the area . cms plans to e - mail phase iii reports directly to physicians in this region , thereby avoiding the need to mail hard copy notification letters . in addition to distributing reports to individual physicians in the four - state region , cms also plans to distribute phase iii reports to 35 physician groups that have participated in the pqrs group practice reporting option . cms intends to e - mail feedback reports to these 35 physician groups . incentive to access reports .