selected automakers differed in how they offer these services to consumers . for example , some automakers offer free trials for 3 months , 6 months , or 1 year , while other automakers offer these services at no additional cost . as we reported in 2016 , automakers can identify and mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities by using practices such as conducting risk assessments and by employing technological measures . personal information collected from vehicles varies in its sensitivity . as reported by ftc staff , some personal information , such as data on precise geolocation , is considered sensitive due to what it can reveal about someone ( eg , routines ) . there is no federal comprehensive privacy law governing the collection , use , and sale of personal information by private sector companies . rather , federal statutes and regulations addressing privacy issues in the private sector are generally tailored to specific purposes , situations , types of information , or sectors or entities . for example , the health insurance portability and accountability act governs the use and disclosure of an individual's health information by certain entities . federal law also does not require all companies to have a privacy policy or to notify consumers of their privacy practices . while no single federal agency oversees data privacy issues , ftc is a law enforcement agency with a mission to promote consumer protection and prevent business practices that are anticompetitive , deceptive , or unfair to consumers . the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) within dot is responsible for vehicle safety . many organizations and governments have used the fair information practice principles ( fipps ) to guide their privacy practices . the organisation for economic co - operation and development developed a version of the fipps — a set of internationally recognized principles for protecting the privacy and security of personal information — in 1980 that has been widely adopted and was updated in 2013 . while the fipps are principles , not legal requirements , they provide a framework for balancing privacy protections with other interests . like other industries , the automobile industry recently developed a set of privacy principles — the consumer privacy protection principles: privacy principles for vehicle technologies and services ( “consumer privacy protection principles” ) . these principles are a self - regulatory framework influenced by the fipps and were adopted by most automakers with vehicle sales in the united states . the consumer privacy protection principles went into effect january 2 , 2016 . further details about our scope and methodology are in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from april 2016 to july 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . connected vehicles offer services and features to consumers through wireless communication systems .