( see fig . although dual - eligible beneficiaries have a higher rate of service use compared to other medicare and medicaid beneficiaries , as a group , they vary in terms of their need for health care services , reflecting differences in the prevalence of disabilities and other health conditions . under medicare , dual - eligible beneficiaries have coverage for most acute care services , such as care provided by physicians or inpatient hospitals , post - acute skilled nursing facility care , and prescription drugs . under state medicaid programs , dual - eligible beneficiaries also have coverage for long - term nursing facility care and home and community - based services . these beneficiaries may also qualify for payment of medicare premiums and cost sharing . medicaid is the health care payer of last resort , meaning that medicare pays to the extent of its liability before medicaid makes any payments . because dual - eligible beneficiaries receive care through separate programs with different benefits and payment processes , they are likely to be treated by many different health care providers that may not coordinate their care , which can lead to increased costs and poorer patient outcomes . prior to the implementation of the financial alignment demonstration in 2013 , the medicare and medicaid programs were separately responsible for covering certain services for most dual - eligible beneficiaries , and there may not have been an incentive for one program to help control costs in the other program . as we previously reported , any savings that were achieved often resulted from services that were largely paid for by medicare , such as reductions in the number and length of hospital stays , and therefore accrued to the medicare program . therefore , state medicaid programs did not have an incentive to better coordinate care or reduce spending since they did not benefit from any savings that were achieved . however , increasingly there have been efforts to try to improve integration of care between these two programs . for example , one specific effort to integrate care for dual - eligible beneficiaries was the establishment of dual - eligible special needs plans ( d - snp ) in 2003 . d - snps are a type of medicare advantage plan exclusively for dual - eligible beneficiaries that provide specialized services targeted to the needs of their beneficiaries , including a health risk assessment and an ict for each enrolled beneficiary . about 1.9 million of the dual - eligible population was enrolled in d - snps in 2014 . cms's goal for the financial alignment demonstration is to integrate medicare and medicaid services and financing and improve care coordination for beneficiaries , therefore resulting in improved care and savings to medicare and medicaid . cms gave the states flexibility in designing their demonstrations because of the different needs of their target populations , the geographic coverage areas , and the number of eligible beneficiaries . for example , while massachusetts chose to limit its target population to dual - eligible beneficiaries from age 21 through 64 , california , illinois , and virginia chose to include all dual - eligible beneficiaries aged 21 and older as their target populations .