circular no . a - 76 establishes policy for the competition and contracting out of commercial activities , including the use of aircraft , and provides guidance for conducting cost comparisons to determine if the private sector could provide aviation services at a lower cost . circular no . a - 11 , part 7 , establishes policy for planning , budgeting , acquisition , and management of federal capital assets , including aircraft , and requires agencies to submit a capital asset plan and business case summary ( an “exhibit 300” ) for all major capital investments , including aircraft acquisitions and overhauls . the exhibit should demonstrate that the agency analyzed three alternatives and calculated the life cycle costs for each . omb provides procedural and analytic guidance , including its “capital programming guide,” for implementing specific aspects of this policy . omb circular no . a - 126 also sets out responsibilities for gsa regarding aircraft management . in implementing this circular , gsa establishes governmentwide policy on various aspects of aircraft management , including procurement , operation , safety , and disposal , and publishes its regulatory policies in the code of federal regulations . gsa , through the interagency committee for aviation policy , also published a number of other guides and manuals to help agencies manage aircraft acquisitions , use , and disposal . its “fleet modernization planning guide,” in particular , aids programs in developing cost - effective fleet replacement plans . a comprehensive aviation fleet management planning process detailed in guidance that omb and gsa have issued can help federal aircraft programs ensure that they acquire , manage , and modernize their aircraft in a cost - effective manner . sound fleet management decisions should be based on a comprehensive process that relies on three key principles: ( 1 ) assessing a program's long - term fleet requirements , ( 2 ) acquiring the most cost - effective fleet of aircraft to meet those requirements , and ( 3 ) assessing fleet performance to determine if the needs are being effectively met . figure 3 illustrates the fleet management planning process , showing that it is a continuous cycle of planning and analyses . although inl has made limited progress since we first assessed the air wing's aviation fleet management in 2004 in adhering to omb and gsa guidance , the bureau plans to undertake a more systematic management approach beginning in 2007 . the bureau has not ( 1 ) conducted a strategic assessment of all long - term fleet requirements , ( 2 ) justified new aircraft investments in a systematic way that considers the range of alternatives and life cycle costs , or ( 3 ) routinely reviewed the performance of the fleet to ensure that its composition is the most appropriate and cost - effective to achieve the bureau's missions . in august 2006 , we shared our observations with inl officials about inl not adhering to omb guidance , particularly in justifying new aircraft investments and analyzing the composition of the aviation fleet . in september 2006 , after completing its own review of aviation program operations , inl officials told us that in october 2006 they would be initiating a number of steps to resolve weaknesses we observed .