mr . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . repairs can be made at the field level or national ( depot ) level . army field level maintenance is intended to bring equipment back to the 10 / 20 series technical manual standard , is done by soldiers augmented by contractors , as required , and is usually performed at installations where the equipment is stationed . national level maintenance is work performed on equipment that exceeds field level reset capabilities . national level maintenance may be done at army depots , by contractors , by installation maintenance activities , or a combination of the three , and is coordinated by the army material command . the army chief of staff testified in june 2006 that , as of that point in time , the army had reset over 1,920 aircraft , 14,160 tracked vehicles , and 110,800 wheeled vehicles , as well as thousands of other items . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as a result of operations related to oif , the army continues to face an enormous challenge to reset its equipment . this is due to the increased usage of equipment , pace of operations , and the amount of equipment to be reset . at the onset of operations in march 2003 , the army deployed with equipment that in some cases was already more than 20 years old . as of january 2007 , the army has about 25 percent of total on - hand wheeled and tracked vehicles and about 19 percent of rotary wing aircraft deployed to the oif / operation enduring freedom ( oef ) theater as shown in table 1 . as we stated in our march 2006 testimony , the army is operating this equipment at a pace well in excess of peacetime operations . the harsh operating environments in iraq and environmental factors such as heat , sand , and dust have taken a toll on sensitive components . troop levels and the duration of operations are also factors that affect equipment reset requirements . the army defines reset as the repair , recapitalization , and replacement of equipment . he further stated that the army expected to have placed about 290,000 major items in reset by the end of fiscal year 2006 . recapitalization includes rebuilding of equipment which could include: extending service life , reducing operating and support costs , enhancing capability , and improving system reliability . the army recapitalizes equipment either at army materiel command depots or arsenals , the original equipment manufacturer , or a partnership of the two .