this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . for further information on this testimony , please contact bernice steinhardt , director , strategic issues , at ( 202 ) 512-6543 or steinhardtb@gao.gov . key contributions to this testimony were made by elizabeth curda ( assistant director ) , and benjamin t. licht . contact points for our congressional relations and public affairs offices may be found on the last page of this statement . agency quarterly priority progress reviews , consistent with the requirements of the act , begin for the goals contained in the fiscal year 2011 budget of the united states government . omb publishes interim federal government priority goals and prepares and submits a federal government performance plan consistent with the requirements of the act . agencies adjust their current strategic plans , prepare and submit performance plans , and identify new or update existing agency priority goals to make them consistent with the requirements of the act . agencies make performance reporting updates on their fiscal year 2011 performance consistent with the requirements of the act . omb begins federal government quarterly priority progress reviews . omb launches a single governmentwide performance website . full implementation of the act with a new strategic planning cycle . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . labor and hhs agreed they should develop and disseminate this information . hhs noted that it does not have the legal authority to mandate increased tanf - wia coordination or create incentives for such efforts . as part of its proposed changes to the workforce investment act of 1998 , the administration proposes consolidating nine programs into three . in addition , the budget proposal would transfer the senior community service employment program from labor to hhs . sustained oversight by congress could also help ensure progress is realized . although agencies have made progress improving their operations in recent years , they need more effective management capabilities to better implement new programs and policies . as part of the new governmentwide framework created by gprama , omb is required to develop long - term goals to improve management functions across the government . the act specifies that these goals should include five areas: financial management , human capital management , information technology management , procurement and acquisition management , and real property management . all five of these areas have been identified by gao as key management challenges across the government . moreover , some aspects of these areas have warranted our designation as high risk , either governmentwide or at certain agencies .