iii ) . during the second phase , we also asked the experts to evaluate issues facing the development of a comprehensive analysis identified during the first phase . thinness in markets generally refers to a relatively small volume of market transactions and relatively high price volatility . in assessing structural change , the panelists agreed less about the importance of industry concentration and thin spot markets than about the importance of economies of scale . while 35 percent believed that concentration was important or most important , 43 percent believed it somewhat or least important . what are the most important factors that affect cattle prices and producers' incomes ? what are the most significant data and modeling issues to be considered in developing a more comprehensive model , or logical framework , to explain cattle prices and producers' incomes ? we make several recommendations to the secretary of agriculture about how to resolve issues and problems regarding cattle price modeling . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . we will then send copies to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of agriculture ; the chairman , u.s. international trade commission , and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report or would like to discuss it further , i can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-2700 . key contributors to the report are listed in appendix viii . the livelihood of cattle producers depends fundamentally on the price they receive for their product and their cost to produce it . but behind this simple arithmetic are a host of demand and supply factors that influence cattle prices and the costs of raising cattle . for instance , the outcome for producers depends on how consumer tastes affect the demand and price for beef . producers' fortunes also hinge on how weather affects the supply and cost of forage and feed grains . the long biological cycle for cattle means that producers have to make supply decisions about herd size long before animals are sold and prices are known . international trade in cattle and beef , competition from poultry , pork , and other protein sources for a place in the consumer's shopping cart , and household income are also among the many demand factors that influence cattle prices and producers' incomes . in addition , structural changes that have been reshaping segments of the industry are affecting cattle demand and supply . the four largest meatpacking firms now slaughter more than 80 percent of all steers and heifers , compared with 36 percent 20 years ago . agreements between producers and meatpackers stipulating prices , number of cattle , and quality considerations are becoming more commonplace . technological changes now enable packers to deliver shelf - ready products to grocers . information technology is being used to conduct live - cattle auctions on the internet . all these developments and more potentially influence the demand and supply of cattle , directly or indirectly affecting cattle prices and producers' incomes .