we disagree . the army's implementation plan was to have been completed in december 2006 , but was still unavailable as of the end of january 2007 . as a result , gao could not determine whether the elements of our recommendation have been addressed . however , we reviewed the recent logistics planning guidance and while the instruction provides general logistics planning guidance for prepositioned stocks , there are few specifics about requirements setting and readiness reporting for secondary items and operational project stocks , facilities , or maintenance oversight . we also reviewed the identified department guidance . while it does require the determination of war reserve materiel requirements , and annual reports of the existing levels of these items , we do not believe this is a systematic reporting of readiness . in fact , our 2005 report found that the department was not enforcing the readiness - reporting provision , and planned to rescind it . neither instruction addresses the optimum mix of storage and maintenance facilities or prescribes oversight requirements for the maintenance of prepositioned equipment to ensure that it is combat ready . moreover , since these issues have been long - standing , recognized both in prior gao reports and assessments made by the army's own audit organizations , we continue to believe that additional direction is needed . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of defense and the secretary of the army . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . if you or your staff has any questions , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8365 . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to assess whether the army's report comprehensively addressed the required reporting areas in public law 109-163 , we reviewed the army's prepositioned stocks program . we obtained the army's report and reviewed and compared it to the legislative mandate as well as other documents including department of defense ( dod ) regulations , army regulations that govern storage and maintenance of prepositioned stocks , and the army prepositioned stocks strategy 2012 . we also reviewed inspector general and army audit agency reports on prepositioning issues as well as any relevant gao reports . we interviewed officials in the department of defense joint staff , department of the army , army materiel command , and the army sustainment command and its subordinate units at each prepositioning location . we also collected and analyzed internal army reports on inventory and readiness to verify the reported inventory levels and readiness rates of prepositioned stocks . to assess the major challenges facing the army as it revises and implements its prepositioning program , we reviewed the army prepositioned stocks strategy 2012 and dod regulations and documents pertaining to a joint prepositioning strategy , along with relevant past gao , inspector general , and army audit agency reports .