or actc . cbo had similar findings looking at a different set of programs using 2010 census cps data . of households that received assistance from medicaid or children's health insurance program ( chip ) , snap , tanf , or housing assistance , the majority participated in one program , most commonly medicaid / chip or snap , and few participated in more than two programs . while studies we reviewed showed that some benefit recipients may face relatively high marginal tax rates , available research suggests these rates do not strongly affect people's actual behavior regarding how many hours they decide to work . what are the number and selected household characteristics of people in poverty based on the spm ? what are the number , incomes ( as a percent of the spm ) , and household characteristics of people receiving benefits from selected programs ? what is known about how selected low - income programs affect incentives to work ? to address our first question , we identified federal programs , including tax expenditures ( that is , provisions of the federal tax code , such as special credits or deductions that reduce a taxpayer's tax liability ) , that ( 1 ) used a measure of low or limited income to determine eligibility , priority for assistance , or to target resources ; or ( 2 ) have target populations that are disproportionately poor or have program purposes that presume that participants will be low - income . we included programs that targeted individuals , families , and communities . due to their relatively small size , we excluded programs totaling less than $100 million in federal obligations or reduced tax revenue in fiscal year 2013 . to compile this list , we built upon a list maintained by the congressional research service ( crs ) , which also developed the selection criteria , by adding relevant tax expenditures and asking relevant agencies to suggest program additions or deletions consistent with the criteria . we then collected information on each program , such as obligation amounts , number of participants , types of services , and income eligibility requirements , using a survey to the federal agencies that administer these programs . to address our second question , we used census' 2013 ( calendar year ) current population survey ( cps ) data to examine household incomes as a percentage of the spm poverty threshold . we categorized households into six mutually exclusive groups: those headed by an elderly member , those headed by a member with a disability , childless households , married households with children , cohabiting households with children , and single parent households . to address our third question , we described the recipients of eight selected programs , including their incomes as a percentage of the spm poverty threshold , benefit amounts , and household types in 2012 ( calendar year ) , the most recent year available . we obtained this information from the transfer income model , version 3 ( trim3 ) , a microsimulation model that adjusts for substantial underreporting of program participation in the cps data using information from each program on caseloads , benefit amounts , eligibility rules and interactions with other programs .