regarding rotc . the services' headquarters determine the number of newly commissioned officers needed annually to support the services' congressionally mandated end strength requirements for military personnel by considering beginning strength , losses , and transfers . they also provide guidance on the number of officers expected from each officer commissioning program , including rotc . to meet the requirements set by service headquarters , the military services typically operate rotc programs using a 5-year production cycle , beginning the year prior to school entry and culminating in the graduation year . rotc's relevance extends beyond its quantitative production capability . rotc supports the concept of a citizen - soldier and the all - volunteer force with its potential to provide officers from a variety of backgrounds and experiences available within the student population on a college or university campus . rotc also provides a method of military outreach and contact with the public . by statute , at least one rotc unit must be established and maintained in each state if certain conditions are met . the military services' rotc programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths . however , each service reported that various factors may affect their ability to meet these goals , and that they have faced challenges commissioning officers for certain occupational specialties . in addition , half of all rotc units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by dod to justify investment in an rotc unit . in fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall rotc officer production goals for newly commissioned officers . the military services annually issue guidance that specifies goals for the number and types of officers that their respective rotc programs need to produce to meet their current authorized end strength as well as future needs that are projected over a 5-year period . for the 5 years we reviewed , fiscal years 2008 through 2012 , the army's rotc program goal for newly commissioned officers ranged from 4,500 to 5,350 ; the navy's goal , which includes officers for the marine corps , ranged from 1,163 to 1,387 ; and the air force's goal ranged from 1,788 to 1,940 . the services generally met these overall production goals for newly commissioned officers . specifically , as shown in table 2 below , the army met at least 95 percent of its goal , the navy met at least 91 percent of its goal , and the air force met at least 96 percent of its goal during this period . furthermore , the army and the air force each exceeded their production goals for 3 of the 5 years we studied . table 2 shows the production goal , actual production , and the percent of the goal met by each service for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 . service officials told us that they manage rotc enrollments , contract offers , and scholarship awards to help ensure that they reach but do not significantly exceed their officer production goals .