i would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have at this time . this lack of oversight is part of a long - standing pattern . for example , in a june 2003 report , we found that doe's oversight of perc was lacking and recommended that the department take corrective action.commerce rather than doe had oversight responsibility and , therefore , doe did not act on our recommendation . in june 2010 , we found that doe's position regarding perc remained unchanged . in its response to our june 2003 report , doe stated that importantly , as neither the propane nor the oilheat act contained a specific enforcement mechanism for any potential perc or nora violations , in june 2010 we concluded that any oversight program implemented by a federal agency would be hampered . as a result , in our we suggested that as congress considers whether to june 2010 report,reauthorize nora or amend perc's authorizing statute , it may wish to impose greater specificity on the requirements it has established and to establish mechanisms to enhance compliance with those requirements . specifically , we suggested that congress should consider establishing a specific enforcement mechanism , and expressly authorizing doe to refer any potential violations of law to appropriate enforcement authorities . consistent with our suggestion , when congress reauthorized nora in 2014 , it amended the oilheat act to , among other things , provide that in the event of a violation of the act , the secretary of energy is to notify congress of the noncompliance and provide notice of the noncompliance with respect to perc , although congress made on nora's website.technical clarifications to the propane act in 2014 as noted above , it did not address this suggestion we made in 2010 . as discussed earlier , congress has authorized check - off programs for agriculture commodities , such as beef , blueberries , cotton , dairy products , eggs , peanuts , popcorn , pork , and potatoes , and usda has mandated oversight activities over these programs . advertising campaigns , and investment plans , the ams , among other things , ensures that the collection , accounting , auditing , and expenditure of promotion funds is consistent with the enabling legislation and department orders . commerce notified perc in august 2009 that this price composite index threshold had been exceeded . if you or your staff members have any questions about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or by e - mail at ruscof@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . marya link , alison o'neill , kiki theodoropoulos , susan sawtelle , and barbara timmerman made key contributions to this testimony . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .