gao - 02-289t . washington , d.c.: may 2 , 2002 . ssa has not studied the impact of the increased threshold . however , officials believe that the trend in waived ssi overpayments is more likely due to increases in the number of annual reviews of recipients' medical eligibility . these reviews have resulted in an increase in benefit terminations and subsequent recipient appeals . during the appeals process , recipients have the right to request that their benefits be continued . those who lose their appeal can then request a waiver of any overpayments that accrued during the appeal period . ssa will usually grant these requests under its current waiver policies . another factor affecting trends in waivers may be staff application of waiver policies and procedures . although , ssa has developed guidance to assist field staff when deciding whether to deny or grant waivers , we found that field staff have considerable leeway to grant waivers based on an individual's claim that he or she reported information to ssa that would have prevented an overpayment . in addition , waivers granted for amounts less than $2,000 are not subject to second - party review while another employee in the office — not necessarily a supervisor — must review those above $2,000 . during our field visits , we identified variation among staff in their understanding as to how waiver decisions should be processed , including the extent to which they receive supervisory review and approval . in some offices , review was often minimal or non - existent regardless of the waiver amount , while other offices required stricter peer or supervisory review . in 1999 , ssa's oig reported that the complex and subjective nature of ssa's title ii waiver process , as well as clerical errors and misapplication of policies by staff , resulted in ssa incorrectly waiving overpayments in about 9 percent of 26,000 cases it reviewed . the report also noted that 50 percent of the waivers reviewed were unsupported and the oig could not make a judgment as to the appropriateness of the decision . the oig estimated that the incorrect and unsupported waivers amounted to nearly $42 million in benefits . while the oig only examined waivers under the title ii programs and for amounts over $500 , the criteria for granting ssi waivers are generally the same . thus , we are concerned that similar problems with the application of waiver policies could be occurring in the ssi program . ssa has taken a number of steps to address long - standing vulnerabilities in ssi program integrity . ssa's numerous planned and ongoing initiatives demonstrate management's commitment to strike a better balance between meeting the needs of ssi recipients and ensuring fiscal accountability for the program . however , it is too early to tell how effective ssa will ultimately be in detecting and preventing overpayments earlier in the eligibility determination process , improving future payment accuracy rates , and recovering a greater proportion of outstanding debt owed to it .