as a result , each center uses a different system . to determine how effectively these systems support the centers' current operations , we interviewed information system users at each of the four homeownership centers . we asked them about how they use fha's single - family information systems to accomplish their missions , the training they received on the information systems they use , the quality of the data in the information systems , and information systems' limitations . because it requires extensive knowledge of database software , only a few staff at each homeownership center are proficient in using the warehouse . to make the warehouse more useful to the average user , hud has developed a front - end query tool that enables staff to request basic information without having knowledge of database software . however , advanced queries still require program and database knowledge . to better ensure that fha's single - family information systems support the homeownership centers' operations , hud's office of the chief information officer is developing an enterprise architecture , and its office of single family housing is planning improvements to specific information systems . an enterprise architecture defines an organization's current ( baseline ) and desired ( target ) systems operating environments and provides a road map for moving between the two . it is an essential tool for effectively and efficiently reengineering business processes and for implementing and evolving their supporting systems . a well - defined enterprise architecture can assist in optimizing an organization's business operations and the underlying information technology supporting these operations . as required by the clinger - cohen act , hud's office of the chief information officer is developing an enterprise architecture for the department . as planned , its enterprise architecture will define: the work hud performs in achieving the department's mission , the information necessary to deliver programs and operate the department , the automated systems that create or manipulate data to support hud's business , and the technology , such as hardware and software , necessary to support the department's activities . our interviews focused on the computerized homes underwriting management system , the single family acquired asset management system , the approval / recertification / review tracking system , and the single family data warehouse . we reviewed the procedures followed by the centers to target high - risk lenders for review and identify potential loan fraud cases in order to determine the extent to which the centers can rely on their information systems for data . similarly , we obtained and analyzed contract obligation data from the hud procurement system and contract expenditure data from hud's central accounting and program system to determine the systems' ability to readily provide complete and accurate contract cost information . we also reviewed a march 2001 hud - sponsored assessment of the centers' toll - free telephone information systems and operations for information on the strengths and weaknesses of the systems and their ability to provide efficient and cost - effective customer service . finally , we reviewed reports on our prior work at the centers and reports issued by hud's inspector general for information regarding hud's oversight of lenders and its management and marketing contractors .