hire . in an august 2013 memorandum , the army civilian human resources agency requested that department of the army headquarters provide clarification on the definition of a u.s. hire found in dod's lqa instruction . in the memorandum , the army civilian human resources agency explained that the department of the army had been interpreting dod's lqa instruction to mean that a physical presence overseas during time of recruitment ( that is , from the time of application to a job offer ) , for any reason , disqualified a job applicant from meeting the definition of a u.s. hire . the army civilian human resources agency memorandum stated that this interpretation of a u.s. hire did not appear to be logical , and cited a recent case as an example . after receiving the army civilian human resources agency's request for clarification , in september 2013 the deputy assistant secretary of defense for civilian personnel policy sent a policy advisory to the department of the army with guidance on how to define a u.s. hire . the policy advisory stated that an individual may still be considered a u.s. hire even though he or she may have left the united states for a short period of time , and it provided examples of such scenarios . specifically , it clarified that a job applicant should be considered to physically reside in the united states and considered a u.s. hire if he or she takes a vacation outside the united states , travels outside the united states on a temporary duty assignment , or is deployed overseas as a reservist or national guard member during the time of recruitment . in addition , the policy advisory stated that reservists and national guard members deployed overseas benefit from the provisions afforded by the uniformed service employment and reemployment rights act when determinations are made as to whether they are recruited from the united states , and they should be allowed employment benefits that would accrue as if a deployment had not occurred . regarding the issue of u.s. hire , the policy advisory stated that it was dcpas's intent for personnel physically residing in the united states before being deployed overseas to be considered for lqa eligibility as if they were not deployed . the definition of a u.s. hire in dod's september 2013 policy advisory appears to conflict with opm's interpretation of the dssr in compensation claim decisions since at least 2012 . may 2014 opm compensation claim decision , opm further clarified that an employee must be physically residing in the united states during recruitment to be considered a u.s. hire . specifically , opm stated that the dssr does not exempt particular categories of employees , such as military reservists mobilized overseas , from the dssr's requirements for a u.s. hire . thus , federal agencies cannot exempt categories of employees in their implementing regulations , since that would exceed the scope of the dssr . opm file number 11-0037 ( july 11 , 2012 ) .