gao - 12-916r . washington , d.c.: september 20 , 2012 . the legislation is currently pending . the house also passed a bill for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 , which does not include a similar provision , thus it is unclear whether the final national defense authorization act , when passed , will address these issues . dod's annual report on prepositioning programs — with three partially - addressed elements , data inconsistencies among the services , inaccuracies , and omissions — is illustrative of long - standing problems stemming from the lack of overarching dod strategic guidance and oversight . the resulting product is , for the most part , a separate report by each of the services on its prepositioning efforts , rather than a coordinated joint - service picture of dod's prepositioning programs . strategic guidance and enhanced joint departmental oversight could strengthen the coordination and quality assurance procedures that dod uses to compile its annual prepositioning reports for congress . importantly , a more complete , consistent , and accurate report would aid congress in its ability to oversee and make informed decisions about dod's prepositioning programs . further , an increased emphasis on joint program management and oversight of prepositioned materiel and equipment would serve to unify dod's prepositioning efforts in support of defense priorities , identify and reduce any unnecessary overlap or duplication , and achieve cost savings and efficiencies . because we have made recommendations for strategic guidance and oversight for several years without meaningful actions by dod , and in response to continued congressional concern and proposed legislation related to this issue , we are elevating this issue as a matter for congressional consideration . to improve dod's annual prepositioning report and more fully inform the congressional defense committees on the status of prepositioned materiel and equipment , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , in coordination with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , to 1. develop guidance that clearly articulates the type and format of information the services should provide for the report to ensure consistency across dod's prepositioning programs , and 2. identify and correct weaknesses in dod's quality assurance procedures to minimize inaccuracies and omissions in the report . congress may wish to require the secretary of defense to develop overarching strategic guidance , along with an implementation plan , to integrate and synchronize the services' prepositioning programs department - wide . the strategic guidance and implementation plan , which should be developed within a specified time frame , should ensure that dod's prepositioning programs align with national defense strategies and new departmental priorities and emphasize joint oversight to maximize efficiencies and reduce the potential for unnecessary overlap or duplication in prepositioned materiel and equipment across the department . we provided a draft of this report to dod for comment . in its written comments , reproduced in appendix ii , dod concurred with our recommendations .