dod agreed with our recommendation . in june 2005 , dod published its strategy for homeland defense and civil support , which recognizes the national guard's critical role in these missions in both its federal and state capacities . however , the strategy does not detail what the army national guard's role or requirements will be in implementing the strategy . dod has not yet completed a review of the full range of the army national guard's missions and the assets it will need to successfully execute them . in the absence of such requirements , national guard units will continue to be structured and funded largely for their warfighting roles , and with the exception of certain specialized units , such as weapons of mass destruction civil support teams , army national guard forces are generally expected to perform civil support missions with either the resources supplied for their warfighting missions or equipment supplied by states . in its homeland defense and civil support strategy , dod sets goals of ( 1 ) maximizing threat awareness ; ( 2 ) deterring or defeating threats away from the u.s. homeland ; ( 3 ) achieving mission assurance in performance of assigned duties under attack or after disruption ; ( 4 ) supporting civil authorities in minimizing the damage and recovering from domestic chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , or high - yield explosive mass casualty attacks ; and ( 5 ) improving national and international capabilities for homeland defense and homeland security . the strategy recognizes the need to manage risks in the homeland defense and civil support mission areas given resource challenges the department faces in performing all its missions . therefore , the strategy puts first priority on homeland defense missions that the department will lead , with second priority on ensuring the department's ability to support civil authorities in the event of multiple mass casualties from chemical , biological , radiation , or nuclear incidents within the united states . to accomplish these goals , dod has noted that it will have to integrate strategy , planning , and operational capabilities for homeland defense and civil support more fully into its processes . it plans to implement its strategy with dual - purpose forces that are simultaneously trained and equipped for warfighting and homeland missions . the strategy recognizes that national guard forces not on federal active duty can respond quickly to perform homeland defense and homeland security within u.s. territory and are particularly well suited for civil support missions because of their locations across the nation and experience in supporting neighboring communities in times of crisis . based on this strategy , u.s. northern command has been tasked to develop detailed contingency plans to identify the full range of forces and resources needed for the homeland missions dod may lead or the civil support missions in which active or reserve forces should be prepared to assist federal or state authorities . however , it is not clear when this effort will be completed . dod has taken some steps to develop additional information on the national guard's readiness for some of its domestic missions .