grandfathering . nfip allows some property owners to continue to pay grandfathered rates , which do not reflect the most recent reassessments of flood risk ( which occur when the properties are remapped into higher - risk flood zones ) . the grandfathered policies continue to pay premium rates as if they were still located in lower - risk zones . fema does not categorize policies with grandfathered rates as subsidized because they are within classes of policies that fema says are not subsidized as a whole . fema officials acknowledged that in such classes of policies , property owners who obtain grandfathered rates are cross - subsidized by other policyholders in the same flood zone . that is , other policyholders pay higher rates to cover the shortfall in premiums from grandfathered policies . as a result , both grandfathered policies and the policies that cross - subsidize them do not pay rates in line with the risk of the individual property and can send inaccurate risk signals to policyholders . furthermore as we found in prior reports , fema does not know how many of its current policies pay grandfathered rates , which raises questions about its rate - setting process . before 2010 , it did not identify whether newly issued policies were receiving grandfathered rates . as a result , it cannot currently verify whether grandfathered policies result in premium revenue sufficient to pay for the estimated full long - term risk of flood loss . however , fema officials said that in april 2016 they had begun a phased effort to collect the information necessary to identify and analyze grandfathered policies , and that they expect to complete the effort by september 2018 . as we previously recommended , fema needs to obtain the information necessary to determine full - risk rates for subsidized policyholders . as we previously recommended , fema needs to collect information on the location , number , and losses associated with grandfathered policies and analyze the financial effect these properties had on nfip . as we previously suggested , congress could eliminate subsidized premium rates and require fema to charge all policyholders premium rates that reflect the full risk of loss . in addition , congress could ensure that premium rates are more closely linked to the individual property's flood risk by eliminating flat hfiaa surcharges and requiring fema to incorporate necessary reserve fund charges into premium rates based on individual property risk . requiring fema to obtain elevation certificates for subsidized policyholders and data on grandfathered policies could address the policy goal of making nfip's federal fiscal exposure more transparent and facilitate congressional oversight . the cost of obtaining elevation certificates could be burdensome for some policyholders , but could be considered as part of an affordability assistance program ( see following section ) and also could help some policyholders reduce their premium rates . eliminating subsidized premium rates and requiring fema to charge all policyholders premium rates that reflect the full risk of loss could reduce fiscal exposure to the federal government and promote flood risk resilience , two of the policy goals we identified .