officials from the u.s . marshals service — which is responsible for investigating cases in which sex offenders fail to register — stated that having this notification mechanism in place will improve their ability to provide evidence to support the prosecution of offenders who fail to register because it is important for the prosecutor to demonstrate that the offender was aware of the registration requirements . information about additional steps that ice has taken , or could take , to determine what , if any , responsibility ice - ero has with regard to informing alien sex offenders of their registration requirements was omitted because ice considered it to be fouo . to alien sex offenders under order of supervision to inform these offenders about potential registration requirements . before releasing an alien under order of supervision , ice - ero requires aliens to review and sign department of homeland security ( dhs ) form i - 220b , order of supervision , which explains the alien's conditions of release . the form also allows for additional conditions to be identified in an addendum . the addendum includes the following condition for aliens convicted of a sex offense: “that you register as a sex offender , if applicable , within 7 days of being released , with the appropriate agency ( s ) and provide ice with written proof of such within 10 days.” officials from two of the five ice - ero field offices included in our review told us they have an office policy in place that requires deportation officers to inform alien sex offenders under supervision about potential registration requirements . we subsequently found that six individuals in our sample should not have been included in the population of alien sex offenders under supervision , resulting in a final sample size of 131 and an estimated total population of 1,309 . both offices use the addendum to the form i - 220b to inform these offenders . however , as part of a broader effort that began in 2009 to review and revise ice's policy on reporting requirements under orders of release on recognizance and orders of supervision , ice - ero officials indicated that they must take additional steps before finalizing pending revisions . for example , revisions to the form i - 220b must be put through the agency's formal clearance process before a revised version can be published . also , given the uncertainty surrounding its legal role in informing alien sex offenders in its custody about potential registration requirements , the agency needs to assess whether there is a legal obligation for ice - ero to notify alien sex offenders of their requirements to register . according to ice officials , if ice - ero determines that there is no such obligation , it will then decide whether or not to retain , as a matter of policy , the language in the form i - 220b addendum regarding sex offender registration . sorna states that , shortly before the release of the sex offender from custody for the offense giving rise to the duty to register , an appropriate official must inform the sex offender of that person's duties under sorna , which would include registration , and explain those duties .