these pollutants may include contaminants such as perchlorate . many of the studies we reviewed contained only research findings , rather than conclusions or observations on the health effects of perchlorate . appendix iii from our 2005 report provides data on these studies , including who sponsored them ; what methodologies were used ; and , where presented , the author's conclusions or findings on the effects of perchlorate . only 44 of the studies we reviewed had conclusions on whether perchlorate had an adverse effect . however , adverse effects of perchlorate on the adult thyroid are difficult to evaluate because they may happen over longer time periods than can be observed in a typical research study . moreover , different studies used the same perchlorate dose amount but observed different effects , which were attributed to variables such as the study design type or age of the subjects . such unresolved questions were one of the bases for the differing conclusions in epa , dod , and academic studies on perchlorate dose amounts and effects . the adverse effects of perchlorate on development can be more easily studied and measured within typical study time frames . of the studies we reviewed , 29 evaluated the effect of perchlorate on development , and 18 of these found adverse effects resulting from maternal exposure to perchlorate . epa has issued drinking water regulations for more than 90 contaminants . the safe drinking water act , as amended in 1996 , requires epa to make regulatory determinations on at least five unregulated contaminants and decide whether to regulate these contaminants with a national primary drinking water regulation . the act requires that these determinations be made every five years . in january 2005 , the national academy of sciences issued its report on epa's draft health assessment and the potential health effects of perchlorate . the academy reported that although perchlorate affects thyroid functioning , there was not enough evidence to show that perchlorate causes adverse effects at the levels found in most environmental samples . on april 11 , 2007 , epa announced its preliminary determination not to regulate 11 of the contaminants on this list . the agency also announced that it was not making a regulatory determination for perchlorate because epa believed that additional information may be needed to more fully characterize perchlorate exposure and determine whether regulating perchlorate in drinking water presents a meaningful opportunity for health risk reduction . several federal environmental laws provide epa and states authorized by epa with broad authorities to respond to actual or threatened releases of substances that may endanger public health or the environment . for example , the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ) , as amended , authorizes epa to investigate the release of any hazardous substance , pollutant , or contaminant . the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ) gives epa authority to order a cleanup of hazardous waste when there is an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health or the environment , and one federal court has ruled that perchlorate is a hazardous waste under rcra .