these types of assistance are not discussed in this report . from an allocation of $506 million , empire state developed various programs to assist small businesses . empire state's business recovery grant ( brg ) program provides grants to businesses to compensate them for economic loss , and its small firm attraction and retention grant ( sfarg ) program provides incentives to remain in or relocate to lower manhattan . other conditions or limitations are described in the explanations of specific analyses that follow . key contributors to this report were catherine hurley , mark mcardle , dan meyer , and barbara roesmann . to obtain information on the assistance provided to small businesses from community development block grant ( cdbg ) supplemental funding , we interviewed officials from the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , new york state's empire state development corporation ( empire state ) , and the lower manhattan development corporation ( lmdc ) . for our analysis , we obtained detailed program information and data on the various programs that hud , empire state , and lmdc have created to assist businesses after september 11 , including an empire state database of grant recipients . this database is the same one used by the hud office of inspector general to monitor expenditures in new york . we ascertained how information for this database was collected and maintained to determine its reliability , and we found the information to be reliable for our purposes . to obtain information on other sources of funds available to rebuild and sustain business in lower manhattan , we interviewed officials from the following: the small business administration ( sba ) , the new york city economic development corporation , the new york small business development center ( sbdc ) , fleetboston and the bank of new york , and nonprofit organizations that provided financial assistance . we selected the nonprofit organizations by reviewing various media and internet sources on the rebuilding effort in new york as well as through referrals from other organizations concerned with economic renewal in lower manhattan . we met with officials from the following nonprofit and other organizations that offer financial assistance toward the rebuilding and economic renewal efforts: accion new york , downtown alliance , new york city partnership , renaissance development corporation , seedco , and the september 11th fund . we also met with business advocacy groups , whose directors are often small business owners , to obtain their views on the assistance that empire state , sba , and others provided . these groups included the following: from the ground up , manhattan chamber of commerce , tribeca organization , wall street rising , and the world trade center tenants association . we obtained the empire state disaster recovery database , which captured data on program activity through september 11 , 2002 . we used these data to calculate descriptive statistics on the numbers of businesses , dollar amounts , and other characteristics of the business recovery grant ( brg ) program , the small firm attraction and retention grant ( sfarg ) program , and the large business recovery grant program .