pathways programs . these programs promote employment opportunities in the federal government for students and recent graduates through an exception to the competitive hiring rules for certain positions in the federal workforce . appendix i provides additional information on the hiring flexibilities that were available to dod's civilian acquisition workforce as of september 2018 . sections of title 5 outline recruitment and retention flexibilities that agencies can offer to prospective and current employees to help recruit and retain highly qualified personnel . like other federal agencies , dod can use these incentives to recruit and retain civilian personnel , including those in the acquisition workforce . recruitment bonuses may be paid to a newly hired federal employee if the agency determines that the position would be difficult to fill in the absence of a bonus . relocation bonuses may be paid to a current employee who must relocate for a position in a different geographic area if the agency determines that the position would be difficult to fill in the absence of a bonus . retention bonuses may be paid to a current employee if the agency determines that the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee or a special need of the agency for the employee's services makes it essential to retain the employee who would likely leave federal service in the absence of such a bonus . student loan repayments may be paid on behalf of a job candidate or a current employee to recruit or retain highly qualified personnel . the employees must sign a service agreement of at least 3 years with the agency that pays the loans . federal agencies may pay up to $10,000 per employee per calendar year , totaling no more than $60,000 for any one employee . dod can fund the four monetary incentives with the defense acquisition workforce development fund ( dawdf ) — a dedicated funding source for the recruitment , training , and retention of dod's acquisition personnel — as well as other sources , such as operations and maintenance appropriations . appendix ii provides additional information on the recruitment and retention flexibilities available to dod's civilian acquisition workforce as of september 2018 . several offices within dod play key roles in managing how the department uses hiring , recruitment , and retention flexibilities for the civilian acquisition workforce . for example , hci oversees department - wide acquisition workforce strategic planning ; dcpas develops implementation guidance on how dod flexibilities should be used ; and civilian personnel centers track the extent to which flexibilities are used ( see table 2 ) . from fiscal year 2014 to 2018 , dod increased its use of hiring , recruitment , and retention flexibilities for its civilian acquisition workforce . during this period , dod used hiring flexibilities for 90 percent of its approximately 44,000 civilian acquisition workforce hiring actions . this high usage rate came as usd ( a&s ) , usd ( p&r ) , and the military departments' leadership encouraged their hiring managers and human resource specialists to use the hiring flexibilities to help reduce the length of the hiring process . additionally , during this period , dod's human resource specialists issued guidance that helped address confusion about the requirements governing the hiring authorities .