however , risks to the aviation system remain . of these 300 arrests , tsa stated that 27 percent were illegal aliens , 17 percent were drug - related , 14 percent were related to fraudulent documents , 12 percent were related to outstanding warrants , and 30 percent were related to other offenses . dhs has requested about $254 million in fiscal year 2012 for the spot program , which would support an additional 350 ( or 175 full - time equivalent ) bdos . if tsa receives its requested appropriation , tsa will be in a position to have invested about $1 billion in the spot program since fiscal year 2007 . a 2008 report issued by the national research council of the national academy of sciences stated that the scientific evidence for behavioral monitoring is preliminary in nature . the report also noted that an information - based program , such as a behavior detection program , should first determine if a scientific foundation exists and use scientifically valid criteria to evaluate its effectiveness before deployment . the report added that such programs should have a sound experimental basis and that the documentation on the program's effectiveness should be reviewed by an independent entity capable of evaluating the supporting scientific evidence . as we reported in may 2010 , an independent panel of experts could help dhs develop a comprehensive methodology to determine if the spot program is based on valid scientific principles that can be effectively applied in an airport environment for counterterrorism purposes . thus , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security convene an independent panel of experts to review the methodology of the validation study on the spot program being conducted to determine whether the study's methodology is sufficiently comprehensive to validate the spot program . we also recommended that this assessment include appropriate input from other federal agencies with expertise in behavior detection and relevant subject matter experts . dhs concurred and stated that its validation study , completed in april 2011 , included an independent review of the study with input from a broad range of federal agencies and relevant experts , including those from academia . dhs's validation study found that spot was more effective than random screening to varying degrees . for example , the study found that spot was more effective than random screening at identifying individuals who possessed fraudulent documents and identifying individuals who law enforcement officers ultimately arrested . according to dhs's study , no other counterterrorism or screening program incorporating behavior - and appearance - based indicators is known to have been subjected to such a rigorous , systematic evaluation of its screening accuracy . however , dhs noted that the identification of such high - risk passengers was rare in both the spot and random tests . in addition , dhs determined that the base rate , or frequency , of spot behavioral indicators observed by tsa to detect suspicious passengers was very low and that these observed indicators were highly varied across the traveling public .