mmrb . this code identifies a soldier with a permanent profile who has been returned to duty by an mmrb ( mos medical review board. ) this code identifies a soldier who is allowed to continue in the military service with a disease , injury , or medical defect that is below medical retention standards , pursuant to a waiver of retention standards under chapter 9 or 10 of this publication , or waiver of unfit finding and continued on active duty or in active reserve status under ar 635 – 40 . fit for duty . this code identifies the case of a soldier who has been determined to be fit for duty ( not entitled to separation or retirement because of physical disability ) after complete processing under ar 635 – 40 . *the army regulation does not provide medical criteria for these codes . appendix v: department of defense pre - deployment health assessment ( dd form 2795 ) . brenda s. farrell , ( 202 ) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov . in addition to the contact named above , marilyn wasleski , assistant director ; gina hoffman ; latoya king ; grace materon ; elisha matvay ; sonya phillips ; jeanett reid ; norris smith iii ; and cheryl weissman made significant contributions to the report . in addition , terry richardson , carl barden , and steven putansu provided guidance and assistance with design and analysis ; nicole harms provided legal advice ; steve fox , marcia crosse , and tom conahan advised on message preparation ; and clara mejstrik , adam smith , maria storts , and john wren provided assistance during medical file reviews . dod civilian personnel: medical policies for deployed dod federal civilians and associated compensation for those deployed . gao - 07- 1235t . in order to create the sample , we used the universe of soldiers from each installation who were preparing for deployment from april 1 , 2006 , to march 31 , 2007 , to iraq or afghanistan and answered “yes” to question number 3 on the pre - deployment health assessment ( form dd 2795 ) which asks , “are you currently on a profile , or light duty , or are you undergoing a medical board ? defense health care: comprehensive oversight framework needed to help ensure effective implementation of a deployment health quality assurance program . ” our statistical samples are representative of soldiers at these installations who meet our eligibility criteria . washington , d.c.: june 22 , 2007 . dod civilian personnel: greater oversight and quality assurance needed to ensure force health protection and surveillance for those deployed . gao - 06-1085 . washington , d.c.: september 29 , 2006 . military personnel: dod and the services need to take additional steps to improve mobilization data for the reserve components . gao - 06-1068 . those who did not complete a pre - deployment health assessment during this time frame had no chance of being selected . military disability system: improved oversight needed to ensure consistent and timely outcomes for reserve and active duty service members .