ongoing . prc approved the market test for metro post on november 14 , 2012 . usps selected san francisco as the first city for testing . the market test began on december 17 , 2012 . revenue: not yet available . description pursuant to an interagency agreement between usps and the state department and authorities granted under 39 u.s.c . usps is authorized to accept passport applications on behalf of the department . under the terms of the most recent agreement ( 2000 ) , trained usps personnel , among other things , review each passport application for completeness , record pertinent information about the identification the applicant used , collect fees , and send the completed application to the state department . usps retains a portion ( $25 ) of the collected fees in the form of an execution fee . in fiscal year 2011 , usps accepted approximately 5.6 million passport applications in over 6,300 post offices nationwide . according to usps , the applications generated net income of $43 million for the period . by using usps's extensive network of post offices , the agreement is intended to provide passport applicants with more convenient access to passport acceptance services than the state department could provide alone , particularly in remote u.s. areas . according to the interagency agreement , either party may terminate the agreement , without liability , with 180 days advance notification to the other party . through various interagency agreements and under authority granted by 39 u.s.c . § 411 , in 2006 , usps began conducting eeo investigations on behalf of other federal agencies . according to usps officials , usps initiated this service to generate additional revenue . in addition , usps believed that given its extensive experience in this area , it could use its existing contractor workforce to reduce the costs and improve the timeliness and quality of other agencies' eeo complaints processing . since 2006 , 17 federal agencies have entered into interagency agreements with usps for this purpose . in fiscal year 2011 , usps's national eeo investigative service office completed 255 investigations for 9 federal agencies that generated about $558,000 in net income . according to usps , interagency agreements can be terminated at any time by the mutual agreement of the parties . pursuant to authorities granted under 39 u.s.c . § 411 and a 4-year interagency agreement with hud , usps agreed to provide hud with data on vacant u.s. residential and business addresses . according to the agencies' most recent agreement ( september 2011 ) , hud intends to use this information to forecast neighborhood changes , assess neighborhood needs , and measure the performance of several of its programs . hud agreed to pay usps $30,000 in 2011 and has options to purchase additional data over a 4-year period for a total cost of up to $160,000 . the parties specified that the agreement may be terminated for no reason or any reason by written notice to the other party . in addition to services that usps performs on a discretionary basis for federal agencies , usps is required — either by law or executive order — to perform numerous services on behalf of federal agencies .