messrs . chairmen and ranking members of the subcommittees: we are pleased to be here today to discuss the department of defense's ( dod ) management of its business systems modernization program , an area of longstanding concern to the congress , and one that we first designated as a high risk program in 1995 and continue to do so today . as we have said , dod's existing systems cannot provide reliable financial data to support informed decisionmaking and promote accountability , thus leaving dod at a high risk of fraud , waste , and abuse . in addition , we have said that dod's business systems modernization will remain at risk until the department has implemented proven modernization management controls that are embodied in the clinger - cohen act , federal guidance , and commercial best practices . these controls include investing in new and existing systems within the context of a departmentwide modernization blueprint , commonly called an enterprise architecture ; investing in these systems in an incremental or modular fashion , and only when they can be economically justified on the basis of costs , benefits , and risks ; and overseeing these system investments to ensure that they are delivering promised system capabilities and benefits on time and within budget . last year , your hearing brought additional attention and focus to dod's business systems modernization program . in our testimony at that hearing , we highlighted the department's modernization management weaknesses , and the department testified that it was committed to addressing each . www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 03-553t . to view the full report , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . for more information , contact randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-5555 or hiter@gao.gov or gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 9505 or kutzg@gao.gov . lack of effective oversight: dod has not consistently overseen its system projects to ensure that they are delivering promised system capabilities and benefits on time and within budget . for example , for the four dfas projects , oversight responsibility is shared by the dod comptroller , dfas , and the dod chief information officer . however , these oversight authorities have largely allowed the four to proceed unabated , even though each was experiencing significant cost increases , schedule delays , and / or capability and scope reductions and none were supported by adequate economic justification . as a result , dod invested approximately $316 million in four projects that may not resolve the very financial management weaknesses that they were initiated to address . since then , dod has begun a number of efforts to follow through on its stated commitment . for example , it plans to issue the first version of its enterprise architecture in may 2003 , it is creating a new investment governance and oversight approach , and it is revising its system acquisition guidance . we view each of these as positive steps . however , the fact remains that today , with but isolated exceptions , dod's management and oversight of its hundreds of new and existing system investments is largely unchanged from where it was last year .