accounts . the automatic ira is intended to help address the retirement security needs of those not already covered by an employer - sponsored retirement plan . further , the automatic ira is designed to extend the benefits of payroll - deduction savings and automatic features of 401 ( k ) s. according to some experts , requiring employers to offer automatic iras is necessary for a number of reasons . first , employers have had the option to establish payroll - deduction iras for over 10 years , and for a number of reasons , very few employers have done so . as we previously reported , ira providers have told us some employers may be reluctant to adopt a payroll - deduction ira because they believe that their publicizing the payroll - deduction iras may be construed as an endorsement of the policy , which could potentially violate erisa . what are the potential benefits and limitations of automatic ira proposals and state - assisted retirement savings proposals ? to answer the first question , we obtained and reviewed data collected by large 401 ( k ) plan administrators ; reviewed studies on the impact of 401 ( k ) automatic enrollment polices on participation rates and saving patterns ; and conducted in - depth interviews with selected plan sponsors about their experience with and views of automatic enrollment . we found the data from these sources to be sufficiently reliable for our use . to answer the second question , we reviewed and analyzed existing proposals , as well as feasibility studies of these proposals , and interviewed pension industry experts in academia , representatives of employee benefit consulting firms , plan administrators , and state and federal government officials . throughout this report , we considered a worker to be covered by an employer - sponsored plan if the employer offers such a plan , the worker is eligible to participate under the plan's rules , and the worker chooses to participate in it . for both objectives , we also reviewed relevant federal regulations . we conducted this audit from august 2008 to october 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i of this report contains a detailed description of the methodology used in this review and its limitations . traditionally , employers that sponsored retirement plans generally established “defined benefit” plans . under such plans , participation is generally automatic for eligible workers , and retirement benefits are established by a formula , often based on a worker's salary and years of service . since the 1980s , defined contribution plans — most prominently the 401 ( k ) plan — have supplanted defined benefit plans as the dominant type of private - sector retirement plan .