state did not provide comments on the draft . dod and state also provided us with technical comments , which we have incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of state , the secretary of defense , and other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact zina merritt at ( 202 ) 512-5257 or merrittz@gao.gov , or charles johnson at ( 202 ) 512-7331 or johnsoncm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . we found that dsca fulfilled these steps . for example , dsca officials said they work with the military departments and other dod entities to determine what specific assistance the military departments will provide and which military department will provide it . according to officials , this coordination occurs by e - mail and phone . based on those determinations , the appropriate dsca country program director develops an exord — which may be subsequently updated with additional guidance — that provides direction to the various dod components involved . we found that dsca had developed exords for the 12 drawdowns authorized from fiscal years 2011 through 2015 for which dod provided articles and services . finally , dsca tracks the execution of the drawdown by maintaining data on articles and services , along with their value , in an automated database , the dsca 1000 system . the military departments provide execution data to dsca , and dsca enters the data into its 1000 system . we found dsca maintained execution data on the 12 drawdowns for which it provided articles and services , as discussed earlier in this report . as we noted in our april 2016 report , dsca has not reported to congress on any of the instances in which drawdown authorities have been used since 2011 . these five authorizations totaled $200 million and are in various stages of execution . as of august 2016 , the value of articles and services delivered was approximately $125.0 million , constituting about 64 percent of all articles and services delivered under the 13 total drawdowns . the drawdown efforts have been in three areas: ( 1 ) airlift and aerial refueling assistance to france and chad in their efforts to secure mali from terrorists and violent extremists ; ( 2 ) defense articles and support to countries supporting the african union - led international support mission in the central african republic ; and ( 3 ) defense services , including airlift and military education and training , to support benin , cameroon , chad , niger , and nigeria in their efforts to defeat the terrorist group boko haram . state officials stated that these drawdowns provided just - in - time defense and helped peacekeeping on the african continent while furthering the security and foreign policy goals of the united states .