gao - 02-610 . washington , d.c.: june 7 , 2002 . let me provide you more details . we have reported that many state and local officials have expressed concerns about the coordination of federal public health preparedness and response efforts . officials from state public health agencies and state emergency management agencies have told us that federal programs for improving state and local preparedness are not carefully coordinated or well organized . for example , federal programs managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , department of justice ( doj ) , and oep and cdc all currently provide funds to assist state and local governments . each program conditions the receipt of funds on the completion of a plan , but officials have told us that the preparation of multiple , generally overlapping plans can be an inefficient process . in addition , state and local officials told us that having so many federal entities involved in preparedness and response has led to confusion , making it difficult for them to identify available federal preparedness resources and effectively partner with the federal government . the proposed transfer of numerous federal response teams and assets to the new department would enhance efficiency and accountability for these activities . this would involve a number of separate federal programs for emergency preparedness and response , including fema ; certain units of doj ; and hhs's office of the assistant secretary for public health emergency preparedness , including oep and its ndms and mmrs programs , along with the strategic national stockpile . in our previous work , we found that in spite of numerous efforts to improve coordination of the separate federal programs , problems remained , and we recommended consolidating the fema and doj programs to improve the coordination . the proposal places these programs under the control of one person , the under secretary for emergency preparedness and response , who could potentially reduce overlap and improve coordination . this change would make one individual accountable for these programs and would provide a central source for federal assistance . the proposed transfer of mmrs , a collection of local response systems funded by hhs in metropolitan areas , has the potential to enhance its communication and coordination . officials from one state told us that their state has mmrss in multiple cities but there is no mechanism in place to allow communication and coordination among them . although the proposed department has the potential to facilitate the coordination of this program , this example highlights the need for greater regional coordination , an issue on which the proposal is silent . because the new department would not include all agencies having public health responsibilities related to homeland security , coordination across departments would still be required for some programs . for example , ndms functions as a partnership among hhs , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , fema , state and local governments , and the private sector . however , as the dod and va programs are not included in the proposal , only some of these federal organizations would be brought under the umbrella of the department of homeland security .