( see app . i for the status of those recommendations. ) these veterans were ultimately seen beyond the 30-day time frame . a key component of vha's oversight of veterans' access to primary care , particularly for newly enrolled veterans , relies on monitoring appointment wait times . however , vha monitors only a portion of the overall time it takes newly enrolled veterans to access primary care . vha officials said they regularly review data related to access , including data on wait times for primary care . vha has developed reports to track these data for each visn and va medical center . vha officials indicated that they look for trends in average wait times across medical centers , and also track the percentage of veterans seen within 30 days of their preferred dates or return - to - clinic dates . officials from all six visns and medical centers in our review said they use these reports , and other locally developed reports , to monitor wait times for each of their sites of care to identify any trends . visn and va medical center officials said if they find wait times are increasing , they work to identify solutions , which the medical center is then tasked with implementing . for example , officials from two visns and medical centers told us that in response to increasing wait times for primary care , actions have been taken to improve patient access , including opening new sites of care and hiring additional providers . we found , however , that vha monitors only a portion of the overall time it takes newly enrolled veterans to access primary care , which is inconsistent with federal internal control standards . according to the internal controls for information and communications , information should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the entity who need it to carry out their responsibilities . however , vha monitors access using veterans' preferred appointment dates , which are not determined until schedulers make contact with veterans , as the basis for measuring how long it takes veterans to be seen , rather than the dates newly enrolled veterans requested on their enrollment applications that va contact them to schedule appointments . ( see fig . therefore , vha does not account for the time it takes to process enrollment applications , or the time it takes va medical centers to contact veterans to schedule their appointments . consequently , data used for monitoring and oversight do not capture veterans' overall experiences , including the time newly enrolled veterans wait prior to being contacted by a scheduler , which makes it difficult for officials to effectively identify and remedy scheduling problems that arise prior to making contact with veterans . our review of medical records for 120 newly enrolled veterans found that , on average , the total amount of time it took to be seen by primary care providers was much longer when measured from the dates veterans initially requested va contact them to schedule appointments than it was when using appointment wait times calculated using veterans' preferred dates as the starting point . ( see table 4. )