both charter schools were located in the same school district . the office for civil rights ( ocr ) is responsible for ensuring equal access to education through enforcement of the civil rights laws , including section 504 of the rehabilitation act . the department also said that it anticipates that the knowledge gained from the four compliance reviews currently underway will provide additional insights into compliance issues specific to charter schools that could inform the development of guidance . further , education said that based on information they have received to date , including information provided in our study , the department is considering additional or updated guidance for charter schools related to recruitment , admissions , accessibility , and the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) . with respect to our second recommendation , education said that over the next several years , it proposes to examine issues underlying enrollment of students with disabilities in several ways . for example , it plans to conduct focus groups with parents of students with disabilities in a sample of communities with a larger charter school presence , compile a set of case studies of charter schools with both high and low enrollment of students with disabilities , and review state polices and guidance concerning students with disabilities in charter schools . education also provided technical comments , which have been incorporated in the report as appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of education . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . however , data limitations and design issues prevented us from including findings at the metropolitan level and on charter schools' lea status in our report . due to variation in charter school structure and policies across states , and because decisions about the placement of students with disabilities in charter schools , traditional public schools , or a separate facility of some type , are made at the school district level , and placement decisions vary according to students' needs , aggregated data may mask differences in enrollment levels of students with disabilities in charter schools and traditional public schools at the metropolitan level . therefore , in addition to an aggregate and state - level analysis for the 41 states with operating charter schools , we also attempted to analyze counts of students with disabilities at the school - level for selected metropolitan areas . however , several factors hindered us from conducting this type of analysis . some of the metropolitan areas we considered were missing data on students with disabilities , while geographical issues presented challenges in other areas . specifically , in states where charter schools are their own lea , it was not always clear where the charter schools were physically located in the metropolitan area , and therefore difficult to determine which traditional public school district should serve as the appropriate basis of comparison .