washington . we disagree . we conducted a comprehensive qualitative review of over 59,359 comments entered into the cost performance and visibility framework from fiscal years 2009 through 2011 and categorized them into broad themes of issues raised by the bases in reference to the common output level standards . as shown in figure 2 of our report , the need for clarity of the common output level standards was raised over 200 times by the joint bases during this timeframe . however , because dod's data is not adequate to permit us to specifically identify what types of clarification problems were being encountered by the bases , we supplemented our analyses with follow - up interviews to provide anecdotal examples that added some context to our analyses and described a few of the types of problems encountered . moreover , our data suggested that dod's quarterly process had proven ineffective at addressing the need for clarification and review of problematic standards since some standards continue to be problematic despite the quarterly reviews which dod asserts are working . for these reasons , we continue to believe that improvements are needed in dod's current process for reviewing and clarifying the common standards to address the bases reported concerns . dod partially concurred with our fifth recommendation , to develop a common strategy that expands routine communication between the joint bases , and between the joint bases and osd , to encourage joint resolution of common challenges and sharing of best practices and lessons learned . dod stated that it believed there are already mechanisms in place to facilitate routine communication between the joint bases , as well as between osd and the joint bases , and that it is increasing those opportunities . dod listed the various opportunities it has for sharing joint basing information , all of which we are aware: the military services have routine communication with the joint bases and are the lead to encourage joint resolution of common challenges and sharing of best practices . dod chairs a working group twice a month where headquarters service representatives offer information and ideas generated during internal service meetings with joint bases . best practices from the bases are shared in a periodic newsletter . osd and the military services conduct joint base site visits each year to capture any opportunities for improvement and hosts an annual management review meeting each year with the joint base commanders . while we recognize that dod has facilitated communication of lessons learned and best practices , as we note in our report , because different services have the lead role in providing support services at different joint bases , best practices are not necessarily shared with all the bases across the services . dod's joint basing policy states that problems at the joint bases should be identified and addressed at the lowest possible level , which can include only officials at any given joint base . thus , the majority of these issues may not be elevated to the working group but may still occur at multiple joint bases leading to duplication of effort in resolving common problems experienced in multiple locations .