monitor affirmative action programs . in 2016 ofccp relied significantly on voluntary compliance by federal contractors , and this approach could not ensure that contractors were complying with basic requirements like developing and maintaining an aap . by signing a qualifying federal contract , covered contractors are required to develop an aap within 120 days of contract commencement and update it annually . however , ofccp had no process for ensuring that the tens of thousands of establishments that had signed a qualifying federal contract do so . ofccp has taken steps towards implementing a mechanism to monitor aaps but has not fully implemented this recommendation . in 2018 ofccp contracted with an information technology vendor to develop a web - based portal to allow contractors to upload their aaps electronically for convenience , increased compliance , and for ofccp review and resource prioritization . officials anticipate delivery of the portal by the close of fiscal year 2019 . simultaneously , according to officials , ofccp has developed the necessary information collection request to obtain approval from omb to collect all contractors' aaps annually . the agency anticipates that omb approval will be timely to align with completion of the aap portal . facilitate timely compliance officer training . in 2016 , we found that ofccp may not be providing timely training for new compliance officers . according to ofccp officials , budget constraints had made it difficult to hold timely centralized training for new compliance officers . in half of the regions we visited , compliance officers or management officials we spoke with noted that this training was not provided in a timely manner after new officers are hired . for example , one compliance officer told us they worked for 8 months before receiving formal training . in one district office , compliance officers we spoke with explained that the lack of uniform , timely training made compliance officers feel unprepared when they began their job . further , without providing timely training to new compliance officers , ofccp cannot ensure consistency in its enforcement efforts across its offices . ofccp has taken steps to improve its training program , but has not fully implemented this recommendation . in 2018 , ofccp retained an expert consultant to assess its national training program and standardize its training development and evaluation process . the assessment was completed in 2019 and a plan of action was created to address any program gaps , according to agency officials . officials reported that the plan of action was fully implemented in fiscal year 2019 and ofccp obtained a 5 year international association for continuing education and training ( iacet ) accreditation for its program . ofccp officials told us they are developing a learning management system that will allow new compliance officers easy access to training soon after the hiring . ofccp plans for the system to include the development of course requirements by level of competence — basic , intermediate , and advanced . ofccp officials told us they plan to roll out the new system in january 2020 .