this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , 31 u.s.c . the frbs did not adequately identify and authenticate users . for example , due to the weak design of password reset functionality for one of the distributed - based auction applications , anyone on the internet could potentially change the password for a user in the application by having only his or her userid . recognizing the severity of this vulnerability , the frbs took steps to immediately correct this weakness . the frbs also designed and implemented the distributed - based auction applications to only rely on one means of authentication , rather than a combination of authentication factors for controlling access . furthermore , the frbs did not replace a well - known vendor - supplied password on one of their systems , thereby increasing the risk that an unauthorized individual could guess the password and gain access to the system . authorization is the process of granting or denying access rights and privileges to a protected resource , such as a network , system , application , function , or file . a key component of granting or denying access rights is the concept of “least privilege.” least privilege is a basic underlying principle for securing computer resources and data . the term means that users are granted only those access rights and permissions that they need to perform their official duties . to restrict legitimate users' access to only those programs and files that they need to do their work , organizations establish access rights and permissions . user rights are allowable actions that can be assigned to users or to groups of users . file and directory permissions are rules that are associated with a particular file or directory and regulate which users can access them and the extent of that access . to avoid unintentionally giving users unnecessary access to sensitive files and directories , an organization must give careful consideration to its assignment of rights and permissions . the frbs did not implement sufficient authorization controls to limit user access to distributed - based computer resources . the distributed - based auction applications had excessive database privileges that were granted explicitly as well as inherited through permissions given to all users . as a result , malicious users could use these excessive privileges to exploit other vulnerabilities in the applications . in addition , the frbs had granted users administrative privileges on their workstations , even though most users did not require this level of access . granting unnecessary access privileges increases the risk that a workstation could be successfully compromised and then used to attack other frb resources . as a result , the unnecessary level of access granted to computer resources provides opportunities for individuals to circumvent security controls to deliberately or inadvertently read , modify , or delete critical or sensitive information . boundary protections demarcate a logical or physical boundary between protected information and systems and unknown users . organizations physically allocate publicly accessible information system components to subnetworks with separate , physical network interfaces , and prevent public access into their internal networks , except as authorized .