but it still has not been completed . while the agencies are now in a better position to do so , they must build on the progress made to date by completing data and modeling efforts underway , updating their fire management plans with the results of these data efforts and ongoing research , and following through on recent cost - effectiveness and affordability initiatives . however , time is running out . further delay in completing a strategy that cohesively integrates these activities to identify options and related funding needs will only result in increased long - term risks to communities , ecosystems , and federal budgetary resources . because there is an increasingly urgent need for a cohesive federal strategy that identifies long - term options and related funding needs for reducing fuels , we have recommended that the secretaries of agriculture and the interior provide the congress , in time for its consideration of the agencies' fiscal year 2006 wildland fire management budgets , with a joint tactical plan outlining the critical steps the agencies will take , together with related time frames , to complete such a cohesive strategy . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or at nazzaror@gao.gov . jonathan altshul , david p. bixler , barry t. hill , richard johnson , and chester joy made key contributions to this statement . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . nationally it has established strategic priorities and increased resources for implementing these priorities . locally , it has enhanced data and research , planning , coordination , and collaboration with other parties . with regard to accountability , it has improved performance measures and established a monitoring framework . over the last 5 years , the federal government has been formulating a national strategy known as the national fire plan , composed of several strategic documents that set forth a priority to reduce wildland fire risks to communities . similarly , the recently enacted healthy forests restoration act of 2003 directs that at least 50 percent of funding for fuel reduction projects authorized under the act be allocated to wildland - urban interface areas . while we have raised concerns about the way the agencies have defined these areas and the specificity of their prioritization guidance , we believe that the act's clarification of the community protection priority provides a good starting point for identifying and prioritizing funding needs . similarly , in contrast to fiscal year 1999 , when we reported that the forest service had not requested increased funding to meet the growing fuel reduction needs it had identified , fuel reduction funding for both the forest service and interior quadrupled by fiscal year 2004 .