( app . worker benefits are protected . individuals successfully transition from welfare dependency to self - sufficiency . as agreed , using the selected key outcomes for labor as a framework , we ( 1 ) assessed the progress labor has made in achieving these outcomes and the strategies the agency has in place to achieve them ; and ( 2 ) compared labor's fiscal year 2000 performance report and fiscal year 2002 performance plan with the agency's prior year performance report and plan for these outcomes . additionally , we agreed to analyze how labor addressed its major management challenges , including the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security , that we and labor's office of inspector general ( oig ) identified . appendix i provides detailed information on how labor addressed these challenges . ii contains labor's comments on a draft of this report. ) gpra is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking , management , and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs . new and valuable information on the plans , goals , and strategies of federal agencies has been provided since federal agencies began implementing gpra . under gpra , annual performance plans are to clearly inform the congress and the public of ( 1 ) the annual performance goals for agencies' major programs and activities , ( 2 ) the measures that will be used to gauge performance , ( 3 ) the strategies and resources required to achieve the performance goals , and ( 4 ) the procedures that will be used to verify and validate performance information . these annual plans , issued soon after transmittal of the president's budget , provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer - term goals and mission and day - to - day activities . annual performance reports are to subsequently report on the degree to which performance goals were met . the issuance of the agencies' performance reports , due by march 31 , represents a new and potentially more substantive phase in the implementation of gpra — the opportunity to assess federal agencies' actual performance for the prior fiscal year and to consider what steps are needed to improve performance and reduce costs in the future . the role of the department of labor is to promote the welfare and economic security of the nation's workforce and ensure that workplaces are safe . to carry out its mission , the agency oversees a broad array of programs , from those that help students' transition into the workforce to those that inspect the workplace or ensure the integrity of pension plans for retirees . these activities affect more than 100 million workers and more than 10 million employers . this section discusses our analysis of labor's performance in achieving its key selected outcomes and the strategies the agency has in place , relating to human capital and information technology , for achieving these outcomes . labor reported making progress toward its outcome of reducing injuries , illnesses , and fatalities in the workplace . labor reported that it met four of the six goals we reviewed under this outcome and substantially achieved another goal .