gao - 06-581t . washington , d.c.: april 5 , 2006 . unemployment insurance: factors associated with benefit receipt . gao - 06-341 . washington , d.c.: march 7 , 2006 . labor determined these overpayments to be the result of fraud . more recently , in its fiscal year 2007 budget justification , labor estimated that approximately $313 million in overpayments results from identity theft each year . labor's oig has documented identity theft schemes as a major management challenge . for example , in its semiannual report to congress , the oig reported on a case in which individuals used more than 200 stolen identities to file 222 ui claims and obtain more than $693,000 in ui benefits from february 2001 through february 2005 . labor has introduced several initiatives to help states improve their ability to detect and prevent overpayments in the ui program . first , labor has initiated a pilot using the national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) to further assist in identifying and preventing improper payments , including overpayments . the ndnh is a database , maintained by the department of health and human services' office of child support enforcement , that contains information on all newly hired employees , quarterly wage reports for all employees , and ui claims nationwide . the ndnh enhances states' ability to detect unreported work violations by ui claimants working in other states or for certain employers that operate in multiple states . in addition , the ndnh can help improve the accuracy of labor's error estimates . information from the ndnh cross - match can be readily integrated into labor's bam program by cross - matching the ssns of the claimants against the ndnh . in fiscal year 2005 , three states ( texas , utah , and virginia ) participated in the pilot . according to labor , initial results of the pilot show that overpayment detections increased 114 percent in texas , 41 percent in utah , and 73 percent in virginia . the texas workforce commission also reported that using the national cross - match in combination with the existing statewide cross - match helped detect 50 percent more cases of potential fraud in one quarter than it would have detected otherwise . in addition , on the basis of its ndnh pilot results , labor reported in its fiscal year 2005 performance and accountability report that a substantial amount of additional overpayments could be detected using the database . labor reported that it is moving ahead with full implementation of the ndnh cross - match with 5 states ( connecticut , texas , utah , virginia , and washington ) , and expects 29 states to use the ndnh by the end of fiscal year 2006 . in addition to its ndnh pilot , labor is also pursuing the use of other data sources to improve ui program integrity . in particular , labor continues to promote states' data sharing with other agencies , such as the social security administration ( ssa ) , to identify and prevent overpayments . this practice is usually done weekly or biweekly .