ftd alert . irs' ftd alert program has existed since 1972 and is intended to improve overall employment tax compliance . the current program's selection criteria identifies only those depositors who owe more than $50,000 per year , have delinquencies resulting in ftd penalties in recent quarters , and appear to have underpaid the current quarter . if the employers have ftd penalties in the four previous quarters , irs revenue officers are required to contact them to help them understand deposit requirements and the cost and consequences of not depositing as required . although the program provides irs with an opportunity to intervene with these employers concerning their delinquencies , several aspects of the program have been criticized . irs is in the early stages of addressing these weaknesses , as discussed below . over the years , both our reports and irs internal audit reports have been critical of several aspects of the ftd alert program . for example , we stated in a 1991 report that irs lacked a tracking system to determine the result of contacts made with delinquent employers , and irs echoed this same criticism in tigta's 1998 internal report . without such a system , irs cannot assess the effectiveness of the program . the irs national office ftd analyst responsible for the program stated that a meeting is planned in january 2002 to begin development of such a system . as recommended by tigta in 1998 , irs' research organization has been exploring ways to improve the ftd alert program that may result in current selection criteria being replaced . according to irs , earlier efforts have demonstrated some success in identifying the most collectible delinquencies and prioritizing the workload to target those delinquencies . irs' effort to improve employer selection criteria was to be completed in mid - 2000 , but its information systems staff was unable to provide the required data when it was originally requested owing to competing priorities . irs requires the data to develop algorithms based on the current selection criteria that will , if successful , allow irs to identify and prioritize employers nationwide who are at risk of becoming delinquent . the abc's of ftds . this 2-hour class on ftd , including videotape entitled “the abc's of ftds” and a course workbook , was designed to assist employers who experienced difficulties in staying compliant with their federal tax deposit obligations . employers were invited to attend classes that were held in september 1998 , february 1999 , and june 1999 in the seattle metropolitan area . if employers attended the class and remained compliant for two subsequent quarters , irs excused them from paying up to three tax quarters of the ftd penalties they had previously incurred . however , only 28 of 315 employers invited to attend classes actually did so , according to irs data . to analyze the pilot program , irs established both a test group consisting of those employers who attended the educational classes and received the materials and various control groups that did not . irs had planned to track payment compliance for these groups through june 2001 , but instead concluded the evaluation in june 2000 , using compliance data from five quarters .