recovery . ( stage 1 ) the recovery of lithium source material from disassembled weapons is performed at y - 12 in building 9204-2e . y - 12 recovers lithium hydride and deuteride from csas it receives from the pantex plant . historic purification process . ( stage 2 ) the historic purification process relied on wet chemistry , conducted at y - 12 in building 9204-2 . using wet chemistry y - 12 purified the lithium hydride and deuteride ( source material ) recovered from dismantled weapons using hydrochloric acid . the resulting purified lithium chloride salt was then stored in 55-gallon drums at y - 12 until it was needed for use . the lithium chloride was subjected to electrolysis to produce lithium metal , which was then placed in a reactor vessel with either hydrogen or deuterium gas for conversion to lithium hydride or deuteride . the bulk lithium hydride or deuteride resulting from this process was then ready for use as feedstock for the lithium forming and machining phase . current cleaning process . ( stage 2 ) the current cleaning process relies on dmm , which entails sanding and wiping the lithium hydride and deuteride ( source material ) removed directly from the disassembled weapons to remove impurities . this cleaned material becomes bulk material feedstock for the lithium forming and machining phase . the cleaning process is conducted in building 9202 ; the cleaned components are packaged and moved to building 9204-2 for forming and machining . lithium forming and machining . ( stage 3 ) lithium forming and machining are conducted in building 9204-2 and involves preparing the purified or cleaned lithium feedstock for use in refurbished weapons . during this stage , the lithium hydride or deuteride ( feedstock ) is broken into pieces and fed into a crusher / grinder to pulverize it into a powder , which is then blended and loaded into molds for pressing . the resulting blanks are machined into high - precision components . historically , the machine dust resulting from this process was purified using wet chemistry and reused . now , y - 12 stores this dust for future use but cannot recycle it without wet chemistry capabilities . regardless of whether lithium undergoes dmm or wet chemistry , the resulting end product ( i.e. , lithium components suitable for refurbished weapons ) must be qualified through a process approved by the design laboratories ( los alamos and lawrence livermore national laboratories ) . qualification entails testing for chemical and mechanical homogeneity , density , and tensile properties , among other things . although only the end product ( lithium component ) must be qualified , y - 12 prepares for qualification by evaluating the lithium material throughout the production process . y - 12 may evaluate the source material ( i.e. , lithium components from retired weapons ) , the processes used to produce lithium ( i.e. , cleaning , machining ) , and the feedstock for the forming and machining ( i.e. , the purified or cleaned lithium ) . wet chemistry produced a homogeneous feedstock that only had to be evaluated once for use in a given weapon system in production , regardless of the source material .