some areas are implementing streamlining efforts . for example , a law was recently enacted in colorado allowing servicers to choose a shortened statutory foreclosure process for vacant properties that provides for a foreclosure sale to be scheduled in half the time of the typical process , according to a state press release on the new law . in addition , some courts in florida have created expedited foreclosure court dockets for uncontested cases in order to move a higher number of cases forward in the process . shortening the time it takes to complete foreclosure could result in less decrepit properties that servicers could resell more easily and at a higher price than they might have been able to otherwise — thereby encouraging servicers to abandon fewer foreclosures . however , some stakeholders raised concerns about streamlined actions . first , servicers and other industry analysts note that determining whether properties were actually vacant could be difficult . second , shortening foreclosure times is contrary to the trend among state and local governments across the country to enact laws such as foreclosure moratoriums that extend foreclosure timelines . therefore , some raised concerns about ensuring that homeowners had appropriate opportunities to work out a solution within a shortened time frame . third , another potential unintended consequence is that in judicial states , shortening the time frame for foreclosing on vacant properties by moving these cases to the head of the queue could lengthen the time frames for other cases , increasing servicers' carrying costs on those properties . other jurisdictions have attempted to require servicers to complete foreclosures once they have initiated them . for example , staff in one court we visited told us the judge requires a foreclosure sale to be scheduled within 30 days after the court enters a foreclosure judgment . if servicers do not comply , they can be held in contempt of court , fined , and perhaps serve jail time . many local officials and researchers we interviewed suggested that foreclosure cases should be dismissed , that servicers should face fines , or that servicers should lose their right to foreclose or take other actions on a property if they do not take action on foreclosure proceedings or schedule a sale within a certain amount of time . these actions could reduce abandoned foreclosures because servicers would more thoroughly consider the benefits and costs of foreclosure before initiating the process , and once initiated , foreclosures would be completed in a timely manner . others also said that these actions would quickly move properties out of the foreclosure process and into the custody of a servicer that local officials could then hold responsible for the property's upkeep . however , others noted that such a requirement could result in missed opportunities to work out solutions with the borrower and that it could be difficult to enforce . for example , representatives of servicers and others told us that borrowers often sought such alternatives at the last minute before a foreclosure sale and that requiring servicers to complete all foreclosures would limit their ability to explore alternatives late in the foreclosure process .