messrs . chairmen , this testimony is based on our analysis of the proposed language of h.r . 3844 that you introduced in the house of representatives on march 5 , 2002 . it is also based on the results of our review of first - year gisra implementation as presented in my march 2002 testimony and in our report , which is being released today entitled , information security: additional actions needed to fully implement reform legislation . we performed our work during march and april 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dramatic increases in computer interconnectivity , especially in the use of the internet , continue to revolutionize the way our government , our nation , and much of the world communicate and conduct business . however , this widespread interconnectivity also poses significant risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support , such as telecommunications , power distribution , public health , national defense ( including the military's warfighting capability ) , law enforcement , government , and emergency services . likewise , the speed and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age , if not properly controlled , allow individuals and organizations to inexpensively eavesdrop on or interfere with these operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage . as greater amounts of money are transferred through computer systems , as more sensitive economic and commercial information is exchanged electronically , and as the nation's defense and intelligence communities increasingly rely on commercially available information technology , the likelihood increases that information attacks will threaten vital national interests . further , the events of september 11 , 2001 , underscored the need to protect america's cyberspace against potentially disastrous cyber attacks — attacks that could also be coordinated to coincide with physical terrorist attacks to maximize the impact of both . since september 1996 , we have reported that poor information security is a widespread federal problem with potentially devastating consequences . although agencies have taken steps to redesign and strengthen their information system security programs , our analyses of information security at major federal agencies have shown that federal systems were not being adequately protected from computer - based threats , even though these systems process , store , and transmit enormous amounts of sensitive data and are indispensable to many federal agency operations . in addition , in both 1998 and 2000 , we analyzed audit results for 24 of the largest federal agencies and found that all 24 had significant information security weaknesses . as a result of these analyses , we have identified information security as a governmentwide high - risk issue in reports to the congress since 1997 — most recently in january 2001 . these weaknesses continue as indicated by our most recent analyses for these 24 large federal agencies that considered the results of inspector general ( ig ) and gao audit reports published from july 2000 through september 2001 , including the results of the igs' independent evaluations of these agencies' information security programs performed as required by gisra .