we did not include this change because it does not improve the clarity of the report . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees ; the director , federal emergency management agency ; and the director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-8984 . key contributors to this report were mark abraham , julia duquette , david gill , signora may , robert procaccini , and carrie watkins . the following table identifies the major management challenges confronting the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , including the governmentwide high - risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security . fema's fiscal year 2000 performance report generally discussed the agency's progress in resolving its challenges . of the agency's 9 major management challenges , its performance plan had ( 1 ) 38 goals or measures that were directly related to 7 challenges ; ( 2 ) 3 goals or measures that were indirectly applicable to 2 challenges — one of these challenges also has goals or measures directly related to it ; and ( 3 ) no goals or measures related to 1 challenge — financial management systems — but discussed strategies to address this challenge . the first column lists the challenges identified by our office and / or fema's office of inspector general ( oig ) . the second column discusses the progress that has been made in resolving the challenges as discussed in fema's fiscal year 2000 performance report . we conducted our review from april 2001 through june 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we provided a draft of this report to fema for its review and comment . fema chose to meet with us to provide oral comments on the draft report , and we met with fema's gpra manager of the administration and resource planning directorate on june 28 , 2001 , to discuss these comments . while the fema official agreed with the report , she provided suggested changes that we have included in this final report . the suggested changes that we incorporated in this report include ( 1 ) adding clarifying language that fema did not “fully meet” five goals related to the outcome to minimize human suffering and property losses to recognize the progress fema had made , ( 2 ) adding five goals outlined in fema's fiscal year 2002 performance plan related to the major management challenge to support terrorism preparedness coordination , and ( 3 ) adding additional information on progress made to resolve the major management challenge to improve the financial condition of the nfip . fema also asked us to identify its key outcomes with fema's own numbering system in its performance plan in addition to the narrative description we provided to increase clarity in the discussion of agency outcomes .