tion i not ilable . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ( see fig . in the state department's performance and accountability report for fiscal year 2006 , the state ig reported the need for expanded oversight to encompass new department initiatives in transformational diplomacy , global repositioning , and public diplomacy , as well as substantial increases in programs for iraq and afghanistan , counternarcotics , counterterrorism , embassy construction , and information technology . in addition , the ig has noted significant growth in the number of programs and grants with mandated ig oversight , congressional and management requests for special reviews and investigations , and opportunities for joint activities with other departments . the 1986 amendment that created the current ig office was a reaction to concerns expressed in prior gao reports in 1978 and 1982 . in those reports , we raised concerns about the independence of the previous ig offices established administratively by the department and through statutes prior to 1986 . at the same time , our concerns about the state ig's independence were based in part on the ig's use of temporarily assigned foreign service officers to staff the ig office for performing inspections . these protections are necessary in large part because of the unusual reporting requirements of the igs , who are both subject to the general supervision and budget processes of the agencies they audit , while at the same time being expected to provide independent reports of their work externally to the congress . government auditing standards states , “in all matters relating to the audit work , the audit organization and the individual auditor , whether government or public , must be free from personal , external , and organizational impairments to independence , and must avoid the appearance of such impairments to independence . auditors and audit organizations must maintain independence so that their opinions , findings , conclusions , judgments , and recommendations will be impartial and viewed as impartial by objective third parties with knowledge of the relevant information.” personal independence applies to individual auditors at all levels of the audit organization , including the head of the organization . personal independence refers to the auditor's ability to remain objective and maintain an independent attitude in all matters relating to the audit , as well as the auditor's ability to be recognized by others as independent . the auditor needs an independent and objective state of mind that does not allow personal bias or the undue influence of others to override the auditor's professional judgments . this attitude is also referred to as intellectual honesty . the auditor must also be free from direct financial or managerial involvement with the audited entity or other potential conflicts of interest that might create the perception that the auditor is not independent .