also , the overall methodology used for both reports is the same . we also analyzed relevant cbp training policies and procedures for incumbent officers , cbp course offerings for incumbent officers , and cbp's job task analysis that identifies the differences between the former and new basic academy training to identify possible incumbent officer training needs . we obtained and reviewed relevant data from cbp's training records and enrollment network ( traen ) for the period 2004 through 2011 , as well as supplemental data from otd . we assessed the reliability of the traen data by ( 1 ) interviewing knowledgeable officials about how training completion is documented , and how the completions are entered in traen ; ( 2 ) reviewing relevant documentation ; and , ( 3 ) comparing traen records to training completion records we obtained directly from select field offices . we determined the traen data were not sufficiently reliable to demonstrate cbp officer training completion and training needs , as discussed later in this report . further , we interviewed ofo and otd officials on cbp efforts to address any identified training needs and compared these efforts with otd training standards . to assess cbp policies for tracking , overseeing , and evaluating incumbent officer training , we interviewed officials at the ofo training branch , the office of field programs , the office of passenger admissibility , and passenger programs , including the fraudulent document analysis unit ( fdau ) and the enforcement policy office . we also visited three ports of entry — john f. kennedy international airport , laredo land port , and dallas - fort worth international airport — during january and february 2011 to observe cbp officer inspections and to interview cbp officers and port management regarding incumbent cbp officer training and inspection policies and procedures . we selected john f. kennedy international airport and dallas - fort worth international airport because of the large volume of international passenger traffic going through these airports . we selected laredo land port because the postacademy course was piloted at this port of entry . our observations helped us understand cbp officer passenger inspections . we also interviewed officials with training - related responsibilities at cbp headquarters , the new york field office , and three land ports of entry we visited — john f. kennedy international airport , laredo land port , and dallas - ft. worth international airport . our observations from these visits and interviews are illustrative and provide insights but are not generalizable to all ports of entry across the country . the scope of our review was limited to training provided to all cbp officers who serve in the passenger environment at ports of entry with an emphasis on passenger admissibility . it did not include training on customs procedures , radiation detection or training provided to those cbp officers who serve as canine specialists , or those who may serve in the cargo environment . we conducted this performance audit from december 2010 to december 2011 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .