gao - 02-337 . washington , d.c.: january 18 , 2002 . labor had no formal comments . hhs and labor also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . what factors have constrained or complicated financial agreements with fbos ? how have the federal charitable choice provisions intended to provide safeguards for various parties been implemented and what , if any , problems have arisen ? how are fbos being held accountable for performance and what information is available regarding their performance ? to obtain a national perspective on charitable choice , we analyzed the results of our 50-state survey of tanf contracting , interviewed federal officials who oversee programs with charitable choice provisions , and reviewed federal agency reports on barriers to contracting with fbos and the implementation of charitable choice provisions . to obtain more specific information about how charitable choice has been implemented , we visited 5 states — georgia , indiana , texas , virginia , and washington — and conducted telephone interviews with faith - based liaisons established in 15 states . we selected these 5 states to obtain a range in the levels of both state government activities with regard to faith - based initiatives and contracting with fbos , as well as geographic dispersion . in each state , we interviewed state and local government officials who administered programs with charitable choice provisions , representatives of fbos , and representatives of agencies involved in contracting for social services . we performed our work between september 2001 and july 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more details on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . to increase the involvement of religious organizations in the delivery of social services , the congress included charitable choice provisions in the legislation for several federal programs . these provisions were designed to remove legal or perceived barriers that religious organizations might face in contracting with the federal government . first enacted in 1996 , charitable choice provisions apply to administrators , service providers , and recipients of tanf and wtw funds , as established through prwora . subsequently , the congress included charitable choice provisions in the 1998 reauthorization of the csbg program and the amendments to the public health services act in 2000 affecting the sapt block grant program . funding levels for programs with charitable choice provisions vary considerably , with tanf having the highest level of funding ( see table 1 ) . these programs allocate funds in a variety of ways . tanf , csbg , and sapt are block grants , which are distributed in lump sums to states . wtw has two funding streams , one of which is comprised of state formula grants that are mostly passed on to localities and the other representing a smaller portion of funds called national competitive grants , which the department of labor awarded directly to local applicants . most federal funding for these programs is administered by state or local government entities , which have the ability to contract with social service providers , including religious organizations .