, assets ) . according to an fca official , the agency periodically reviews these rules but currently has no plans to modify them . fca officials said that these rules are designed to equitably apportion the annual costs of supervising , examining , and regulating the institutions . for this reason , the methodology relies on asset “brackets” that are much like tax brackets and reflect economies of scale , since the costs of supervision rise as a regulated institution becomes larger ; however , these costs do not increase as fast as asset growth . ofheo regulates secondary market entities . fhfb regulates the 12 federal home loan banks ( fhlbanks ) that lend on a secured basis to their member retail financial institutions . direct expenses include the costs of examining and supervising farmer mac , while indirect expenses are the overhead costs “reasonably” related to fca's services . in general , the other federal financial regulators that regulate institutions similar to fca's use comparable methodologies to calculate assessments . the law requires that the assessments be apportioned “on a basis that is determined to be equitable by the farm credit administration.” fca's current assessment regulations for banks , associations , and “designated other system entities” were developed in 1993 through the negotiated rulemaking process . banks , associations , and the farm credit leasing services corporation ( leasing corporation ) are assessed on the same basis ( i.e. estimated direct expenses take into account the costs incurred in the most recent examination of farmer mac and any expected changes in these costs for the next fiscal year . we asked fca officials if and how the assessment formula they use for farmer mac enables them to compensate for risks in farmer mac's business activities . fca officials also noted that , as their data show , direct costs can rise due to other factors . for example , from 1999 to 2001 , fca officials noted that they invested considerable resources in developing a risk - based capital rule for farmer mac . during this time , fca incurred unique costs that increased farmer mac's assessment for those years . a proportional amount of fca's indirect expenses — that is , those expenses that are not attributable to the performance of examinations — is allocated to farmer mac . this amount is calculated as a relationship between the budget for a certain fca office and fca's overall expense budget for the fiscal year covered by the assessment . ( the proportion for 2000 was 28.9 percent. ) multiplying the percentage by the estimated direct expenses attributable to farmer mac equals the amount of indirect expenses . the addition of the estimated direct expenses and indirect expenses equals the estimated amount to be assessed farmer mac for the fiscal year . indirect expenses would include , for example , the cost of providing personnel services and processing travel vouchers for osmo . at the end of each fiscal year , fca may adjust its assessment to reflect any changes in actual expenses . other entities in the farm credit system , such as the funding corporation , are assessed separately using a methodology similar to the one used for farmer mac .