we provided a draft of our report to dod for comment . in oral comments received from the office of the secretary of defense , the department concurred with our report . we are sending copies of this letter to interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; the deputy under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness ; the under secretary of defense comptroller ; the secretary of the army ; the director of the defense finance and accounting service ; and the director of the office of management and budget . sixteen could not pay their basic household expenses . four soldiers were unable to obtain loans to purchase a home , meet other needs , or obtain va educational benefits due to service - related debt on their credit reports . at least 8 soldiers were owed travel reimbursements at the same time they were being pursued for collection of their service - related debts . the army's failure to record separation paperwork in the pay system and other payment errors resulted in over $12,000 of debt for one severely battle - injured soldier . although the soldier's family expected that he would receive retirement pay when his army pay stopped upon his separation , the soldier had no income for several months while the army attempted to recover his military debt . as a result , his family was unable to pay household bills , the utilities were shut off , and the soldier's dependent daughter was sent out of state to live with relatives . in addition , although the soldier had been receiving treatment at an army medical center and a va polytrauma center over a 5-month period , the day the soldier was released to go home , his army unit called his wife to ask why he was not reporting for duty — an indication that his army unit had considered him to be awol . table 4 illustrates examples of the effects of debt collection actions on selected separated army battle - injured soldiers and their families based on our case studies . five soldiers and family members told us that they had contacted their unit finance offices multiple times for assistance in resolving their pay and debt problems . however , the soldiers said that finance personnel either did not get back to them as promised or the finance personnel they spoke with said they could not help them with their problems . dfas and army officials we spoke with acknowledged that finance office personnel at some locations lacked the knowledge needed to accurately input transactions to soldier pay accounts . dfas officials told us they recently initiated actions to train finance office personnel at several locations . debts imposed the greatest hardship on battle - injured soldiers who have had to endure financial problems while they cope with adjusting to physical limitations due to their injuries . the following case summaries provide additional details of selected soldier debt experiences . the first soldier , case study #1 , battled for 1-1 / 2 years after he separated from the service to resolve his debts and obtain a reimbursement related to travel expense during his deployment . because new physical limitations upon separation from military service .