mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for questions about this statement , please contact eileen r. larence at ( 202 ) 512-8777 or larencee@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . we asked them about the extent to which they found fincen's services and products useful . we also interviewed officials from 8 of the 25 federal and state law enforcement agencies responding to our questionnaire including the agencies that fincen has identified as its top five federal law enforcement customers regarding the extent to which fincen's support has contributed to their investigations of financial crimes . we also reviewed a number of fincen reports and strategic plans including an internal assessment of the support fincen's analysis and liaison division ( ald ) provides to its domestic law enforcement customers . we conducted this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . more detail on our scope and methodology is included in our december 2009 report . in our december 2009 report , we found that law enforcement agencies we surveyed generally reported finding fincen's services and products useful , citing direct access to bsa data , on - site liaisons , and access to financial information on people or organizations suspected of being involved in significant money laundering or terrorist financing activities — known as the 314 ( a ) process — as those that are among the most useful . however , we found that fincen could ( 1 ) better inform law enforcement of the types of complex analytic products that it can provide , ( 2 ) more clearly define the types of requests for complex analytic support that it will accept , and ( 3 ) actively solicit input on the development of complex analytic products in order to help law enforcement better utilize fincen's expertise and enhance the value of the products it provides to law enforcement . liaisons from three of fincen's top five federal law enforcement customers noted that direct access to the bsa database provides law enforcement a means to access these data in order to help identify , deter , and detect money laundering or other potential financial crimes related to a range of criminal activity . as a result of the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act of 2001 ( usa patriot act ) , fincen also introduced a new tool to further assist federal law enforcement agencies in their investigations of financial crimes . this tool , developed by fincen in response to section 314 ( a ) of the usa patriot act , enables federal law enforcement agencies to reach out to financial institutions across the country for potential information related to financial crimes investigations . fincen facilitates the 314 ( a ) process through the use of a secure communications system .