however , defense did not fully implement this criteria . the csf process and guidance is detailed in figure 2 . in july 2006 , the comptroller provided the pakistani government with a cost template and information intended to clarify the types of costs that were reimbursable under csf and the information the comptroller needed to support pakistan's reimbursement claims . we found that defense did not consistently apply existing csf guidance and that certain deficiencies existed in their oversight procedures . comptroller generally performed four broad analytical reviews as called for in its guidance . for example , the comptroller generally performed a comparison of total claimed costs to the estimated u.s. cost to provide the same support . defense guidance developed by the comptroller also calls for obtaining sufficient information to validate pakistani claims to determine that costs were incurred , reasonable , and appropriate . for example , defense reimbursed pakistan over $2 billion for claims from january 2004 through june 2007 without obtaining detailed documentation that would allow a third party to recalculate the costs . regarding pakistan's accounting for csf , we acknowledge that there are limitations in any arrangement with another sovereign nation , but we noted that pakistan provided more detailed documentation to support their claims after a request from the comptroller in 2006 . in addition , the lack of documentation led to inconsistencies in defense's reimbursement of certain costs . for example , as illustrated in figure 3 , defense paid pakistani navy claimed costs for boats for about half of the months and disallowed them the other half , despite no discernable differences in the level of documentation the pakistani government provided for the claims . we also identified additional inconsistently reimbursed costs , such as bulletproof jackets and telephone cables . comptroller guidance states that reimbursement claims must clearly indicate the incremental nature of the logistical and military support provided — i.e. , that claimed costs are above and beyond the partner country's normal operating costs . because the pakistani claims lacked this information , defense officials differed as to whether the claims should be disallowed or deferred until pakistan could provide additional support . any such determination by the secretary shall be final and conclusive . the amount of csf reimbursements to pakistan from october 2001 through june 2007 are shown in figure 1 . this funding became known as coalition support funds . to provide defense with maximum flexibility , congress passed the defense appropriations act for fiscal year 2002 granting the secretary of defense the authority to make csf payments notwithstanding any other provision of law in such amounts as the secretary may determine in his discretion , based on documentation determined by the secretary to adequately account for the logistical and military support provided by partner nations . in 2003 , at the request of the comptroller , the defense inspector general performed an audit of the csf oversight process . in response , the comptroller published guidance in december 2003 to clarify the roles and responsibilities of the comptroller , centcom ( and other regional combatant commanders ) , and odrp in the csf process .