( see app . ii for a comparison of adls and payment rates for each rug. ) thus , a snf might respond to the pps by increasing the resources devoted to completing the mds . this possible snf response to the new payment system may be similar to how hospitals responded to the inpatient hospital pps . under the inpatient pps , hospitals are paid a prospectively determined rate per patient stay , which is adjusted for expected resource needs based on factors such as patient diagnoses and treatment . after the implementation of the inpatient pps in 1983 , hospitals expanded the number of diagnoses they reported to describe patients . these changes in documentation resulted in some patients being classified into higher payment categories , which increased hospital payments . a snf also has an incentive to change the amount of care provided to minimize its costs and maximize its payments . because the amount of therapy provided is key to classifying the majority of patients into rugs , a snf benefits when it provides an amount of therapy on the low end of the range of therapy minutes associated with that rug . the rug classification system is hierarchical . for the snfs in our sample , we analyzed data from the nursing home mds national repository to compare differences in patient classification and therapy services across three points in time — early in pps ( january - march 1999 ) , 1 year later ( january - march 2000 ) , and 2 years later ( january - march 2001 ) . data to examine the distribution of medicare patients after the implementation of bipa - mandated changes ( applied to services on or after april 1 , 2001 ) were not available in time for this analysis . our sample included over 350,000 mds assessments for medicare beneficiaries for each time period . we calculated the number of initial assessments that had used estimated minutes to qualify patients into a rehabilitation category by counting the number of first assessments that reported actual therapy minutes below the minimum number of minutes required in the three rehabilitation categories ( high , medium , and low ) . to determine the extent to which patients received the estimated therapies , we calculated , for the patients who had a second assessment , the percent who had received less than the minimum number of therapy minutes required for the rug reported on the initial assessment . we also interviewed cms staff responsible for snf policy and we reviewed regulations , literature , and other documents relating to snf pps and mds . appendix ii: therapy minutes , activities of daily living , and medicare payment rates to snfs patients are classified into the custodial categories according to their need for nursing services and assistance with adls . these patients typically do not meet the criteria for medicare coverage because they generally do not require skilled nursing care .