leveraging of technology . select technologies to enhance asset security through methods like access control , detection , and surveillance systems . this involves not only using technology , but also ensuring positive returns on investments in the form of reduced vulnerabilities . information sharing and coordination . establish means of coordinating and sharing security and threat information internally , within large organizations , and externally , with other government entities and the private sector . performance measurement and testing . use metrics , such as implementation timelines , and active testing , such as unannounced on - site assessments , to ensure accountability for achieving program goals and improving security at facilities . this testimony is based on past reports and testimonies and discusses ( 1 ) limitations fps faces in protecting gsa buildings and resulting vulnerabilities and ( 2 ) actions fps is taking to address challenges . work for these past reports and testimonies included using our key practices as a framework for assessing facility protection efforts by fps management and at individual buildings . we also visited fps regions and selected gsa buildings to assess fps activities firsthand . we surveyed a sample of 1,398 federal officials who work in gsa buildings in fps's 11 regions and are responsible for collaborating with fps on security issues . additionally , we reviewed training and certification data for 663 randomly selected guards in 6 of fps's 11 regions . because of the sensitivity of some of the information in our prior work , we cannot specifically identify the locations of the incidents discussed . we also conducted covert testing at 10 judgmentally selected high - risk facilities in four cities . for all of our work , we reviewed related laws and directives , interviewed officials and analyzed documents and data from dhs and gsa , and interviewed tenant agency representatives , contractors , and guards . the previous work on which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . fps assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to gsa and tenant agencies ; however , fps's ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of gsa and tenant agencies , which may be unwilling to fund the countermeasures fps recommends . we have found that under the current risk management approach , the security equipment that fps recommends and is responsible for acquiring , installing , and maintaining may not be implemented if tenant agencies are unwilling to fund it . for example , in august 2007 fps recommended a security equipment countermeasure — the upgrade of a surveillance system shared by two high - security locations that , according to fps officials , would cost around $650,000 .