( see app . iii for a map of legislative branch facilities in the washington , d.c. , metropolitan area. ) ( see app . ii for additional details on the calculations and assumptions. ) unless otherwise noted , we determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to identify a strategy for reducing emissions , we reviewed documents from the world resources institute , and congressional research service ; and we interviewed officials and reviewed documents from aoc , gpo , and gao to learn about energy audits and emissions reduction projects that the legislative branch has already implemented . we also interviewed officials from the national renewable energy laboratory and doe's federal energy management program about energy audits , and types of emissions reduction projects and their cost - effectiveness ; and officials from gsa about emissions reduction projects related to vehicles . in addition , we also interviewed pepco energy services about its renewable energy contracts with the legislative branch agencies . we conducted our work from august 2006 through april 2007 . to develop a greenhouse gas inventory in accordance with the greenhouse gas protocol , we set an organizational boundary , operational boundary , and base year . this boundary defines the legislative branch and the criteria for reporting emissions . for the purpose of this report , the legislative branch includes the architect of the capitol ( aoc ) , gao , government printing office ( gpo ) , library of congress ( loc ) , congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and u.s. botanic garden . aoc has jurisdiction over the day - to - day operations of the senate office buildings , house office buildings , u.s. capitol and grounds , loc buildings and grounds , capitol power plant , and u.s. botanic garden . in 1995 , doe's femp initiated the savenergy program , which provided funding for energy audits of federal facilities but not for project implementation . femp funding for savenergy audits was eliminated in fiscal year 2006 . three energy audits — for the capitol and the rayburn and madison buildings — were conducted under the savenergy program . in addition to projects identified through energy audits , a strategy would include evaluating other projects to reduce emissions that may fall outside the scope of energy audits , such as ( 1 ) projects to reduce electricity emissions by curtailing energy use , purchasing high - efficiency appliances , using renewable electricity , and considering the energy efficiency of facilities when constructing new facilities and before entering into leases ; ( 2 ) projects to reduce emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels in the capitol power plant by adjusting the fuel mix ; ( 3 ) projects to reduce vehicle emissions by acquiring fuel - efficient vehicles and vehicles that run on renewable fuel ; and ( 4 ) projects to reduce overall emissions by purchasing offsets . the cost - effectiveness , emissions reductions , and funding options for each of these projects would have to be evaluated on a case - by - case basis . compared with projects identified through energy audits , several of these projects cost more to implement but could reduce emissions faster .