quality services . these services help manufacturers implement management systems to achieve a defined industry - specific or general quality certification or standard . growth services . these services provide manufacturers with the tools and methods to identify and target opportunities to develop new products , markets , services , or customers . we analyzed these data to identify any changes in centers' finances for fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . we selected this period to encompass the year prior to when nist began recompeting mep centers' cooperative agreements . nist collects financial information from each mep center , including the amount of financial assistance received from nist , program income received from manufacturers for services provided , cash received from other sources ( such as grants ) , and in - kind contributions . we also obtained nist data detailing the cost share under which each center was operating for fiscal years 2013 through 2017 . we assessed the reliability of centers' financial data by reviewing agency documentation , verifying some data against another data source , and interviewing nist officials and officials from selected centers . we determined that nist's data on mep centers' federal assistance and nonfederal contributions are the best available data and are sufficiently reliable to describe general changes in these aspects of centers' finances during this time period . however , as noted in the report , we found that some centers underreport their nonfederal resources in excess of the nonfederal contributions required to meet their cost share . as a result , we expect that centers' total available resources — including their federal assistance , nonfederal contributions , and nonfederal resources in excess of their nonfederal contributions — are higher than what we present in the report . we determined this because the underreporting we identified with centers' nonfederal resources in excess of their nonfederal contributions would tend to understate the amount of these resources over time and because we did not find evidence of overreporting that would contradict this pattern . in addition , we did not independently verify the nonfederal contributions reported by the mep centers because it was outside the scope of our work . we also obtained and analyzed nist data on mep centers' activities , such as data on the size , location , and number of manufacturers the centers reported serving in fiscal years 2013 through 2018 . nist guidance for mep centers calls for centers to report various information about the manufacturers that they serve , including company name , dun and bradstreet number , and the north american industry classification system code . nist uses the dun and bradstreet number to compile other information about each manufacturer , including location and number of staff . we analyzed the data to identify any changes in centers' activities and to determine the extent to which any changes might be associated with the aica cost share adjustment . we also reviewed nist guidance for the mep program and interviewed nist and mep center officials to gain an understanding of the mep center activity data nist collects . we assessed the reliability of the activity data by reviewing agency documentation and interviewing nist officials and selected centers .