( see fig . about one third were conciliated . this report addresses the thoroughness of the process for resolving housing discrimination complaints — that is , the extent to which fheo and fhap agencies meet hud standards , policies , and best practices in a timely manner . gao reviewed the thoroughness and timeliness of fheo and fhap agencies' efforts during the intake process ; the extent to which fheo and fhap agencies ensure the thoroughness of investigations , regardless of the outcome ; the extent to which fheo and fhap agencies attempt to conciliate fair complainants' satisfaction with the thoroughness , fairness , and outcomes of the fair housing process . for example , 21 agencies did not ask for the respondent's first and last name , and 15 did not ask for the respondent's organization . as indicated in figure 5 , in only 8 agency test cases did intake staff ask the complainant for the name of an alternate contact person and in only 7 agency test cases did the intake staff request a work number — an important piece of information because , according to fheo officials , many complainants are in the process of moving and are difficult to recontact . also , intake staff about half of the time asked for the respondent's telephone number . further , the agencies collected little information beyond level 1 . on average , they gathered 8 percent of level 2 , 11 percent of level 3 , and 9 percent of level 4 information . some level 4 ( best practice ) information that was most often collected during our case study includes the respondent's gender ( 13 test calls ) , respondent's race ( 9 test calls ) , and what the complainant hoped to see as a result of filing a complaint ( 8 test calls ) . although hud policy recommends that intake staff obtain as much information as possible regarding the aggrieved person's allegations during the initial intake interview , the amount of information collected on initial contact varied significantly by agency . one location collected nothing beyond the complainant's name and mailing address , while another collected up to 80 percent of the level 1 data . however , in none of the test calls did intake staff collect 100 percent of the level 1 information . while most agencies appeared to collect the remainder of the critical information through their intake forms ( either the hud - 903 form or state equivalent ) , this practice prevents the agency from taking any further action on the complaint until a signed form is received . according to hud officials , the revised title viii handbook contains standards for information that hud will collect during initial contact with a complainant . however , these and other standards may not apply to fhap agencies since their certification by hud does not ensure that they follow identical procedures . the time it takes to receive the form can delay the enforcement process , potentially resulting not only in the loss of a housing opportunity but also in complainants becoming frustrated with the process and deciding not to pursue their complaint .