according to u.s . marshals service officials , security system funding reductions most affected funding for additional and replacement equipment , perimeter security , and access control systems . reduced employee morale , recruitment , and retention — court officials we interviewed in 8 of 12 circuit courts , 2 of 4 district courts , 2 of 4 bankruptcy courts , and all 4 defender organizations reported that reduced staffing levels because of the 2013 sequestration have led to other negative effects , including increased workloads , decreased morale , and retention and recruitment challenges . for example , officials we interviewed in 6 of 12 circuit courts , 3 of 4 district courts , 2 of 4 bankruptcy courts , and all 4 defender organizations stated that the 2013 sequestration or the lapse in fiscal year 2014 appropriations weakened employee morale , on the basis of their observations and interactions with employees . the budget committee chair told us that increased funding for the judiciary in fiscal years 2014 and 2015 has allowed courts to begin filling vacant positions , but that most courts have been concerned about increasing their staff levels after the experience of the 2013 sequestration and because of fear of future budget reductions . to what extent does the judiciary have mechanisms to identify opportunities for cost savings and efficiencies ? what actions did the judiciary take to plan for and implement the fiscal year 2013 sequestration , and what effects , if any , has the judiciary identified from these actions and the fiscal year 2014 lapse in appropriations on judiciary personnel and operations ? to determine the efforts the judiciary has undertaken in the past 10 fiscal years to achieve cost savings and efficiencies , we analyzed judiciary reports and documents ( such as annual reports of the aousc director , among others ) from fiscal year 2004 through july 2015 and compiled a list of the initiatives undertaken by the judiciary to contain costs , as well as a description of the initiatives and the dates the initiatives were implemented since approximately fiscal year 2004 ( or the initiation of a cost containment strategy by the judiciary ) . to determine the extent to which the judiciary has estimated the cost savings achieved as a result of its efforts , we analyzed judiciary documents and information such as rent savings projections and data tracked by aousc staff in data systems and spreadsheets . we compared the judiciary's cost savings estimates against standards for internal control in the federal government and cost - estimating guidance to determine the extent to which the estimates comported with these criteria . while the judiciary is not required by law to abide by the standards for internal control in the federal government and cost - estimating guidance , the management controls described in the standards and the guidance are consistent with the management practices of leading organizations . to assess the reliability of the cost savings and related staffing and salary data , we interviewed judiciary officials who maintain the databases where these financial and staffing and salary data are tracked and reviewed related documentation .