ii. ) once the user selects his preferences among the available options , the site generates a list of licensed facilities , with those most closely matching the chosen preferences ranked highest . it includes a chart showing the number and type of staff on duty for each daily shift , which is also posted in public view at the facility . doea receives about two inquiries a week from providers asking for assistance , but in general the providers find this process relatively easy . initial skepticism among some providers has diminished as they hear from providers already in the system and they recognize the inherent advantage of free advertising . this is especially beneficial for smaller , independent facilities that cannot match the commercial advertising of the national and regional chains . a state administrator noted that maintenance of the web site requires some continuing effort . with substantial turnover among facility providers and professionals assisting prospective residents , outreach and training is an ongoing process . doea also tries to spot - check at least some key data elements entered into the system , even though the web site itself prominently displays a disclaimer that provider - entered data have not been verified for accuracy . no formal evaluations of the web site have yet been undertaken , but informal feedback has been uniformly positive according to both provider and consumer representatives , as well as the state official responsible for its operation . consumers , and those acting on their behalf , are finding that the web site has several distinct advantages over previously available information sources . most importantly , it provides a way to efficiently narrow their search . they can quickly identify the universe of facilities within a given area and determine which offer the services they are looking for at a price they can afford . current information about participation in government subsidy programs is especially valuable for many prospective residents of limited means . in addition , because “find - a - facility” is on the internet , out - of - state family members can actively participate in the process of locating an appropriate facility . similarly , the web site makes it much easier for professionals assisting elderly clients , such as social workers and hospital discharge planners , to determine the full list of available placement options . in 1999 , texas enacted a law requiring assisted living facilities to provide each prospective resident a consumer disclosure statement that follows a standard format approved by the department of human services . its purpose is to enable consumers to better compare facilities by describing their policies and services in terms of uniform categories . however , its effectiveness depends not only on its content but also on how and when facilities distribute it to consumers . this five - page checklist form addresses many of the topics identified in our expert interviews as critical for consumers choosing among alternative assisted living facilities . it describes the services and amenities provided to all residents , as well as those offered at additional cost . ( see app . iii. ) the form also lists circumstances that could lead a resident to be discharged from the facility and the training received by staff .