capturing all activities . all four subschedules partially met this practice . specifically , the majority of the activities contained in these subschedules could be mapped back to the program's ngen work breakdown structure . however , this structure is defined at a high level and is not expected to be further decomposed into planned work products and deliverables until the program enters the deployment phase when ngen contracts are awarded . until this structure is sufficiently defined , it cannot be determined whether the program schedules capture all work needed to accomplish program objectives . for example , we identified risk mitigation activities for 10 active risks that should have been , but were not , captured as scheduled work . during our review , program officials told us that they had since taken steps to ensure that all risk mitigation activities are added to the schedule . however , until ngen work is sufficiently defined , the program does not have complete assurance that the activities currently captured in the various schedules support ngen increment 1 . sequencing all activities . one subschedule substantially met this practice while the other three minimally met it . the subschedule that substantially met this practice had less than 1 percent of activities missing a predecessor or successor dependency . of the remaining three subschedules , two did not identify predecessor or successor activities for over half of the activities in their schedules . this is of concern because if an activity that has no logical successor slips , the schedule will not reflect the effect of these slips on the critical path , float , or scheduled start dates of “downstream” ( i.e. , later ) activities . according to the gate briefing document , these red ratings introduced a number of risks , such as the risk that the program would not be able to execute its current acquisition approach and meet program milestones . in addition , even though the assessment rated the acquisition management metric as green , this rating is not consistent with our findings in this report about the ngen integrated master schedule . specifically , the rationale for the green rating was that the august 2010 rebaselined schedule was viewed as realistic and achievable by key stakeholders . however , as stated earlier , program officials conceded that the schedule does not assign resources , and the scheduling tool is unable to generate a valid critical path , which are key scheduling practices ; thus the august 2010 schedule was not reliable . the approval of the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development and acquisition ) for ngen to proceed beyond gate 5 was made conditional on the program satisfactorily completing action items focused on releasing the request for proposals for the transport services contract ( scheduled for january 2011 ) and resolving its funding shortfall . as shown above , don has demonstrated a pattern of approving ngen at key acquisition review gates in the face of both limited disclosure of the program's health and risks and known program risks and shortfalls in performance . future increments have yet to be defined .