we summarized and categorized the results . financial information in this report was obtained from official navy and marine corps budget documents and accounting reports . to assess the reliability of the data , we ( 1 ) reviewed and analyzed the factors used in calculating carryover for the completeness of the elements included in the calculation , ( 2 ) interviewed navy and marine corps officials knowledgeable about the carryover data , ( 3 ) reviewed gao reports on depot maintenance activities , and ( 4 ) reviewed fiscal years 2010 and 2011 customer orders submitted to dmag to determine whether they were adequately supported by documentation . in reviewing these orders , we obtained the status of the carryover at the end of the fiscal year . on the basis of procedures performed , we have concluded that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we performed our work at the headquarters of the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , the office of the assistant secretary of the navy ( financial management and comptroller ) , and marine corps deputy commandant ( programs and resources ) , washington , d.c. ; marine corps logistics command , albany , georgia ; the maintenance center at albany , georgia and the maintenance center at barstow , california . we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 through june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in addition to the contact named above , greg pugnetti , assistant director ; steve donahue ; keith mcdaniel ; and hal santarelli made key contributions to this report . according to the dod regulation , this carryover metric allows for an analytical - based approach that holds working capital fund activities to the same standard as general fund execution and allows for meaningful budget execution analysis . in accordance with the dod financial management regulation,nonfederal orders , ( 2 ) non - dod orders , ( 3 ) foreign military sales , ( 4 ) work related to base realignment and closure , and ( 5 ) work - in - progress are to be excluded from the carryover calculation . the reported actual carryover ( net of exclusions ) is then compared to the amount of allowable carryover using the above - described outlay - rate method to determine whether the actual carryover amount is over or under the allowable carryover amount . our analysis of dmag reports showed that from fiscal year 2004 through fiscal year 2011 , reported actual carryover exceeded the allowable amounts in 6 of the 8 years . during the most recent 6-year period , the reported amounts of actual carryover exceeded the allowable amounts each year , ranging from a high of $59 million in fiscal year 2007 to a low of $7 million in fiscal year 2011 .