iii . ssa may hold payments to beneficiaries for a month under certain circumstances , such as when a payment address is in question . in these instances , the mbr may indicate benefits due , but not paid for that month . months may not be included in our twp overpayment population . for example , if ndnh earnings data indicated the beneficiary completed all 9 twp months and 3 grace period months from october 2009 to september 2010 ( i.e. , 12 months ) , but the next month of sga - level earnings occurred in october 2010 , which is outside our 15-month time frame , the beneficiary was not included in our twp overpayment population . figure 5 below illustrates the 15 months from july 2009 to september 2010 for which our analysis captured both di payment records on the mbr and earnings data on the ndnh . second , because our calculation of potential overpayment months includes only months where di payment records on the mbr showed that di benefits were both due and paid for that month , our twp overpayment population does not include individuals whose only months of sga beyond the twp occurred in months where benefits were due , but not paid . similarly , our twp overpayment population does not include individuals whose only months of sga beyond the twp occurred in months where benefits were paid , but not due . next , we drew a simple random sample of 130 individuals from the twp overpayment population and contacted the employers to verify the wages paid to the individuals . we completed requests from employers for 98 individuals for a response rate of 76 percent . nonresponses included sample items whose employers we could not locate , employers who were no longer in business , and employers who refused to cooperate with our requests . we asked employers who provided earnings data to identify payments that were not related to work activity , such as paid time off , extended sick leave , or posttermination compensation . many employers provided payroll reports indicating hours and payments by payment category , such as total payments for hours in regular work , hours in overtime work , and hours of vacation time . using the earnings data employers provided , we calculated monthly earned income for each sample item and identified whether the beneficiaries' monthly earned income exceeded sga during any month of the extended period of eligibility . because employers use different payroll cycles and provided different levels of detail in their responses , we adhered to the following guidelines to standardize our calculation of monthly earned income: 1 . in consideration of ssa guidance regarding the timing of payments , we calculated monthly earned income according to the period in which payments were earned rather than when they were paid . however , if an employer's payroll reports indicated only the dates when payments were issued , we calculated monthly earned income according to those dates .