( see fig . the range of average per spill costs for the spills that occurred in the east coast locations ranged from about $27 million to over $37 million , higher than the average costs in any other region besides the two spills in caribbean . the high spill costs in the east coast locations were caused by several spills in that geographic area that had considerably higher costs . specifically , four of the eight most expensive spills occurred on the waters off the east coast . the time of year in which a spill occurs can also affect spill costs — in particular , impacting local economies and response efforts . ( 2 ) what are the factors that affect major oil spill costs ? and ( 3 ) what are the implications of major oil spill costs for the oil spill liability trust fund ? this situation occurred in march of 1996 when a tank barge spilled approximately 176,000 gallons of fuel oil along the coast of texas . because the spill occurred during the annual spring break tourist season , the time frames for cleaning up the spill were truncated , and the standards of cleanliness were elevated . both of these factors contributed to higher removal costs , according to state officials we interviewed . the time of year in which a spill occurs also affects response efforts because of possible inclement weather conditions . for example , spills that occur during the winter months in areas of the country that experience harsh winter conditions can result in higher removal costs because of the increased difficulty in mobilizing equipment and personnel to respond to a spill in inclement weather . according to a state official knowledgeable about a january 1996 spill along the coast of rhode island , extremely cold and stormy weather made response efforts very difficult . although the 51 spills occurred during all seasons of the year , they were most prevalent in the fall and winter months , with 20 spills occurring in the fall and 13 spills during the winter , compared with 9 spills in the spring and 9 in the summer months . on a per - spill basis , the cost range for the 51 spills was highest in the fall ( see fig . the type of oil spilled affects the degree to which oil can be cleaned up and removed , as well as the nature of the natural resource damage caused by the spill — both of which can significantly impact the costs associated with an oil spill . the different types of oil can be grouped into four categories , each with its own set of impacts on spill response and the environment ( see table 2 ) . for example , lighter oils such as jet fuels , gasoline , and diesel dissipate quickly , but they are highly toxic , whereas heavier oils such as crude oils and other heavy petroleum products do not dissipate much and , while less toxic , can have severe environmental impacts . very light and light oils naturally dissipate and evaporate quickly , and as such , often require minimal cleanup .