i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have . these roles are not mutually exclusive and can reinforce one other . for example , nbic's efforts as an innovator might result in the development of data that could enhance its role as an analyzer by providing the center with another dataset to review . the biosurveillance integrators' roles we identified: analyzer: use technological tools and subject matter expertise to develop shared situational awareness by creating meaningful new insights from disparate datasets and information that could not be gleaned in isolation . coordinator: bring together multi - disciplinary partners across interagency organizations to enhance understanding of new or potential biological events , such as through the collaborative development of products and services . innovator: facilitate the development of new tools , technology , and approaches to address gaps in biosurveillance integration . according to homeland security presidential directive 10 ( hspd - 10 ) : biodefense for the 21st century , a national bioawareness capability providing early warning , detection , or recognition of a biological weapon attack is an essential component of biodefense . to contribute to this national capability , in 2003 , dhs created the biowatch program to provide early warning , detection , or recognition of a biological attack . the biowatch program uses routine laboratory testing designed to detect an aerosolized biological attack for five specific biological agents considered high risk for use as biological weapons . when dhs was established in 2002 , a perceived urgency to deploy useful — even if immature — technologies in the face of potentially catastrophic consequences catalyzed the rapid deployment of many technologies . dhs completed the initial deployment of biowatch quickly — within 80 days of the president's announcement of the biowatch program in his 2003 state of the union address . in 2005 , dhs expanded biowatch to an additional 10 jurisdictions , for a total of more than 30 . the expanded deployment — referred to as generation 2 ( gen - 2 ) — also included the addition of indoor monitoring capabilities in three high - threat jurisdictions and provided additional capacity for events of national significance , such as major sporting events and political conventions . in 2015 , we reported that the biowatch program collaborates with more than 30 biowatch jurisdictions throughout the nation to operate approximately 600 gen - 2 aerosol collectors . these units rely on a vacuum - based collection system that draws air through a filter . these filters are manually collected and transported to state and local public health laboratories for analysis . using this manual process , a result can be generated from 12 to 36 hours after an agent is initially captured by the aerosol collection unit . to reduce detection time , dhs began to develop an autonomous detection capability in 2003 for the biowatch program — known as generation 3 ( gen - 3 ) . envisioned as a laboratory - in - a - box , the autonomous detection system would automatically collect air samples , conduct analysis to detect the presence of biothreat agents every 4 to 6 hours , and communicate the results to public health officials via an electronic network without manual intervention .