disbursements reconciliation . the ipa independently compared disbursements from the defense cash accountability system to outlays on the april 2013 schedule and to documentation supporting significant reconciling items to help ensure that reported disbursements were complete and reasonably stated . according to the ipa , the navy performs similar reconciliations each month . to assess the reliability of the documentation , the ipa performed walk - throughs of key processes , made inquiries of navy personnel , and analyzed the documentation provided . in addition , the ipa considered the results of its tests of the navy's controls for reconciling military pay activity each month , as discussed further below . based on its evaluation of these reconciliations and documentation provided by the navy , the ipa concluded that the navy's population of military pay transactions was complete . we reviewed the results of the ipa procedures to assess these reconciliations ; re - performed selected procedures , such as tracing selected amounts to supporting documentation and performing recalculations ; and assessed the appropriateness of the reconciling items . based on our review , nothing came to our attention that raised concerns regarding the adequacy of the navy's documentation supporting the completeness of the population of transactions reflected on its april 2013 schedule . the ipa determined that the navy provided sufficient documentation to support the accuracy and validity of selected basic pay and entitlement transactions the ipa tested . the ipa tested a statistical sample of 405 leave and earnings statements from the $1.8 billion of outlays associated with basic pay and entitlements reflected on the april 2013 schedule . the navy provided more than 3,000 documents to support the sampled leave and earnings statements , such as orders , promotion messages , enlistment documents , and discharge documents . the ipa's evaluation of sample item tests resulted in a projected total error of $6.8 million , and based on its determination of tolerable misstatement and materiality , the ipa concluded that the estimate of errors was immaterial . in addition , the ipa performed analytical procedures to test $400 million of activity reflected in the navy's april 2013 schedule , representing the portion of federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) taxes and military retirement contributions for servicemembers . the ipa compared reported amounts to an estimate determined by multiplying basic pay included in the april 2013 schedule by applicable mandated rates and concluded that the reported amounts were reasonable . we reviewed the results of the ipa's tests of military pay transactions and re - performed selected procedures to assess the reasonableness of the ipa's conclusions . for example , we reviewed the ipa's sampling methodology and related error projection . we also re - performed tests performed by the ipa for a nongeneralizable random sample of 21 ( 5 percent ) of its 405 leave and earnings statement sample items , such as recalculating payment amounts and reviewing documentation provided by the navy to assess whether transactions were adequately supported . we also re - performed the ipa's analytical procedures related to the navy's portion of fica taxes and the military retirement contributions and reviewed the ipa's related conclusions .