iii. ) in their training initiatives for employed workers , states and local workforce boards focused on training that addressed specific business needs and emphasized certain workplace skills . states and local workforce boards gave priority to economic sectors and occupations in demand , considered economic factors when awarding grants , and funded training that was tailored or customized to specific employers . states and local workforce boards focused most often on training provided by community or technical colleges that emphasized occupational skills and basic skills . most of the 16 states we contacted focused on certain economic sectors or occupations in which there was a demand for skilled workers . twelve states had at least one office , usually the economic development office , which targeted the manufacturing sector for training initiatives . states also targeted the health care and social assistance sector ( which includes hospitals , residential care facilities , and services such as community food services ) and the information sector ( which includes data processing , publishing , broadcasting , and telecommunications ) . new york took a sector - based approach to training by funding grants to enable employees to obtain national industry - recognized certifications or credentials , such as those offered through the computer software or plastics industries . other training programs focused on occupations in demand . for example , in louisiana , two state offices funded training that gave preference to occupations with a shortage of skilled workers , such as computer scientists , systems analysts , locomotive engineers , financial analysts , home health aides , and medical assistants . of the 148 local workforce boards that specifically funded training for employed workers in 2001 , the majority of workforce boards targeted particular economic sectors for training these workers . as with the states , most often these sectors were health care or manufacturing . ( see fig . for example , workforce boards we visited in florida , minnesota , oregon , and texas became involved in funding or obtaining funding for local initiatives to train health care workers , such as radiographers and certified nursing assistants , that hospitals needed . some states considered local economic conditions , such as unemployment rates , in their grant award criteria in addition to , or instead of , giving priority to certain economic sectors and occupations . for example , california's employment training panel must set aside at least $15 million each year for areas of high unemployment . similarly , in illinois and indiana , the state economic development offices considered county unemployment or community needs in awarding training funds . florida's workforce training grants gave priority to distressed rural areas and urban enterprise zones in addition to targeting economic sectors . in addition , most state economic development offices ( 13 of 16 ) and more than half of the state workforce development offices ( 9 of 16 ) we contacted funded training that was tailored or customized to specific employers' workforce needs . for economic development offices , such customized training was not new: these offices have typically funded training for specific companies as a means of encouraging economic growth within their states , and in some cases have done so for a long time .