ein vulnerabilities . in february 2018 , tigta identified concerns with irs's ein application process and made 18 recommendations , including that irs improve processes to ensure that the applicant meets the requirements for obtaining an ein and implement policies to help detect potential abuse of the online ein application system . irs agreed with 15 of tigta's recommendations and , as of september 2019 , irs reported that it had addressed 11 recommendations . the four unaddressed recommendations aim to improve data collection and validation in the ein system , which could help irs identify suspicious applications . irs officials stated that these improvements are on hold due to limited resources and competing priorities . in addition , characteristics of the ein may make it inherently risky and susceptible to fraudsters . according to irs , a business's ein is not considered pii and is not required to be protected like a social security number . this may make it easier for a fraudster to obtain an existing ein and file a fraudulent business tax return . in addition , we have previously reported that fraudsters may target paid preparers , tax software providers , and other third parties to steal taxpayer data to commit idt refund fraud or other types of financial crimes . these data may include existing eins or the necessary information to obtain a new ein , making it easier for fraudsters to file fake business returns . irs officials stated that they recognize the potential risk of the ein application process , but must balance the needs of legitimate businesses against irs's responsibility to detect and prevent fraud . officials noted that they have security measures in place to detect potentially suspicious activity in the online ein application and fraud filters to detect when taxpayers file a return with a dormant ein . a fraud risk assessment consistent with leading practices would help irs establish a risk tolerance for the ein process and determine if its existing fraud controls are sufficient to address the vulnerabilities inherent to the ein application process . high false detection rates for idt fraud filters . the national taxpayer advocate's 2018 annual report to congress noted that one of irs's most serious problems is a high false detection rate in its fraud detection systems . in general , the false detection rate is the number of legitimate returns selected by the irs as potentially fraudulent , divided by the total number of returns selected as potentially fraudulent . the national taxpayer advocate noted that irs's false positive rate for individual idt filters was 63 percent in 2018 . the high rate contributed to increased processing times and delays in issuing refunds for legitimate returns . it also created additional work for irs . similarly , our data analysis of bmfic data shows that irs's business idt fraud filters had about an 85 percent false detection rate for returns screened by fraud filters from mid - january 2017 to december 2018 . in september 2019 , irs officials described several factors contributing to the high false detection rate for business idt fraud filters .