execution . for authorized and funded projects , gsa awards contracts for design and construction ; the project's baseline scope , schedule , and budget are revised , as needed , based on awarded contracts ; gsa's project manager monitors design and construction progress and manages changes to the project's scope , cost , or schedule . close - out . gsa's project manager completes construction close - out activities and turns the project over for tenants' use . gsa project managers perform key steps in the process that include overseeing contractors , monitoring and reporting on the progress of projects , managing changes to the project , and coordinating with tenant agencies . additionally , gsa project managers are responsible for ensuring that “commissioning” is performed during the project . “commissioning” generally requires that an independent commissioning agent oversee the construction contractor's testing of installed building components to determine if they are performing as designed . according to gsa data , gsa substantially completed 36 major construction projects in the 5-year period from fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2018 . the total cost of those 36 projects was approximately $3.2 billion . listed below are some characteristics of those projects . cost: project costs ranged between $21 million and $343 million , with an average cost of about $89.3 million . schedule: project durations ranged between about 12 months and 79 months , with an average of about 43 months . project type: r&a projects made up the majority of projects ( 64 percent ) , with an average cost of about $74.2 million and an average duration of about 47 months . new construction projects accounted for 36 percent , with an average cost of about $116 million and an average duration of about 35 months . on average , r&a projects cost about $42 million less than new construction projects but took about 13 months longer to complete . see figure 1 for summary information on the cost and duration of these projects , by project type . location: the national capital region ( gsa region 11 ) had the most projects with nine ( 25 percent ) , and all but one of the 11 gsa regions had at least one project . project delivery method: gsa utilized four delivery methods for 35 of the 36 projects in our 5-year time frame . construction manager as constructor , whereby gsa contracts separately with a design firm and a construction contractor . the construction contractor is involved early - on to consult on the design as it is being developed ; upon the design's completion , gsa negotiates with the construction contractor on a price to undertake the construction . gsa used this method for 12 of the 36 projects ( average cost of about $99.8 million ) . design - bid - build , whereby gsa contracts with a design firm to develop a project's design . after the design is completed , gsa contracts separately with a construction contractor . gsa used this method for 11 of the 36 projects ( average cost of about $81.3 million ) .