individual accounts . these are fully funded accounts that are administered either by employers , the government , or designated third parties and are owned by the individual . the level of retirement benefits depends largely on the amount of contributions made by , or on behalf of , an individual into the account during his or her working life , investment earnings , and the amount of fees individuals are required to pay . the countries that have adjusted their existing payg national pension programs demonstrate a broad range of approaches for both reducing benefits and increasing contributions in order to improve the programs' financial sustainability . their experiences also provide lessons about the potential effects of some adjustments on the distribution of benefits , including the maintenance of a safety net and incentives to work and save . they also emphasize the care required in implementing and administering reforms and ensuring that the public understands the new provisions . to reconcile payg program revenue and expenses , nearly all the countries we studied have decreased benefits , and most have also increased contributions , often in part by increasing retirement ages . the experiences of other countries demonstrate the importance of considering how individual accounts may affect the long - term and short - term financing of the national pension system and the economy as a whole . in the long - term , individual accounts can contribute to sustainability by providing a mechanism to prefund retirement benefits that could be less subject to demographic booms and busts than a payg approach . individual accounts prefund benefits in private accounts rather than government accounts . if governments are unable to save through national pension reserves , private accounts may facilitate pre - funding that would not occur otherwise.if , however , such accounts are funded through borrowing , no such prefunding is achieved . in the short - term countries adopting individual accounts face the common challenge of how to pay for both a new funded pension and an existing payg pension simultaneously . the cost of the transition from a payg program to individual accounts depends on whether the individual accounts redirect revenue from the existing payg program , the amount of revenue redirected , and how liabilities under the existing payg program are treated . the countries we studied vary in the amount of revenue diverted from their payg programs to fund their individual accounts , resulting in a range of related transition costs . australia and switzerland used new sources of funding to add individual accounts to their existing , relatively modest , national pension systems . the amount by which the government's spending exceeds its revenues in a given period , usually a fiscal year . the federal deficit is the shortfall created when the federal government spends more in a fiscal year than it receives in revenues . to cover the shortfall , the government sells bonds to the public . a type of retirement plan that guarantees a specified retirement payment and in which the plan's sponsor assumes the risk of providing these benefits .