( see fig . 8 for a comparison of how distance education compares to other selected technology goals. ) minority serving institutions indicated that they expect to have difficulties in meeting their goals related to technology . eighty - seven percent of tribal colleges , 83 percent of historically black colleges and universities , and 82 percent of hispanic serving institutions cited limitations in funding as a primary reason for why they may not achieve their technology - related goals . for example , the southwest indian polytechnic institute in albuquerque , new mexico , serves about 670 students and it uses distance education to provide courses for an associates degree in early childhood development to about 100 students . the school uses two - way satellite communication and transmits the courses to 11 remote locations . according to a technology specialist at the school , this form of distance education is expensive compared to other methods . as an alternative , the institute would like to establish two - way teleconferencing capability and internet access at the off - site locations as a means of expanding educational opportunities . school officials noted , however , that many of the locations have no telephone or internet service because they are in such remote areas of the state . about half of the schools also noted that they might experience difficulty in meeting their goals because they did not have enough staff to operate and maintain information technology and to help faculty apply technology . for example , officials at diné college , a tribal college on the navajo reservation , told us they have not been able to fill a systems analyst position for the last 3 years . school officials cited their remote location and the fact that they are offering relatively low pay as problems in attracting employees that have skills in operating and maintaining technology equipment . having a systematic approach to expanding technology on campuses is an important step toward modernizing and evaluating technology at postsecondary schools . about 75 percent of historically black colleges and universities , 70 percent of hispanic serving institutions , and only 48 percent of tribal colleges had completed a strategic plan for expanding their technology infrastructure . fewer schools had completed a financial plan for funding technology improvements . about half of historically black colleges and universities and hispanic serving institutions , and 19 percent of tribal colleges have a financial plan for expanding their information technology ( see fig . studies by other organizations describe challenges faced by minority serving institutions in expanding their technology infrastructure . for example , an october 2000 study by booz , allen , and hamilton determined that historically or predominantly black colleges identified challenges in funding , strategic planning , and keeping equipment up to date . an october 2000 report by the department of commerce found that most historically black colleges and universities have access to computing resources , such as high - speed internet capabilities but individual student access to campus networks is seriously deficient due to , among other things , lack of student ownership of computers or lack of access from campus dormitories .