wipp , 2014 . vii for ne. ) in addition to nap - 4c , nnsa's fee determining official issued implementation guidance for the fiscal year 2016 performance evaluation cycle . this implementation guidance directs relevant nnsa officials to follow a series of templates for interim reports to the contractor and provides the format of the final per and specific dates for those reports . the guidance does not include procedures as to how officials throughout nnsa are to collect or use information to create the content for those templates . for example , the guidance's interim feedback report schedule states that the “program / functional offices provide input to field offices.” there is no discussion of how the program / functional office is to provide such input , what types of input are important , or how the input is to be used . similarly , nnsa's pemps also do not discuss how officials should collect or use performance information . in the absence of documented , detailed procedures , nnsa may not consistently collect and use performance information from program managers and field office officials for contracts in a given fiscal year and may therefore inconsistently apply nnsa's evaluation process . for example , we identified two instances in which the nnsa fee determining official made handwritten changes to proposed award fee amounts during fiscal year 2012 without documenting in the per the basis for the changes , such as by identifying the performance information that would support the handwritten changes to create traceability between the award fee amounts and its supporting performance documentation . these changes awarded ( 1 ) los alamos national laboratory's contractor a year of award term , even though the contractor had not met the established rating threshold for award term , and ( 2 ) lawrence livermore national laboratory's contractor a higher award fee that also qualified the contractor for award term it otherwise would not have received . with these changes , these contractors received award terms and fees in a manner inconsistent with how award terms and fees were assessed for other m&o contractors . according to nnsa officials , this type of action would not happen currently because the agency's approach is rooted in a policy ( nap - 4c ) and implementation guide that is supported by a more collaborative decision - making process . however , even under the new policy , because nnsa does not have clearly documented procedures specifying how officials are to collect or use performance information , nnsa leadership cannot have assurance that there is clear traceability between the contractor evaluation and its underlying support . federal standards for internal control state that management should design control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks , such as by clearly documenting internal control in management directives , administrative policies , or operating manuals . nnsa has a documented policy , but this policy does not clearly specify how to collect and use contractor performance information to evaluate contractor performance . nnsa officials stated that in their opinion their policy was still effective and robust without detailed procedures for its implementation .