a corporation that is not an s corporation . a person elected or appointed to serve as a member of the board of directors for a corporation , which generally manages the corporation and its officers . a member of a corporation's board of directors who is a mere figurehead and who has no true control over the corporation . typically , a nominee director may have no knowledge of the business affairs or accounts , may not exercise independent control of or influence over the business , and may not act unless instructed to act by the beneficial owner . liability restricted by law or contract , such as the liability of the owners of a business entity for only the capital invested in the business . a company whose owners ( members ) have limited liability ( see “limited liability” ) and that is managed either by managers or its members . the survey and a more complete tabulation of state - by - state and aggregated results can be viewed at http: / / www.gao.gov / cgi - bin / getrpt ? gao - 06-377sp . we provided a draft of this report to dhs , justice , and treasury . justice and treasury provided technical comments on the report that were incorporated , as appropriate . states historically have had jurisdiction over the way business entities within their boundaries are formed and over reporting requirements for these entities . statutes and requirements vary from state to state . in general , however , forming a company involves certain steps . initially , a company principal or someone acting on the company's behalf submits formation documents to the appropriate state office — usually a division of the secretary of state's office — but in some cases to a different state agency . all formation documents filed with the state are matters of public record and are available to anyone . documents may be submitted in person , by mail or , increasingly , online . a minimal amount of basic information generally is required to form a company , although these requirements also vary from state to state . generally , the documents must give the company's name , an address where official notices can be sent to the company , share information for corporations , and the names and signatures of the persons incorporating ( see fig . state officials generally check to see that the documents supply the information required by statute . fees vary by state from $25 to $1,000 , and the process can take anywhere from 5 minutes to 60 days . see appendix ii for more information on how formation documents are submitted and on the company formation fees in each state . expedited services , available in some states , decrease processing times but may require an additional fee . most states also require companies to file annual or biennial reports in order to stay in good standing , for a fee ranging from $5 to $500 . businesses may be incorporated or unincorporated . a corporation is a legal entity that exists independently of its shareholders — that is , its owners or investors — and that limits their liability for business debts and obligations and protects their personal assets .