claims data . the incoming and outgoing west region contractors also disagreed on which elements of claims data needed to be transferred . for example , the incoming contractor requested information from the claims notes section , which the outgoing contractor stated contained some proprietary information . according to the incoming contractor , this section typically contains information important for claims processing , such as medical necessity reviews — medical record reviews to determine that health care services are appropriate for payment . when the outgoing contractor refused to provide the claims notes , the incoming contractor raised the issue several times to dha during weekly meetings and through letters , as documented in meeting minutes and correspondence we reviewed . however , dha determined that the outgoing contractor did not need to provide the information requested , as the non - proprietary information was available in other claims data sections . according to the incoming contractor , without access to more detailed historical information from the claims notes , there were instances in which they were unable to adjust payment determinations for certain claims paid prior to transition , which resulted in provider and beneficiary dissatisfaction . the contractors and dha made attempts to notify affected beneficiaries that they needed to contact the contractor to reestablish their automated premium payments . however , approximately 224,000 beneficiaries' credit card or electronic funds transfer enrollments for premium payments did not continue after january 1 , 2018 . to give beneficiaries more time to provide this information , dha provided a 150-day grace period for premium payments . still , certain beneficiaries were disenrolled from tricare plans for failure to establish a recurring form of payment . for example , more than 15,000 beneficiaries were disenrolled in the east region . in its “after action” report , dha acknowledged that it did not always provide specific and accurate requirements for data transfers in its transition guidance and that this should be addressed for the next transition . however , the report did not address the difficulties related to resolving contractors' questions and disagreements on these issues . for example , dha officials told us that they followed an informal process for tracking and handling issues raised by contractors during the transition , which was explained in the initial transition specifications meeting in december 2016 . however , the outgoing and incoming contractors in the west region expressed concerns about this process , explaining that it was difficult to resolve issues , particularly with the amount of time it took for dha to provide a response , such as with the referral and authorization disagreement . federal standards for internal control note that an agency should implement control activities through policies , such as by providing guidance with greater specificity for data transfers . these standards also indicate that agencies should remediate deficiencies in a timely manner , such as the prompt resolution of contractors' guidance - related disputes so as to not disrupt the transition schedule . ( recommendation 2 ) the director of dha should incorporate lessons learned from this transition and ensure that subject matter experts review prv / prav requirements and performance guarantees prior to the issuance of the request for proposal for the next transition .