in addition , u.s . 19 , 2002 ) the defendant pleaded guilty to the mail fraud charge and was sentenced to 13 months jail time . the rest of the charges were dismissed with prejudice . united states v. nader pourhassan , no . 2:00-cr - 00229 ( d. utah dec. 31 , 2001 ) the charges were dismissed with prejudice . united states v. richard tescher , no . 3:01cr0168 ( d. alaska jan. 1 , 2005 ) the charges were dismissed without prejudice . one count of wire fraud . united states v. rose morris , no . 1:05-cr - 01378 ( d. n.m. dec. 5 , 2007 ) the defendant pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 5 years probation . “without prejudice” means the federal government can charge the defendant again for the crimes . “with prejudice” means the federal government cannot charge the defendant again . in addition to the contact named above , jeffery d. malcolm , assistant director ; pedro a. almoguera ; paola bobadilla ; mark a. braza ; ellen w. chu ; brad c. dobbins ; jeanette m. soares ; and michelle loutoo wilson made key contributions to this report . attorneys to determine if prosecution or further investigation should be pursued . the official told us that the u.s. attorneys' offices are overwhelmed with cases , and those involving violations of the act tend to receive low priority for federal prosecution . a bureau of indian affairs agent also told us that because so few indian arts and crafts act cases have gone through the courts , little case history exists for the u.s. attorneys' offices to look at for guidance on how to put together a winning case . attorneys generally require that the case be “large scale,” meaning involving either a large dollar amount or a network of shops implicated in misrepresentation ; putting together such a large - scale case is both resource and time intensive . the owner and attorney for native american arts , inc. , told us that in their opinion civil action under the act is more effective than criminal prosecution to curtail misrepresentation . the act provides uniformity under the law , and the statutory and triple damages provisions are effective deterrents . they have observed that , in part because of their successful lawsuits , companies they have not yet sued have preemptively placed disclaimers on their products to prevent a lawsuit . nevertheless , neither of them was aware of any other indian arts organizations , tribes , or individuals bringing such suits . the challenges to bringing suits are that they are costly and time - consuming — investigating cases and developing the evidence to meet legal requirements for civil cases , in their experience , make for an expensive and lengthy process . the cases can also take a long time to resolve if they are defended vigorously , and because this area of law is little developed , appeals may be required to get a positive outcome . in their opinion , most indian artists do not have the resources or attorney access needed to be successful with this approach .