gao - 08-745 . washington , d.c.: june 24 , 2008 . coast guard: observations on changes to management and oversight of the deepwater program . gao - 09-462t . washington , d.c.: march 24 , 2009 . the coast guard generally concurred with our findings . the coast guard is a multimission , maritime military service within dhs . the coast guard's responsibilities fall into two general categories — those related to homeland security missions , such as port security and vessel escorts , and those related to non – homeland security missions , such as search and rescue and polar ice operations . to carry out these responsibilities , the coast guard operates a number of vessels and aircraft and , through its deepwater program , is currently modernizing or replacing those assets . in the meantime , the coast guard has proceeded with production and awarded new contracts without all of the knowledge it needs to ensure that the capabilities it is buying will meet coast guard needs within cost and schedule constraints . for assets already in production , such as the mpa and the nsc , the coast guard has made some progress in the past year in retroactively developing acquisition documentation with the intent of providing the traceability from mission needs to operational performance that was previously lacking . for example , the coast guard approved an operational requirements document for the mpa in october 2008 to establish a formal performance baseline and identify attributes for testing . through this process , the coast guard discovered that icgs's requirement for operational availability ( the amount of time that an aircraft is available to perform missions ) was excessive compared to the coast guard's own standards . according to a coast guard official , the icgs requirement would have needlessly increased costs to maintain and operate the aircraft . even as the coast guard gains this additional knowledge about mpa requirements , it is continuing with this procurement despite not having completed operational testing . according to the msam , testing in an operational environment should be completed with the initial production variants of an asset to demonstrate that capabilities meet requirements before committing to larger purchases . an approved test plan helps ensure that the tests conducted are clearly linked to requirements and mission needs . while the mpa began an operational assessment in july 2008 , the coast guard still lacked , as of march 2009 , a test plan approved by dhs and endorsed by its independent test authority , the navy's commander operational testing and evaluation force . with 11 of 36 mpas already on contract , the coast guard has completed the operational assessment but does not plan to complete operational testing until the fiscal year 2011 time frame . similarly , according to coast guard officials , operational testing of the nsc , also conducted by the coast guard's independent test authority , has begun in the absence of an approved test plan , which is now expected in july 2009 . by the time testing is scheduled to be completed in 2011 , the coast guard plans to have six of eight nscs either built or on contract .