gao - 12-434 . washington , d.c.: march 27 , 2012 . see figure 1 . additionally , the nipp sector partnership model calls on fps to form and chair a government coordinating council comprised of representatives from different levels of government to share activities , policy , and fps also participates in or interacts with the following communications.cross - sector councils , which facilitate relationships within and among the 18 sectors: the state , local , tribal , and territorial government coordinating council ( slttgcc ) , which coordinates with non - federal government organizations across all 18 sectors ; the regional consortium coordinating council , which represents a variety of distinct collaborative efforts between state , local , and private sector partners focused on critical infrastructure found in multistate regions or within a given city ; the nipp federal senior leadership council , which is a dhs - chaired council that consists of federal department and agency representatives from lead agencies named in hspd - 7 ; and the critical infrastructure partnership advisory council , which is a partnership between government and private sector owners and operators of critical infrastructure to effectively coordinate federal protective programs . the nipp requires each lead agency to develop and revise a sector - specific plan that addresses critical infrastructure protection . fps has responsibility for updating the plan to adequately represent the sector and involve council members . every 4 years , fps must: identify gaps between the plan and guidance from ip , policy changes , and best practices ; identify and develop a consolidated list of actions required to close gaps ; obtain , and incorporate input from sector partners and the council in obtain final approval from ip and release the plan to sector partners and the council . fps and dhs issued the first sector - specific plan in 2007 and an update to the plan in 2010 , in which they identified goals and objectives for the sector , shown in table 1 . as the lead agency , hspd - 7 also requires fps to provide the secretary of homeland security with annual reports to assess progress and effectively prioritize sector - specific activities and gaps , among other things . this process involves consulting the council , similar to the 2010 update to the plan . fps's role as the lead agency for the sector is an additional duty beyond its traditional role of protecting over 9,000 owned or leased facilities under the custody and control of gsa . as part of its mission , fps conducts risk assessments , recommends countermeasures , and performs law enforcement activities , such as incident response . fps's activities are funded by security fees collected from tenant federal agencies . as such , fps charges each tenant agency a basic security fee per square foot of space occupied in a gsa facility , among other fees . the interagency security committee ( isc ) , which was established in 1995 , develops policies and standards and facilitates security - related information exchanges .