individual insurance . hhs also modified expenditure authorities for premium assistance for private individual insurance coverage in three states — massachusetts , oregon , and vermont — in anticipation of new coverage being available for purchase through the exchanges starting in 2014 . for example , in massachusetts and vermont the duration of premium assistance was modified for certain adults with higher incomes — above 133 percent in massachusetts and 150 percent fpl in vermont — to end december 31 , 2013 , after which time these individuals could receive federal subsidies to purchase private insurance from the exchanges.premium assistance for certain disabled adults outside of the exchanges after december 31 , 2013 . in contrast to the three states that limited premium assistance for individual insurance coverage , another state was approved to expand coverage through premium assistance . specifically , hhs approved a new demonstration in arkansas , which became the first state to receive expenditure authority allowing federal medicaid funds be massachusetts , however , did receive approval to provide used to provide premium assistance to enable newly eligible beneficiaries to purchase private insurance offered through the state's exchange . hhs approved expenditure authorities in 12 of the 25 states we reviewed that allowed states either to target certain populations to receive hcbs or to provide full medicaid coverage to populations that were eligible to receive hcbs through other medicaid authorities . some of these states received approvals for both options . hcbs encompasses a wide range of services to help individuals who have limited ability to care for themselves — such as some elderly individuals , some individuals with human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immunodeficiency virus ( hiv / aids ) , and some individuals with disabilities — to remain in their homes or live in a community setting instead of receiving these services in an institution , such as a nursing facility . hhs officials noted that states are increasingly seeking expenditure authority under their 1115 demonstrations to cover these types of long - term care services and supports . hhs approved expenditure authorities in 7 of the 12 states that allowed the states to provide hcbs under their demonstrations to specific populations . for example , minnesota received approval to provide elderly individuals who had incomes above the state's medicaid standards with coverage of hcbs to prevent premature entry into nursing facilities and prevent or delay the spending down of their resources to obtain medicaid eligibility . hhs also approved expenditure authorities in 8 of the 12 states that allowed the states to provide full medicaid coverage under their demonstrations to populations that , prior to the demonstration , were eligible for hcbs . within medicaid , states may provide coverage of hcbs through various medicaid authorities , including through section 1915 ( c ) waivers . under 1915 ( c ) waivers , states may provide coverage of hcbs for a targeted population that would , if not for the services provided under the waiver , require institutional care . through expenditure authorities approved in their 1115 demonstrations , the 8 states were allowed to extend full medicaid coverage to these populations .