screening technology . tsa has not approved or qualified any equipment to screen cargo transported on unit - load device ( uld ) pallets or containers — both of which are common means of transporting air cargo on wide - body passenger aircraft — both domestic and inbound aircraft . cargo transported on wide - body passenger aircraft makes up 76 percent of domestic air cargo shipments transported on passenger aircraft . the maximum size cargo configuration that may be screened is a 48-by - 48-by - 65-inch skid — much smaller than the large pallets that are typically transported on wide - body passenger aircraft . prior to may 1 , 2010 , canine screening was the only screening method , other than physical search , approved by tsa to screen such cargo configurations . however , effective may 1 , 2010 , the agency no longer allows canine teams to screen uld pallets and containers given tsa concerns about the effectiveness of this screening method for those cargo configurations . in addition , tsa is working to complete qualification testing of additional air cargo screening technologies ; thus , until all stages of qualification testing are concluded , the agency may not have reasonable assurance that the technologies that air carriers and program participants are currently allowed to use to screen air cargo are effective . tsa is conducting qualification testing to determine which screening technologies are effective at the same time that air carriers are using these technologies to meet the mandated requirement to screen air cargo transported on passenger aircraft . while we recognize that certain circumstances , such as mandated deadlines , require expedited deployment of technologies , our prior work has shown that programs with immature technologies have experienced significant cost and schedule growth . inspection resources . as we reported in june 2010 , for domestic air cargo , tsa amended its inspections plan to include inspections of ccsp participants , but the agency had not completed its staffing study to determine how many inspectors will be necessary to provide oversight of the additional program participants that would support the screening mandate . in our june 2010 report , we recommended that tsa create milestones to help ensure completion of the staffing study . tsa concurred and stated that as part of the staffing study , the agency is working to develop a model to identify the number of required transportation security inspectors and that this effort would be completed in the fall of 2010 . in addition to requiring air carriers to submit screening data to tsa , in may 2010 , tsa also required air carriers to screen a certain percentage of shrink - wrapped and banded inbound cargo . tsa officials stated that in implementing this requirement , air carriers determined that it was more efficient to screen larger groupings of cargo at the point of origin , which resulted in more than the required percentage being screened . therefore , according to tsa officials , continued progress made by industry will help tsa to meet its december 31 , 2011 , deadline to screen 100 percent of inbound passenger cargo . tsa is working with foreign governments to draft international air cargo security standards and to harmonize standards with foreign partners .