v ) . hhs provided a letter stating they had no comment on the draft but sent technical comments which we incorporated into our report ( see app . vi ) . doj provided some technical comments which we included in our report to more accurately reflect information about their settlements . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly release its contents earlier we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of the treasury , the commissioner of internal revenue , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix vii . the objectives of this report were to ( 1 ) identify federal agencies that negotiated some of the largest dollar civil settlements in recent years , ( 2 ) determine whether the selected federal agencies having some of the largest civil settlements take the tax consequences of the companies into account when negotiating civil settlements and officials' views on whether they should address the deductibility of payments in the agreements , ( 3 ) determine whether the companies that paid some of the largest civil settlement payments deducted any of the payments on their federal income tax returns , and ( 4 ) determine what information the internal revenue service ( irs ) collects on companies with civil settlements reached by federal agencies . in addition , we sought to identify whether companies' deductions for settlement payments were being examined in audits and the outcome of the audits . to identify federal agencies that negotiated civil settlements involving companies with some of the largest civil settlement payments , we analyzed information on settlements reached by various federal agencies because we were unable to identify any single , reliably searchable , comprehensive source or database that was known to contain such information governmentwide . we limited our scope to settlements that were negotiated in fiscal years 2001 and 2002 involving companies that file irs form 1120 , u.s. federal corporate tax return . we selected this time frame since it would allow the settling companies time to pay the settlements ; determine applicable tax treatments , if any ; and file federal income tax returns . as a starting point to identify agencies with large settlements in those years , we used information in the 1998 federal financial management status report and five - year plan that summarized assessments and collections of civil monetary penalties by federal agencies for fiscal year 1997 . the information in the report was based on data compiled from 76 federal agencies and showed which of those agencies were responsible for the majority of the civil monetary penalty assessments and collections in fiscal year 1997 .