gao - 05-375 . washington , d.c.: march 31 , 2005 . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or at aloisee@gao.gov . r. stockton butler , julie chamberlain , nancy crothers , christopher ferencik , emily gupta , jennifer harman , winston le , glen levis , f. james shafer , jr. , and gene wisnoski made key contributions to this statement . preventing nuclear smuggling: doe has made limited progress in installing radiation detection equipment at highest priority foreign seaports . weapons of mass destruction: nonproliferation programs need better integration . gao - 05-157 . washington , d.c.: january 28 , 2005 . customs service: acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment . gao - 03-235t . washington , d.c.: october 17 , 2002 . container security: current efforts to detect nuclear materials , new initiatives , and challenges . gao - 03-297t . washington , d.c.: november 18 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to combat nuclear smuggling . gao - 02-989t . washington , d.c.: july 30 , 2002 . nuclear nonproliferation: u.s. efforts to help other countries combat nuclear smuggling need strengthened coordination and planning . gao - 02-426 . washington , d.c.: may 16 , 2002 . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . dhs has faced similar concerns from port operators in the united states . officials from this country told us that they were given more equipment than they could use . a radiation portal monitor provided to bulgaria by the department of state was installed on an unused road that was not expected to be completed for 1-1 / 2 years . mobile vans equipped with radiation detection equipment furnished by the department of state have limited utility because they cannot operate effectively in cold climates or are otherwise not suitable for conditions in some countries . doe has found that environmental conditions at many seaports , such as the existence of high winds and sea spray , can affect radiation detection equipment's performance and sustainability . dhs agreed with our assessment and told us that it would be taking corrective actions . additionally , other doe national laboratories and federal agencies are independently testing numerous different radiation portal monitors using a variety of nuclear and radiological materials and simulating possible smuggling scenarios . however , they are not sharing lessons learned or the results of these tests with other federal agencies . for example , dod's defense threat reduction agency has a large testing facility near sandia national laboratories in new mexico and has pilot tested radiation detection equipment at entrances to certain military bases .