( recommendation 3 ) . most agencies assessed the controls implemented on their systems . however , seven agencies did not consistently perform system control assessments to ensure that the controls were operating effectively , or as intended . further , seven agencies had not completed or implemented other activities in their security assessment and authorization process that assists agencies with ensuring that appropriate controls are implemented on an information system and that the system is authorized to operate . fisma also includes reporting requirements . specifically , omb is to report annually , in consultation with dhs , on the effectiveness of agency information security policies and practices , including a summary of major agency information security incidents and an assessment of agency compliance with nist standards . further , the law requires agencies to report annually to omb , dhs , certain congressional committees , and the comptroller general on the adequacy and effectiveness of their information security policies , procedures , and practices , including a description of each major security incident . in may 2017 , the president signed executive order 13800 , which sets policy for managing cybersecurity risk as an executive branch enterprise . for example , nine agencies did not implement audit log review capabilities on their information systems . nist has developed information security guidelines for federal agencies . specifically , in april 2018 , nist issued an update to its cybersecurity framework that it originally issued in february 2014 . although the cybersecurity framework was initially intended for critical infrastructure , executive order 13800 requires federal agencies to use the cybersecurity framework to also manage their cybersecurity risk . without reviewing , analyzing , and reporting audit logs , agencies limit their ability to identify unauthorized , unusual , or sensitive access activity on their networks . in may 2017 , nist published draft guidance for agencies to use in implementing the cybersecurity framework . this publication is intended to provide guidance on the use of the framework in conjunction with the current and planned suite of nist security and privacy risk management publications , such as nist special publication 800-53 . according to nist officials in the agency's computer security division , the agency is in the process of finalizing the implementation guidance and plans to publish the final version by the end of fiscal year 2019 . in its comments ( reprinted in appendix vi ) , the social security administration stated that it will continue to improve its cybersecurity safeguards and looks forward to receiving additional guidance to assist the agency with its efforts . in its comments ( reprinted in appendix vii ) , the u.s. agency for international development stated that it has developed , documented , and implemented an agency - wide program to provide security for its information and systems , pointing out that its inspector general reported that the agency had an effective program in fiscal year 2018 . the agency also cited its commitment to continuing compliance with fisma's requirements and to safeguarding its information technology services to facilitate its mission .