they then submitted the list to omb for review . according to omb and agency officials , after the submission of the initial list , examiners at omb worked with individual agencies to identify or remove projects as appropriate . according to most agencies , the final list was then approved by their cio . for the identified high risk projects , beginning september 15 , 2005 , and quarterly thereafter , cios were to assess , confirm , and document projects' performance . specifically , agencies were required to determine , for each of their high risk projects , whether the project was meeting one or more of four performance evaluation criteria: ( 1 ) establishing baselines with clear cost , schedule , and performance goals ; ( 2 ) maintaining the project's cost and schedule variances within 10 percent ; ( 3 ) assigning a qualified project manager ; and ( 4 ) avoiding duplication by leveraging inter - agency and governmentwide investments . if a high risk project met any of these four performance evaluation criteria , agencies were instructed to document this using a standard template provided by omb and provide this template to oversight authorities ( eg , omb , agency inspectors general , agency management , and gao ) on request . upon submission , according to omb staff , individual analysts review the quarterly performance reports of projects with shortfalls to determine how well the projects are progressing and whether the actions described in the planned improvement efforts are adequate using other performance data already received on it projects such as the e - gov scorecards , earned value management data , and the exhibit 300 . about 300 projects totaling about $12 billion in estimated it expenditures for fiscal year 2007 have been placed on omb's management watch list or as a high risk project with performance shortfalls . specifically , the president's budget for fiscal year 2007 included 857 major it projects , totaling approximately $64 billion . of this , omb reported that there were 263 proposed major projects that were poorly planned , totaling $10 billion . in addition , agencies reported that 79 of the 226 high - risk projects identified as of march 2006 , collectively totaling about $2.2 billion had a performance shortfall primarily associated with cost and schedule variances that exceeded 10 percent . ● regarding the criterion for high risk designation that the agency has not consistently demonstrated the ability to manage complex projects , only three agencies reported having projects meeting this criterion . this appears to be somewhat low , considering that we and others have previously reported on weaknesses in numerous agencies' ability to manage complex projects . for example , we have reported in our high risk series on major programs and operations that need urgent attention and transformation in order to ensure that our national government functions in the most economical , efficient , and effective manner possible . specifically , the department of defense's efforts to modernize its business systems have been hampered because of weaknesses in practices for ( 1 ) developing and using an enterprise architecture , ( 2 ) instituting effective investment management processes , and ( 3 ) establishing and implementing effective systems acquisition processes .