nrcs , as shown in fig . usda has a policy on organizational changes . among other things , it states that usda's secretary or assistant secretary for administration must approve organizational changes that include , among other things , the closure of an office . the policy also states that proposals for organizational changes such as office closures include a variety of detailed information , including ( 1 ) the circumstances giving rise to the proposal ; ( 2 ) human resource management , financial , and facilities impacts ; ( 3 ) a copy of an internal analysis on civil rights impact ; and ( 4 ) verification from agency management that internal control requirements have been met . in our past work , we have established leading practices for consolidation initiatives such as office closures . specifically , such practices include the following: identify and agree upon goals . the key to any consolidation initiative is the identification of and agreement on specific goals . defining goals can also help agency leaders clarify the benefits associated with a consolidation and describe a future that will be both different from and better than the past . present a business - case or cost - benefit analysis . such an analysis can help agencies show stakeholders why a particular initiative is being considered and the range of alternatives considered to ensure they are using public funds most effectively . identify stakeholders and develop a two - way communications strategy . since stakeholders often view consolidation as working against their own interests , it is critical that agencies identify the relevant stakeholders and develop a two - way communications strategy that both addresses stakeholder concerns and conveys the rationale for and overarching benefits associated with the consolidation . implement consolidations using change management practices . implementing a consolidation requires the concentrated efforts of both leadership and employees . agencies should have an implementation plan for the consolidation that includes , among other things , essential change management practices such as active , engaged leadership at the highest possible levels ; a dedicated implementation team that can be held accountable for change ; and a strategy for documenting best practices and measuring progress toward the established goals of the consolidation . in our past work , we have also established leading practices for implementing staff reductions through the use of buyout and early retirement incentives . such practices include the following: identify the reshaping goals of the agency . this will assist agencies in linking buyout and early retirement incentives to specific organizational objectives . develop workforce reshaping strategies that fully consider alternative methods . this will help agencies identify whether alternatives to buyout and early retirement incentives may more effectively meet agency reshaping goals and could work in conjunction with these tools . design buyout and early retirement incentives that demonstrate a clear relationship to the agency's workforce reshaping goals and overarching strategic goals . this will help ensure that employees critical to the mission of an agency are retained . design buyout and early retirement incentives that consider employees' needs . programs that do not do so may cause damage to the agency's reputation or negatively affect employee morale and productivity . develop a communications strategy early in the process .