other benefits . installation officials also cited benefits such as improved relations with the local government , better quality of service , and the local community's stronger commitment to working with the installation , compared with contractors . for example , moody air force base officials noted that the installation's igsa for water and wastewater treatment has been positive because the local government cares about the overall good of the installation , due to its importance to the community . as part of the approval process for igsas , the military services collect information on igsas' potential expected benefits , which are estimated prior to igsa implementation . however , once igsas are implemented , the services do not fully monitor whether these igsas are resulting in actual financial and nonfinancial benefits . standards for internal control in the federal government states that management should design processes , and document them in policy , to obtain relevant , accurate information that it can use to evaluate the entity's performance in achieving key objectives and make informed decisions about any needed changes . the standards also state that management communicates such information throughout the entity to support achieving those key objectives . following are descriptions of the status of each military service's approach and plans for monitoring the benefits of implemented igsas . army headquarters collects data on the expected financial benefits of igsas , based on information provided in the igsas' business case analyses . these data reflect the financial benefits that the installations expect to achieve by using igsas , which are estimated prior to igsa implementation . army headquarters does not , however , currently monitor whether financial or nonfinancial benefits are actually realized from igsas after implementation . army officials told us in may 2018 that they were drafting guidance that likely will assign responsibility for tracking both the realized financial and nonfinancial benefits of igsas , on an annual basis , to the army's four land - holding commands . they noted , however , that they have not yet decided what specifically to track or finalized a process for monitoring igsa benefits and evaluating program performance , but stated that their goal was to have a process in place by the end of 2018 . navy headquarters collected information on the expected benefits of the igsas it has thus far approved . in addition , in may 2018 , the navy installations command chose 12 high - priority igsa opportunities identified by its regional commands to focus on for implementation and monitoring . according to the navy installations command official who oversees the navy's igsa efforts , this effort is in the very early stages . the official also stated that the expected financial benefits for these 12 will likely be tracked by the navy installations command , but any monitoring of realized financial benefits after the igsas are implemented would be left to the regional commands . on the other hand , the official stated that nonfinancial benefits are very subjective and the navy has not yet determined what information will be collected .