gao - 11-131 . washington , d.c.: february 3 , 2011 . defense planning: dod needs to review the costs and benefits of basing alternatives for army forces in europe . gao - 10-745r . washington , d.c.: september 13 , 2010 . limited analysis of the rotational crewing option . the navy provided little documentation for its analysis of the option to forward station ships and rotate crews from u.s. bases — also known as rotational crewing . this option avoids permanently relocating ship crews and their families . navy officials stated that rotational crewing was undesirable because of its deleterious effect on crew efficiency and morale . our previous reports found that the navy had not developed comprehensive guidance for implementing rotational crewing initiatives or a systemic approach for analyzing rotational crewing alternatives and lessons learned . moreover , as we reported in 2008 , initial navy rotational crewing efforts had provided greater forward presence for navy ships by eliminating ship transits and maintaining more on - station time in distant operating areas . therefore , a rotational crewing approach for this posture decision could potentially provide a strategically effective and cost - effective option . however , the navy provided less analysis of this option than the other two options , which may have prevented the navy from determining the potential operational value of this approach . different operational assumptions not controlled for in analysis of alternatives . the navy provided more documentation and analysis for its comparison of the forward stationing option to the current approach of u.s. - based deployments to the region . as a result of its analysis , the navy concluded that the forward stationing option requires significantly fewer ships to meet european ballistic missile defense mission requirements and therefore represents the more efficient and cost - effective option . however , we found that the navy applied different assumptions to the two options and did not demonstrate that it had controlled for those differences , both of which could affect the outcome of the analysis . further , navy officials did not demonstrate that they had considered the long - term life cycle effect and associated costs for each forward deployed ship . such factors may represent significant costs , without which dod may lack the comprehensive analysis needed to determine the most efficient approach for meeting ballistic missile defense mission requirements . gao's cost estimating and assessment guide states that a business case analysis or a cost - benefit analysis seeks to find the best value solution by linking each alternative to how it satisfies a strategic objective . this linkage is achieved by developing business cases that present facts and supporting details among competing alternatives , including the life cycle costs and quantifiable and nonquantifiable benefits . specifically , each alternative should identify ( 1 ) relative life cycle costs and benefits ; ( 2 ) methods and rationale for quantifying the life cycle costs and benefits ; ( 3 ) effect and value of cost , schedule , and performance trade - offs ; ( 4 ) sensitivity to changes in assumptions ; and ( 5 ) risk factors .