( in billions ) . distribute single audit reports to the applicable agency office . we distributed the surveys to the agencies for completion . we then performed follow - up interviews with representatives from cfo , ig , and program offices to obtain , discuss , and clarify their survey responses . our survey results reflect the information provided by and the opinions of the agency officials who participated in our survey . we did not independently verify the responses to our questions . we received responses from all of the cfo act agencies . one of the 24 agencies returned but did not complete the survey because it does not have grant - making authority , and , therefore , has no experience with single audits . as a result , our survey results are based on responses from 23 agencies . we conducted our work from july 2001 through december 2001 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we discussed a draft of this report with representatives from omb and have incorporated their comments and views where appropriate . according to omb , federal awards for fiscal year 2001 totaled about $325 billion of the $1.8 trillion federal budget . the departments of agriculture , education , health and human services , housing and urban development , and transportation were responsible for managing about 86 percent of the federal awards in fiscal year 2001 . the single audit act , as amended , established the concept of the single audit to replace multiple grant audits with one audit of the recipient as a whole . as such , a single audit is an organizationwide audit that focuses on the recipient's internal controls and compliance with laws and regulations governing federal awards and should be viewed as a tool that raises relevant or pertinent questions rather than as a document that answers all questions . federal awards include grants , loans , loan guarantees , property , cooperative agreements , interest subsidies , insurance , food commodities , and direct appropriations and federal cost reimbursement contracts . the objectives of the single audit act , as amended , are to promote sound financial management , including effective internal controls , with respect to federal awards administered by nonfederal entities ; establish uniform requirements for audits of federal awards administered by nonfederal entities ; promote the efficient and effective use of audit resources ; reduce burdens on state and local governments , indian tribes , and ensure that federal departments and agencies , to the maximum extent practicable , rely upon and use audit work done pursuant to the act . recipients of federal awards who expend $300,000 or more in a year are required to comply with the single audit act's requirements . a significant part of omb circular a - 133 is the compliance supplement . this document serves as a source of information to aid auditors in understanding federal program objectives , procedures , and compliance requirements relevant to the audit , and it identifies audit objectives and suggested procedures for auditors' use in determining compliance with the requirements .