clarifying the legal review process . the training materials preview a legal review process as well as specific roles and responsibilities for administering interagency agreements . see appendix i for more information about these changes . nist does not record or monitor whether it begins working on agreements within a reasonable amount of time after it received funds advanced by client agencies . performing agencies should begin work within a reasonable period of time to ensure that the use of a client agency's funds fulfill a bona fide need of the client arising during the fund's period of availability . that is , appropriations may be obligated only to meet a legitimate need , arising in — or in some cases , arising prior to but continuing to exist in — the fiscal years for which the appropriation was made . long delays between when an agency accepts funds advanced from clients and when it begins work on its agreements may lead to the improper use of appropriated funds . although client agencies bear ultimate responsibility for proper use of their funds , performing agencies share responsibility as well . because nist , as the performing agency , does not record or monitor when work begins on its agreements , it would be difficult for it to carry out this responsibility . there is no governmentwide standard for a reasonable time period for performing work under an interagency agreement as it relates to a client agency's bona fide need . given this information , we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . for in - depth case - file reviews , we selected 11 agreements that did not begin in the fiscal year in which the agreement was accepted and work that ( 1 ) began more than 268 days after the agreement was signed ( which represents the average time it took for nist to begin work on agreements that did not begin in the fiscal year during which nist accepted them ) ; or ( 2 ) had a carryover balance greater than $1 . in addition to the contact named above , jacqueline m. nowicki , assistant director , and shirley hwang , analyst - in - charge , managed this assignment . we drew an additional sample of 15 agreements and achieved a target sample of 76 agreements . three of the additional 15 records did not have cost information associated with them and therefore we did not include them in our analysis . we assessed the reliability of nist's interagency agreement data by performing electronic testing of the data for missing data , outliers , and obvious errors ; reviewing documentation from the system , such as screen shots and training materials ; and interviewing knowledgeable agency officials about how primary users enter data into the system and the internal control steps taken by nist to ensure data reliability . jeffrey heit , travis hill , felicia lopez , julia matta , leah q. nash , rebecca rose , and kan wang made major contributions . nist agreements are required to include the treasury account symbol ( tas ) code , which indicates the period of availability of appropriations .