table 2 . subsidized properties with hud mortgages scheduled to mature through 2013 , by rental assistance program section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) section 221 ( d ) ( 4 ) 3% < 1% since properties with noninsured rent supplement do not carry a hud mortgage , hud does not track mortgage - level data on these properties . according to a hud study , tenants in properties with mortgages under the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir and section 236 programs have an average household income somewhat greater than that for tenants who receive rental assistance ; thus , they may be somewhat more able to afford higher rents . properties financed under the section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir program allow tenants with incomes of up to 95 percent of area median income ; in comparison , project - based section 8 does not serve tenants earning more than 80 percent of area median income . tenants in units covered by a rental assistance program — there are about 134,087 such units in the properties with hud mortgages scheduled to mature through 2013 — will continue to benefit from affordable rents , regardless of when the mortgage matures , as long as the rental assistance contract is in force . when long - term rental assistance contracts expire , hud may renew them . currently , hud generally renews expiring long - term contracts on an annual basis but may go as long as 5 years , and in some cases , 20 years . according to hud , during the late 1990s , about 90 percent of the property owners renewed their contracts , thereby continuing to provide affordable housing . the extent to which the trend continues will depend on the availability of program funding and housing market conditions . if a rental assistance contract expires prior to mortgage maturity and the owner opts not to renew it , assisted tenants would be eligible for enhanced vouchers . tenants could potentially be affected by the length of time given to them to adjust to rent increases as well as by the amount of the increase . property owners are not required to notify tenants when they pay off their mortgage at mortgage maturity . in contrast , property owners electing to opt out of the section 8 project - based program must notify tenants 1 year in advance of the contract expiration . owners electing to prepay their mortgages under the section 236 or section 221 ( d ) ( 3 ) bmir programs must notify tenants at least 150 , but not more than 270 , days prior to prepayment . many factors could influence an owner's decision to keep a property in the affordable inventory or convert to market rate rents upon mortgage maturity . for a profit - motivated owner , the decision may be influenced by the condition of the property and the income levels in the surrounding neighborhood . if the property can be upgraded at a reasonable cost , it may be more profitable to turn the building into condominiums or rental units for higher income tenants .