see figure 12 . dod uses various mechanisms to coordinate on additive manufacturing efforts , but it does not systematically track components' efforts department - wide . dod components share information regarding additive manufacturing through mechanisms such as working groups and conferences that , according to dod officials , provide opportunities to discuss challenges experienced in implementing additive manufacturing — for example , qualifying materials and certifying parts . however , dod does not systematically track additive manufacturing efforts , to include ( 1 ) all projects , henceforth referred to as activities , performed and resources expended by dod ; and ( 2 ) results of their activities , including actual and potential performance and combat capability improvements , cost savings , and lessons learned . dod has not designated a lead or focal point at the osd level to systematically track and disseminate the results of these efforts , including activities and lessons learned , department - wide . without designating a lead to track information on additive manufacturing efforts , which is consistent with federal internal control standards , dod officials may not obtain the information they need to leverage ongoing efforts . dod components use various mechanisms to coordinate information on successes and challenges of additive manufacturing along with other aspects of additive manufacturing . these mechanisms include coordination groups , dod collaboration websites ( such as milsuite ) , conferences , and informal meetings to coordinate on additive manufacturing - related efforts . some of these groups or meetings focus on broad issues , such as manufacturing technologies in general ( in which additive manufacturing may be included ) , and others focus solely on additive manufacturing . participants in these groups have included officials from osd , the military departments , other governmental agencies , private industry , and universities that support the research and development and operational use of additive manufacturing . dod officials explained that these groups and conferences provide opportunities to discuss challenges experienced by the components in implementing additive manufacturing , such as the challenges of qualifying materials and certifying parts , and to discuss the efforts they are making to address these challenges , as well as other aspects of additive manufacturing . see table 3 for examples of eight coordination groups we identified that meet to discuss ongoing additive manufacturing efforts , including ways to address technical challenges . furthermore , dod components participate in defense manufacturing conferences and defense additive manufacturing symposiums ; informal meetings ; and america makes discussions , known as program management reviews . we observed the september 2014 america makes program management review , during which representatives from the government , private industry , and academia discussed the status of the america makes research projects and their additive manufacturing efforts . we also observed an additive manufacturing meeting that included participants from osd , the army , the navy , and the defense logistics agency to discuss the status of their ongoing additive manufacturing efforts and collaboration opportunities . for example , the navy and the defense logistics agency discussed their efforts to survey existing parts that would be candidates for additive manufacturing . the officials stated that they are willing to share information but are focusing on their service - specific efforts .