 oversight . hhs is responsible for direct enforcement of the reporting and rebate provisions of the mlr requirements , including that the reports are submitted timely , that the data comply with the definitions in the regulations , and that rebates are paid timely and accurately . the interim final rule provides a framework through which hhs may conduct audits to determine insurers' compliance with the provisions and provides that hhs may , in its discretion , accept the findings of audits that state regulators may conduct of an insurer's mlr reporting and rebate obligations , as long as specified conditions are met . the interim final rule also provides for the imposition of civil monetary penalties if insurers fail to comply with the requirements . hhs received public comments on the interim final rule from representatives of the insurance industry , consumers , state regulators , and others , covering a wide range of topics , such as the treatment of agents' and brokers' fees , the methodology for determining credibility adjustments , and the treatment of taxes . according to hhs officials , hhs has not determined when it will issue a final rule . ppaca mlrs will be reported to hhs every june and will reflect insurers' experiences from the previous calendar year . the first set of these data will be submitted to hhs in june 2012 , reflecting insurers' experiences from 2011 . in april 2011 , insurers reported mlrs to naic using the ppaca mlr definition based on their 2010 experience . these data are not subject to the ppaca mlr provisions and will not be adjusted to account for credibility or other issues addressed in the provisions . traditional mlr averages generally exceeded the ppaca mlr standards in each market , even without the changes in the new ppaca mlr formula that will generally further increase mlrs . however , traditional mlrs also varied among insurers , particularly among those in the individual market and smaller insurers . since traditional mlrs were calculated differently than they will be under the ppaca requirements , it is difficult to predict , based on these data , what insurers' mlrs would have been using the ppaca formula , or to predict the mlrs that insurers' will report in the future . from 2006 through 2009 , insurers' traditional mlr averages generally exceeded the ppaca mlr standards — 80 percent for the individual and small group markets and 85 percent for the large group market . this is even without the new ppaca mlr formula definitions or credibility adjustments that will generally further increase mlrs reported under the ppaca requirements . the average traditional mlrs reported for 2006 through 2009 were also relatively stable for all markets ( see table 1 ) . since traditional mlrs were calculated differently than they will be under the ppaca requirements , it is difficult to predict , based on these data , what insurers' mlrs would have been using the ppaca formula , or to predict the mlrs that insurers' will report in the future . while traditional mlrs on average generally exceeded the ppaca mlr standards from 2006 through 2009 , they varied , particularly in the individual market .