( see fig . the darpa - air force ucav original plan also called for building and demonstrating two prototypes during the pre - acquisition phase , called x - 45b , that are larger and incorporate low observable technology . prior to the new joint approach , the navy's top mission for the ucav has been conducting intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance . when considering the air force's missions of reactive and preemptive sead and electronic attack , it is foreseeable that the program will face pressures to meet multiple missions . one approach to meeting this challenge is to delay the start of product development until resources — such as technology maturity — are available to meet all requirements . this would delay the program significantly and could raise funding issues . alternatively , adhering to an evolutionary acquisition approach and developing the different mission capabilities in sequence could meet the challenge , so that the initial capability can be fielded sooner . another challenge relates to funding . ( see fig . these air vehicles were expected to be more representative of the operational air vehicle that the air force planned to field . initially , the air combat command , which establishes mission and performance requirements , determined that the x - 45b should be focused on performing sead missions within the air superiority mission area . this decision was made to address the limited inventory of current assets in the air superiority mission area and to counter the challenges and deficiencies associated with conducting sead missions . as of february 2003 , 55 of 160 planned demonstrations have been completed . most of the demonstrations designed to validate the basic flight characteristics of the air vehicle have been completed . only a small number of the demonstrations needed to validate the ability of a single air vehicle to perform a preemptive destruction mission have been completed . the more demanding demonstrations — those designed to demonstrate technologies and software for highly autonomous , multivehicle operations ( with both manned aircraft and unmanned air vehicles ) , and the more difficult aspects of the sead mission against mobile targets — have not begun . the product development decision that dod is approaching for its ucav program represents a commitment by the product developer to deliver a product at established cost , schedule , and performance targets and identifies the amount of resources that will be necessary to do so . our studies of leading companies have shown that when requirements and resources were matched before product development was started , the more likely the development was able to meet performance , cost , and schedule objectives . when this took place later , programs encountered problems such as increased cost , schedule delays , and performance shortfalls . a key to achieving this match is to ensure that the developer has the resources — technology , design and production knowledge , money , and time — needed to design , test , manufacture , and deliver the product . it is not unusual for a customer to initially want a high - performing product that does not cost much or take too long to develop .