, should also be identified . this excluded the u.s . citizenship and immigration services , federal emergency management agency , transportation security administration , and u.s. secret service . we then further refined our selection based on the following criteria: software development life cycle methodology ( iterative development only ) project completion date ( in - progress only ) dhs component ( selection of only one project per component ) we then selected a random sample of three projects , with no more than one project selected from a component . the three case study projects we selected were the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) command , control , communications , and computers , intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) program new asset acquisition offshore patrol cutter project , with particular attention to the seawatch portion of this project ; the u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) biometric entry exit ( bee ) program air exit project , with particular attention to the traveler verification services portion of this project ; and the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) program 8001 project , with particular attention to the sevis modernization portion of this effort . in preliminary interviews , we confirmed that these projects were applying agile practices in order to validate data reported to the investment evaluation , submission , and tracking system . these case studies were used to supplement our findings from our program process and team activity and dynamics - level evaluations of the department's implementation of leading practices for adopting agile development . to evaluate case studies' implementation of these leading practices , we reviewed artifacts from the selected projects . in particular , we reviewed artifacts demonstrating a project's use of agile including testing metrics , evidence of agile ceremonies , the existence of user stories and a backlog , and the availability of agile coaching and training . we then interviewed officials responsible for program and project management and representatives of groups responsible for software development for the three selected case study projects to discuss gaps we identified . we shared our initial assessment with dhs , uscg , cbp , and ice and obtained feedback and additional supporting documentation . regarding our analysis of project implementation of the program process and team activity and dynamics core elements , we followed the aforementioned process in assessing a core element as being “met” , “partially met” , or “not met” . these assessments were used to gain insight into the extent to which dhs policy , procedures , and guidance prepared programs and projects for the successful adoption of agile leading practices . we did not evaluate the projects in order to make specific recommendations to the individual projects . we conducted this performance audit from december 2017 through april 2020 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .