see app . iii for a list of articles and reports that we reviewed and determined to be relevant for our analysis . the librarian - assisted literature search was conducted in august 2015 , and we reviewed literature from that search and identified additional sources from august 2015 to may 2016 . to describe the extent to which federal agencies are addressing any challenges posed by differences across the data collection efforts , we interviewed senior agency officials and academic experts and obtained relevant documentation . we asked agency officials about what , if any , steps their agency has taken , or planned to take , to address some of the difficulties or challenges that may have resulted from the differences across the data collection efforts . we also asked agency officials as well as officials from entities that use federal data on sexual violence if they were aware of any additional steps being taken by other federal agencies , state agencies , or other national entities , etc. , to address some of the difficulties or challenges that may have resulted from the differences across the data collection efforts . we conducted this performance audit from march 2015 to july 2016 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cohen , m.a . and a. r. piquero . “new evidence on the monetary value of saving a high risk youth,” journal of quantitative criminology , vol . cohn , a. m. , h. m. zinzow , h. s. resnick , and d. g. kilpatrick . “correlates of reasons for not reporting rape to police: results from a national telephone household probability sample of women with forcible or drug - or - alcohol facilitated / incapacitated rape.” journal of interpersonal violence , vol . cook , s. l. , c. a. gidycz , m. p. koss , and m. murphy . “emerging issues in the measurement of rape victimization.” violence against women , vol . delisi , m. , a. koloski , m. sweeny , e. hachmeister , m. moore , a. drury . “murder by numbers: monetary costs imposed by a sample of homicide offenders,” the journal of forensic psychiatry & psychology , vol.21 , no . fang , h. , m. t. french , and k. e. mccollister . “the cost of crime to society: new crime - specific estimates for policy and program evaluation.” drug alcohol dependence , vol . du mont , j. , k. miller , and t.l . myhr , “the role of “real rape” and “real victim” stereotypes in the police reporting practices of sexually assaulted women.” violence against women , vol . fisher , b. s. “the effects of survey question wording on rape estimates: evidence from a quasi - experimental design.” violence against women , vol . gardella , j. h. , c. a. nichols - hadeed , j. m. mastrocinque , j. t. stone , c. a. coates , c. j. sly , and c. cerulli .