mex. , and amarillo and big spring , tex . this market includes eastern colorado , southeastern wyoming , and parts of both kansas and nebraska . va owns two inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in denver , colo. , and cheyenne , wyo . this market includes most of montana and part of western north dakota . va owns two inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in fort harrison and miles city , mont . this market includes alaska . va owns one inpatient medical facility in this market , located in anchorage , alaska . geographic area covered by market and the va inpatient medical facilities within it 20 — inland north this market includes eastern washington , northern idaho , northeastern oregon , and part of northwest montana . va owns two inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in spokane and walla walla , wash. 20 — inland south this market includes parts of eastern oregon and southern idaho . va owns one inpatient medical facility in this market , located in boise , idaho . this market includes western oregon , southwestern washington , and part of northwestern california . va owns four inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in portland , roseburg , and white city , oreg. , and vancouver , wash . this market includes northeastern california and western nevada . va owns one inpatient medical facility in this market , located in reno , nev. 21 — south coast this market includes part of central california . va owns three inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in livermore , menlo park , and palo alto , calif . this market includes most of iowa and parts of illinois and missouri . va owns three inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in des moines , iowa city , and knoxville , iowa . this market includes most of minnesota and part of northwestern wisconsin . va owns two inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in minneapolis and st . cloud , minn. 23 — north dakota this market includes most of north dakota and parts of both minnesota and south dakota . va owns one inpatient medical facility in this market , located in fargo , n. dak . 23 — south dakota this market includes most of south dakota and parts of five other states: iowa , minnesota , nebraska , north dakota , and wyoming . va owns three inpatient medical facilities in this market , located in fort meade , hot springs , and sioux falls , s. dak . va health care facilities are organized into 21 regional networks , known as veterans integrated service networks , that are to coordinate the activities of and allocate resources to va health care facilities . va had 22 networks until january 2002 , when it merged networks 13 and 14 to form a new network , network 23 . va defines a health care market as a geographic area having a sufficient population and geographic size to benefit from the coordination and planning of health care services and to support a full health care delivery system .