sharing information . information sharing enables both government and private sector partners to assess events accurately , formulate risk assessments , and determine appropriate courses of action . this includes sharing information on cyber threats and vulnerabilities , providing alerts or warnings about such threats , and recommending mitigation steps . conducting exercises . building and maintaining organizational and sector expertise requires comprehensive exercises to test the interaction between stakeholders in the context of serious cyber attacks , terrorist incidents , natural disasters , and other emergencies . exercises are conducted by private sector owners and operators , and across all levels of government . providing resources . maximizing the efficient use of resources is a key part of protecting the nation's critical infrastructure . this includes providing technical and policy expertise , training , commitment of people , and financial aid through grants . over the last several years , we have reported and made recommendations regarding various aspects of cyber cip , including identifying information - sharing practices and bolstering the public - private partnership . in 2001 , we identified the information - sharing practices of leading organizations and the factors they deemed critical to their success in building successful information - sharing relationships . all of the organizations identified trust as the essential underlying element to successful relationships and said that trust could be built only over time and , primarily , through personal relationships . other critical success factors identified included ( 1 ) establishing effective and appropriately secure communication mechanisms , such as regular meetings and secure web sites ; ( 2 ) obtaining the support of senior managers at member organizations regarding the sharing of potentially sensitive member information and the commitment of resources ; and ( 3 ) ensuring organizational leadership continuity . private sector officials stated that they need access to greater amounts of sensitive and classified government information . however , a private sector official indicated that access to classified information is not valuable because it can not be shared . this official stated that they would prefer information that is unclassified and actionable that can be shared . a private sector council member stated that their federal partners take too long to vet sensitive cyber information before private sector partners can receive and share it . in addition , private sector officials and cyber experts stated that having a single or centralized government source for cyber - related information is important to ( 1 ) avoid confusion about who is the authoritative source , ( 2 ) have a consistent message communicated , and ( 3 ) coordinate a national response . similarly , in march 2009 , we testified that a panel of cyber security experts identified that creating an accountable , operational cybersecurity organization would be essential to improving our national cybersecurity posture . the experts told us that there needs to be an independent cybersecurity organization that leverages and integrates the capabilities of the private sector , civilian government , law enforcement , the military , the intelligence community , and the nation's international allies to address incidents against the nation's critical cyber systems and functions .