postal service . state officials told us they had not initiated efforts to improve information sharing with the fbi on passport - related matters until the summer of 2004 because they had previously been under the impression that the u.s. marshal's service was already sending to class the names of all fugitives wanted by federal law enforcement authorities . the officials noted that the u.s. marshal's service had been cooperative in providing names to class from its main database of fugitives . however , prior to the summer of 2004 , state officials were not aware that the information in the u.s. marshal's database was not as comprehensive as that contained in the fbi - operated national crime information center database . it said it would consider rotating gs - 12 adjudication supervisors through local fraud prevention offices to relieve fraud prevention managers of some of their training responsibilities . state is also establishing a standardized national training program for passport examiners , instituting a regular nationwide quality review program for passport acceptance agent work , and adapting and expanding computer - based training for u.s . postal service acceptance facilities for more widespread use among acceptance agents nationwide . state did not address our recommendation that it assess the extent to which and reasons why workload transfers from one domestic passport issuing - office to another were , in some cases , associated with fewer fraud referrals and to take any corrective action that may be necessary . the fbi also reviewed a draft of this report for technical accuracy . the fbi's comments have been incorporated into the report , as appropriate . as we agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the date of this letter . we will then send copies to interested congressional committees and the secretary of state . we will also make copies available to others on request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 or fordj@gao.gov . additional gao contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix iii . to examine how passport fraud is committed , we reviewed state department bureau of diplomatic security closed passport fraud case files and bureau of consular affairs statistics on passport fraud . we also met with officials at state's diplomatic security headquarters criminal division and at diplomatic security's field office in miami and conducted telephone interviews with diplomatic security officials at field offices in chicago and san francisco . to identify and assess the key challenges state faces in detecting passport fraud , we directly observed state's fraud detection efforts at 7 of its 16 domestic passport - issuing offices ; tested state's use of electronic databases for fraud detection ; analyzed fraud referral statistics from the bureaus of consular affairs and diplomatic security ; and interviewed cognizant officials in both of these bureaus .