results did not substantively differ . we assessed the reliability of the data in these quarterly reports through our case file reviews and by interviewing va officials about the processes and systems they use to develop the reports , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . how effectively has va addressed the causes of overpayments ? how effectively do va's policies and procedures support the collection of overpayments ? to examine the extent of overpayments , we reviewed available post - 9 / 11 gi bill financial data from fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . we also analyzed data on all outstanding overpayment debts dating back to the start of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program in 2009 . we assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing va's reporting systems and conducting electronic testing of the underlying data , and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . we also reviewed va's monitoring of overpayments and collections by examining its data tracking and reporting practices and assessed these efforts against guidance for government receivables in omb circular a - 129 . to identify the causes of overpayments , we reviewed va's quarterly high - dollar overpayment reports and supporting documentation for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 . we assessed the reliability of these data through an in - depth file review of 20 overpayment cases and interviews with knowledgeable agency officials and we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our reporting purposes . we also reviewed a selection of school compliance surveys , which va uses to assess whether schools that receive va education benefits adhere to applicable laws and regulations . to examine the effectiveness of va's efforts to address both the causes of overpayments and the collection of overpayment debts , we reviewed relevant federal laws , regulations , and policy guidance for processing and collecting va debts . we interviewed senior va officials and visited one of va's four regional processing offices as well as va's debt collection office , the debt management center , to interview management and frontline staff . we also interviewed representatives from several veterans service organizations , higher education associations , and administrators at nine schools about the effects of overpayments on veterans and schools . we selected the nine schools to include a mix of program lengths ( 2-year and 4-year schools ) , sectors ( public , nonprofit , and for - profit ) , and student veteran populations ranging from 14 to more than 14,000 . we assessed va's efforts to address the causes of overpayments and collect overpayment debts against the requirements in the post - 9 / 11 gi bill's statute and regulations , and government standards for internal controls . we conducted this performance audit from april 2014 to october 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for more information on our scope and methodologies , see appendix i . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .