( see app . i for a list of specific elements of the military compensation system. ) dod provides employee benefits to more than 1.3 million active duty service members and their nearly 2 million spouses and dependents . the subcommittee expressed concerns about whether the current employee benefit package available to active duty service members has kept pace with changes in the demographic composition of the force and whether the benefit package positions dod to compete with private - sector companies for high - quality personnel . because of these concerns , the subcommittee asked us to review the active duty benefit structure . specifically , our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) how dod has changed benefits in response to demographic changes in the active duty military since the advent of the all - volunteer force in 1973 and ( 2 ) how the military's overall benefit package compares with the array of benefits offered by private - sector firms . this report expands on the issues we covered in our april 2002 testimony on active duty benefits . the family and medical leave act of 1993 applied to all nine companies we contacted ; however , none offered paid time off to care for family members . employee assistance programs provide information and referrals to help employees cope with alcohol and substance abuse , family problems , stress , and psychiatric problems . an increasing number of programs also provide information and counseling services related to financial planning , legal assistance , pre - marriage and marriage counseling , college planning , and spouse job placement assistance for relocation . four of the nine companies we contacted offered employee assistance programs that included counseling and referral services . according to the bureau of labor statistics , 54 percent of employees had access to employee assistance programs in 1999 . flexible benefits , also called cafeteria plans , allow employees to tailor their benefit packages to their specific needs . companies use flexible benefits as one approach to meet the needs of their increasingly diverse workforces , while containing costs . flexible benefits allow employees to choose among plans within a given benefit area or to design individual benefit packages by selecting specific benefits from among several types . employees may choose from a variety of health care and life insurance options , various levels of sickness and accident insurance , long - term disability insurance , additional vacation and sick leave days , dependent care , adoption assistance , and legal assistance benefits . according to the bureau of labor statistics , the percentage of employees in medium and large companies with access to flexible benefits increased from 5 percent in 1988 to 13 percent in 1999 . some companies permit employees to allocate funds for dependent care expenses , health care deductibles , coinsurance , and other costs not covered by health care plans through flexible spending accounts . these accounts provide employees with a pretax savings account into which employees deposit a defined amount of money each pay period . according to the bureau of labor statistics , the percentage of employees in medium and large companies eligible for flexible spending accounts increased from 12 percent in 1988 to 21 percent in 1999 .