the department of state did not comment on the report . dhs concurred with our recommendation to develop and implement a tool that corroborates and validates flight schedule data to more reliably track air carriers' public charter operations between the united states and cuba . in its response letter , dhs described the challenges it faces in scheduling inspections for air carriers that have entered into lease or codeshare agreements with other carriers . we acknowledge the challenges tsa faces in identifying the correct flights and responsible regulated parties when scheduling inspections under the conditions described and are encouraged by tsa's planned steps to better identify public charter flight operations and shared flights . dhs's response letter describes steps that tsa is taking to develop a tool that aims to better analyze flight data to use in scheduling inspections and prompts manual confirmation of flight information when the automated system identifies lower confidence of flight operations . during the course of our review , tsa described this concept and explained how it plans to use it to better identify scheduled flights for air carrier inspections . however , as dhs indicates in its response letter , tsa is still exploring how to best integrate public charter flights into this tool . dhs also described planned improvement to tsa's master work plan ( mwp ) to corroborate and validate flight schedule data . while dhs does not specify what these improvements include and how they will lead to more reliable tracking of air carriers' public charter operations between the united states and cuba , we agree that improving the scheduling tool that is used to plan inspections is a good place to start . dhs also described planned updates to the rules that guide the management of data in its mwp . specifically , tsa plans to record anomalies in operations identified before , during , and after visits , such as trip dates that were changed or air carriers that were scheduled to be inspected , but were not , as well as the reason why . our analysis discovered some of these anomalies and explaining them required tsa to engage in a lengthy process of tracking down historical information that was not readily available . these improvements , if implemented , will be a helpful step in providing better historical information to track and validate carrier operations . finally , dhs described tsa's plans to work with aircraft operators , foreign air carriers , and u.s. government agencies to directly obtain flight information . these efforts , if implemented as planned , represent a positive step for tsa in corroborating and validating flight schedule data to more reliably track air carriers' public charter operations between the united states and cuba . dhs acknowledges that these efforts are underway with an estimated completion date of march 2019 . we will continue to monitor tsa's progress in implementing these planned actions . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of the department of homeland security , the secretary of the department of state , and the secretary of the department of transportation . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov .