commitment . as shown in figure 6 , for loans guaranteed under the section 538 program , a borrower ( developer ) applies for a guaranteed loan through an rhs - approved lender . rhs selects proposals based on eligibility requirements and has a field office review the underwriting . the field office then forwards a request for credit subsidy budget authority to headquarters , which obligates the authority . the usefulness of options for delaying or preventing suspensions of fha's and rhs's guaranteed loan programs can be considered in light of whether they would have been applicable to past suspensions . ( see table 4. ) as previously noted , the expanded notification options would have provided additional information on the status of resources for fha and rhs guaranteed lending programs and would thus have been applicable to most of the suspensions since fiscal year 2000 . providing a higher limit on commitment authority would have increased the amount of commitment authority available to fha and , as a result , would have been applicable to the suspension of programs under fha's gi / sri account in fiscal years 2003 and 2004 due to the exhaustion of commitment authority . the option that would combine the multifamily programs under fha's gi / sri account for credit subsidy purposes would likely eliminate the need for appropriations of credit subsidy budget authority and therefore would have been applicable to the suspension of gi / sri account programs due to the exhaustion of budget authority in fiscal years 2000 and 2001 . the option that would permit the use of negative subsidies to cover shortfalls in credit subsidy budget authority would have been applicable to the same suspensions . iv ) . hud agreed with our findings but said it saw difficulties with each of the options we presented for helping to prevent program suspensions . hud cited specific difficulties with some of the options . for example , hud questioned the option to expand fha notifications on the use of commitment authority , saying we presumed that congress did not act to prevent the suspension of the gi / sri account programs in fiscal year 2003 because it did not receive timely notifications . our draft report did not make this presumption . nevertheless , we clarified the final report to emphasize that had fha been required to provide an additional notification once there was a strong possibility that the programs would need to be suspended , congress would have had timelier information to consider providing additional commitment authority . hud also commented that the option to combine multifamily programs under fha's gi / sri account for credit subsidy purposes is inconsistent with the federal credit reform act , which requires that credit subsidy rates be determined for each program . our draft report indicated that this option would require congressional action . we added language to our final report to recognize that this could involve giving fha a limited exception to federal credit reform act requirements to the extent that the option may be inconsistent with these requirements .