they can be found in gao - 16-525c . the air force's response that it had the necessary information to make an informed divestment decision is not consistent with the actions it made subsequent to the analyses it cited . for example , a year after proposing to divest the a - 10 , the air force convened a group of cas experts to , among other things , examine the state of cas affairs and examine gaps . we also reported that in march 2016 the air force initiated a comprehensive force structure study that will include examining its requirements for cas and other missions performed by the a - 10 . the navy faced a similar situation in 2012 . in june 2014 we found that the navy , although it has a policy to guide divestment decisions , had not followed its policy when it decided in 2012 to decommission seven cruisers and two dock - landing ships well prior to the end of their service lives . the navy's policy requires a decision memorandum in such circumstances to address why it is in the best interest of the navy to decommission the ships and mitigation strategies for any resulting capability gaps . navy officials told us that they did not prepare the decision memorandum because they were under time pressure to identify budget savings . as with the a - 10 , congress did not support the navy's decision . we also found in june 2014 that the navy policy does not require the navy to evaluate risks associated with shortfalls in the number of ships — i.e. however , air force fac ( a ) training requirements are higher for a - 10 pilots than for those of other air force aircraft . a - 10 fac ( a ) s are required by the air force to be mission proficient whereas f - 16 fac ( a ) s and future f - 35 fac ( a ) s are only required to be familiar with the mission . a - 10 fac ( a ) s are required to conduct four times as many yearly training sorties as f - 16 fac ( a ) s and almost three times as many as future f - 35 fac ( a ) s. in addition , the a - 10 program is the only weapons instructor course that requires all entering students to be fac ( a ) qualified and has a training phase specifically dedicated to fac ( a ) . moreover , air force officials told us that the skills needed for the fac ( a ) mission build upon cas skills . , capacity — in making decommissioning decisions . in this case , the navy recommended decommissioning large surface combatants and amphibious ships when it was simultaneously reporting shortfalls in those same ship types to support its shipbuilding plans . overall , dod does not have guidance to help ensure that the services are collecting quality information needed to inform decisions for divesting major weapon systems before the end of their service lives .