pub l no . 111-358 , § 105 , 124 stat . 3989 ( 2011 ) ( codified at 15 u.s.c . funds to be at least 1 foot above the base flood elevation level . according to hud officials , such efforts are classified according to the type of activity performed and the disaster resilience measures within each activity are not isolated and are therefore unable to be tracked separately . as a result , hud cannot break down exactly how much of the remaining sandy supplemental appropriation that has been or will be used to help enhance disaster resilience , although some of the appropriation is being used for those purposes . how have states and localities in the sandy - affected area used federal funds to help enhance resilience during disaster recovery ? to what extent did state officials report being able to use federal programs to maximize resilience - building during disaster recovery ? what actions did the federal government take to promote disaster resilience in the recovery effort , and what , if any , improvements could be made for future large - scale disasters ? to address our first objective , we reviewed program documentation — such as grant guidance and federal rules — and discussed program purposes with key agency officials to determine whether and how administered programs and activities facilitate community and regional disaster resilience as part of rebuilding . we obtained information on appropriations from the sandy supplemental and information related to the purposes of programs and activities from the sandy supplemental and federal agency documents . we focused on describing five federal programs that have the ability to support disaster resilience - building efforts that are administered by four federal agencies that received 92 percent of the sandy supplemental . we collected and analyzed information from the district of columbia , new york city , and each of the 12 states that had a major disaster declaration about the types of projects for which they used federal funds to enhance disaster resilience as part of the hurricane sandy recovery effort . we also reviewed state hazard mitigation plans and local hazard mitigation plans and guidance . in addition we reviewed information about large - scale state projects provided by fema headquarters , fema's sandy recovery office and state officials . during a site visit to new jersey , 1 of the 2 states that sustained the most damage , we also toured damaged areas and projects in progress to observe and discuss planned resilience - building efforts . we also requested a comprehensive list or selected examples of hazard mitigation projects their states had planned or underway . additionally , we asked officials to discuss their opinions of the successes and challenges of fema's public assistance and hazard mitigation grant program , the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) community development block grant - disaster recovery program , and the department of transportation's ( dot ) public transportation emergency relief program . hazard mitigation officers were joined by their state counterparts or supervisors in state emergency management departments with responsibility for managing other aspects of recovery efforts .