ii ) . hud said that the draft report provided a balanced assessment but also that the report's concerns about fha's risk management and emphasis on the need for piloting lower - down - payment products were unwarranted . hud said that it welcomed the draft report's acknowledgement of fha's improvements in program administration and risk management but questioned the report's concerns about fha's ability to understand and manage risk . hud indicated that its proposal to diversify fha's product offerings and pricing structure grew out of recognition that fha was subject to adverse selection , as evidenced by the loss of borrowers with better credit profiles and growth in seller - funded down - payment assistance loans . in addition , hud listed steps it had taken to curtail seller - funded down - payment assistance , including publishing a proposed rule in may 2007 that would effectively eliminate seller - funded down - payment assistance in conjunction with fha - insured loans . these limits vary by county . the limit for an fha - insured mortgage is 95 percent of the local median home price , not to exceed 87 percent or fall below 48 percent of the freddie mac conforming loan limit , which was $417,000 in 2006 . therefore , in 2006 , fha loan limits fell between a floor in low - cost areas of $200,160 and a ceiling in high - cost areas of $362,790 . eighty - two percent of counties nationwide had loan limits set at the low - cost floor , while 3 percent had limits set at the high - cost ceiling . the remaining 15 percent of counties had limits set between the floor and ceiling , at 95 percent of their local median home prices . fha insures most of its single - family mortgages under its mutual mortgage insurance fund , which is supported by borrowers' insurance premiums . fha has the authority to establish and collect a single up - front premium in an amount not to exceed 2.25 percent of the amount of the original insured principal obligation of the mortgage , and annual premiums of up to 0.5 percent of the remaining insured principal balance , or 0.55 percent for borrowers with down payments of less than 5 percent . currently , fha uses a flat premium structure whereby all borrowers pay the same 1.5 percent up - front fee and a 0.5 percent annual fee . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 requires an annual independent actuarial review of the economic net worth and soundness of the fund . the actuarial review estimates the economic value of the fund as well as the capital ratio to see if the fund has met the capital standards in the act . the analysis considers the historical performance of the existing loans in the fund , projected future economic conditions , loss given claim rates , and projected mortgage originations . the fund has met the capital ratio requirements since 1995 , and the single - family mortgage insurance program has maintained a negative overall credit subsidy rate , meaning that the present value of estimated cash inflows from premiums and recoveries exceeds estimated cash outflows for claim payments ( excluding administrative costs ) .