technical review . regional office staff assess the timeliness and completeness of applications , including whether the applications meet the eligible entity and economic distress criteria . project analysis review . a regional representative assesses complete applications' responsiveness to the specific requirements set forth in the relevant ffo . however , officials said that the process for applying the criteria may change from time to time based upon , for example , a suggestion from commerce's office of general counsel or a regional office . the 2011 edap ffo described two grant review procedures that were not part of eda's 2007 edap ffo . specifically , in fiscal year 2007 , applications were only required to meet one out of five evaluation criteria , and eda staff were not required to prioritize or rank competitive applications to help inform the grant officer's award decision . however , in fiscal year 2011 , eda policy required staff to apply specific weights , as shown in table 2 , to five categories of evaluation criteria: ( 1 ) national strategic priorities ; ( 2 ) economically distressed and underserved communities ; ( 3 ) return on investment ; ( 4 ) collaborative regional innovation ; and ( 5 ) public / private partnerships . next , staff were to categorize each grant application as “not competitive,” “competitive,” or “highly competitive” based upon the merit review . irc panels were then required to make a ranked list of recommendations from the pool of “competitive” and “highly competitive” applications . the ranked list of applications would be considered by the grant officer for final grant award decisions . table 2 illustrates the criteria and procedures used to assess public works and eaa grants in fiscal years 2007 and 2011 . eda has a history of inconsistently documenting the results of committee meetings in which proposed projects are recommended for funding . in december 2000 , the commerce office of inspector general ( oig ) reported that it found inconsistencies in how eda's regional offices documented the project review committee ( now referred to as the irc ) process and recommended that eda keep better documentation of actions by these committees . we also found inconsistencies in how eda's regional offices documented the results of irc meetings , based on our review of a nongeneralizable sample of the irc meeting documentation for 64 public works and eaa projects eda funded in fiscal years 2007 and 2011 . for example , some irc meeting documentation we reviewed provided limited information on the proposed projects and included only a discussion of the number of jobs and the amount of private investment that the project would generate . in contrast , we found other instances of irc meeting documentation that provided detailed information on proposed projects reviewed , including positives and negatives associated with the project and recommendations to improve the project . eda officials told us that the agency had policies and procedures in place for its regional offices to follow for awarding grants in fiscal years 2007 and 2011 , but that copies of the 2007 policies and procedures could not be located and that the same policies and procedures effective in fiscal year 2010 were also applicable in 2011 .