leadership . in addition to the proposal that both of you are offering , i'm pleased to say that several other members on both sides of the political aisle and on both ends of capitol hill are also taking steps to answer the call for fiscal prudence by proposing bills to accomplish similar objectives . i was pleased to join you when you announced this proposal . as i said at the time , i believe it offers one potential means to achieve an objective we all should share: taking steps to make the tough choices necessary to keep america great and to help make sure that our country's , children's and grandchildren's future is better than our past . senators conrad and gregg , thank you for your leadership . they could agree that for the task force or commission to have a chance of succeeding “everything must be on the table” at least for discussion . that said , it is important to find a way to involve whoever is elected as our new president . after all , it will be the person elected approximately 53 weeks from now who must use the “bully pulpit” and put their energy and prestige behind the effort to help ensure success . although i think having a deadline is important , i believe that a december 9 , 2008 , deadline for the commission's report does not offer enough time for the kind of input and involvement that will be necessary . some way must be found to gain the active involvement and buy - in of the incoming president . in any event , it seems likely that the december 2008 deadline would need to be replaced — perhaps with a january or february 2009 date . you also asked us to think about the current requirement for a “fast track” up - or - down vote in the house and senate and the requirement for a supermajority in both houses . as former congressman and former office of management and budget ( omb ) director leon panetta has said , in any effort to change our fiscal path “nothing will be agreed to until everything is agreed to.” this statement also offers a warning about the dangers of picking apart any package . whatever process is developed for considering the task force's recommendations should protect the proposal from being picked apart amendment by amendment . the task force is charged with developing — and agreeing to — a coherent proposal which , taken as a whole , will put us on a prudent and sustainable long - term fiscal path . presumably , to reach agreement , the members will have made compromises — any proposal is going to have elements that represent concessions by the various members . in all likelihood those concessions will have been made in return for concessions by others . if individual elements can be eliminated by amendment , the likelihood that the package will achieve its goal will be reduced . the very process of coming up with a coherent proposal means that the package is likely to stand or fall as a whole . in that sense the prohibition on amendments makes some sense .