( see fig . the combination of these trends means that annual labor force growth will begin to slow after 2010 and by 2025 is expected to be less than a third of what it is today . ( see fig . relatively fewer workers will be available to produce the goods and services that all will consume . without a major increase in productivity , low labor force growth will lead to slower growth in the economy and to slower growth of federal revenues . the measures themselves describe either adequacy or equity , but their distribution with respect to earnings level describes progressivity . note however that equity measures cannot accurately assess the distributional effects of reform proposals that rely on general revenue transfers . such proposals do not generally specify what kind of future taxes or spending cuts will finance the transfers or who will bear the related burden ; but evaluating progressivity from an equity perspective requires that all taxes and benefits be clearly allocated . estimating future effects on social security benefits should reflect the fact that the program faces a long - term actuarial deficit and benefit reductions and / or revenue increases will be necessary to restore solvency . to illustrate a full range of possible outcomes , we developed hypothetical benchmark policy scenarios that would restore solvency over the next 75 years either by only increasing payroll taxes or by only reducing benefits . our tax - increase - only benchmark simulates “promised benefits,” or those benefits defined under current law , while our benefit - reduction - only benchmarks simulate “funded benefits,” or those benefits for which currently scheduled revenues are projected to be sufficient . the benefit reductions are phased in between 2005 and 2035 to strike a balance between the size of the incremental reductions each year and the size of the ultimate reduction . at our request , social security actuaries scored our benchmark policies and determined the parameters for each that would achieve 75-year solvency . for our benefit reduction scenarios , the actuaries determined these parameters assuming that disabled and survivor benefits would be reduced on the same basis as retired worker and dependent benefits . if disabled and survivor benefits were not reduced at all , reductions in other benefits would be deeper than shown in this analysis . social security's distributional effects reflect program features , such as its benefit formula , and demographic patterns among its recipients , such as marriage between lower and higher earners . the retired worker benefit formula favors lower earners by design , replacing about 50 percent of pre - retirement earnings at age 65 for an illustrative low earner but only about 30 percent of pre - retirement earnings for an illustrative high earner . ( see fig . the disability benefit formula also favors lower earners , and disability recipients are disproportionately lower earners . our simulations suggest that for individuals born in 1985 , compared with a hypothetical program without disability insurance , social security's disability provisions increase lifetime social security benefits for the bottom fifth of earners by 43 percent , compared with 14 percent for the top fifth of earners .