ii ) . as described in table 1 , fha's current use of total has provided additional benefits over previous scorecards , such as less paperwork for lenders and more consistent underwriting decisions . loan prospector and desktop underwriter had , among other things , helped speed up the application process and provided an opportunity to base approvals on objectively determined variables . total continues these benefits and , in addition , has generated two others . first , as noted earlier , the previous scorecards did not always provide consistent underwriting decisions — that is , at times the results of their assessments differed , which resulted in the same loan being accepted by one scorecard and referred by the other . as a result , certain loans had to be approved manually , through potentially subjective decision making . total limits the number of loans that need to be approved manually because it provides consistent automatic underwriting decisions . second , lenders that use total do not have to provide as much documentation for the accepted loans they underwrite as lenders that do not use total . for example , these lenders do not have to obtain or submit verification of rent , and the requirements for proof of income employment and assets are less stringent . unicon tested the variables' ability to predict claim default . unicon determined that a number of variables , such as credit , ltv ratio , and cash reserves should be included in total . to determine the best type of credit variable for fha's purposes to include in total , unicon and its subcontractor fair isaac corporation used 1994 and 1996 credit data to test various credit models and confirm the results . these models included those that measured borrowers' credit using only credit scores and more complex models that were based on individual credit characteristics rather than on a credit score . based on this analysis , fha decided that the standard fico credit score was a reasonable credit variable to include in the scorecard . second , unicon tested various versions of statistical models suitable for developing scorecards . these were variations on two types of models , “logit” and “hazard.” both models predict the probability of default based on predictive variables that are weighted according to their statistical importance , although the hazard model can predict default over multiple time periods . fha officials stated that , based on unicon's analyses , both models' predictive capability were about equal . fha chose the logit model , claiming that it was easier to implement and that its estimates were easier to interpret . third , unicon tested the stability of the model by estimating it against a sample of loans from 1992 that had not been included in the original 1992 data . in addition , unicon tested the model's stability over time by checking whether the determinants of defaults occurring within 2 years were similar for the 1992 and 1994 application years . both stability tests , according to documents provided by fha , suggested that the model did not materially change over the 2-year period .