the agencies' comments are summarized below . written comments from dod , state , and usaid are reproduced in appendixes ii , iii , and iv respectively . in response to the recommendation to identify approaches for , or examples of , how to assess alternative contracting approaches , and document a determination that the approach selected is in the best interests of the government , dod and state concurred . dod , by way of explaining its delay in issuing guidance , noted it was required to adhere to the regulatory rulemaking process and noted that the final far rule to implement section 802 is expected to be issued in march 2015 . section 802 provided flexibility for dod to issue guidance and regulations as may be necessary to ensure contracting officers take specific actions for certain solicitations and we continue to believe dod should do so expeditiously . state noted that it will issue guidance to assist contracting officer to assess alternative contracting approaches and document the determination that the approach selected is in the best interest of the government . usaid did not believe it was necessary to issue additional guidance , stating that the far has provided specific actions for a contracting officer to follow to ensure that they identify and adequately reconsider proposed contracts and that to provide additional guidance may limit its contracting officers' discretion . as we noted in the report , usaid has restated these actions in a policy directive , but it has not provided contracting officers with guidance on how to perform these new requirements . specifically , usaid has not provided examples of how to conduct an analysis of alternate acquisition approaches or determine the feasibility of contracting directly with proposed subcontractors , described what documentation is necessary , or identified where the required contracting officer's determination should be recorded . rather than limit a contracting officer's discretion , we believe that more specific guidance will help contracting officer's comply with these new requirements , improve oversight , and align more closely with federal internal control standards . dod and state concurred with our recommendation to revise their processes and guidance governing management reviews of procurements to ensure that such reviews assess whether contracting officers are complying with the provisions of section 802 . dod indicated it will provide or revise and update guidance governing management reviews to ensure that such reviews assess whether contracting officers are complying with the provisions of section 802 . they expect that these checklists will be revised by the end of the year . usaid officials do not anticipate the need to revise agency regulations once the far is updated , noting that its contracting personnel assess proposed contracting arrangements in accordance with the far as part of its standard acquisition processes . officials noted that the updated checklists will remind its personnel of the section 802 requirements to assess the feasibility of contracting directly with proposed subcontractors , and to document their determination that the accepted approach is in the government's best interests as well as the basis for that determination . however , it is unclear if checklist revisions will provide contracting officers with the information necessary to perform the analysis of alternative acquisition approaches required by section 802 .