personnel . although the contractor hired by hhs to perform iv&v services identified the lack of personnel as a major risk factor in june 2003 , it took hhs and its system integrator over 6 months to substantially address this weakness . in february 2004 , the iv&v contractor reported this issue as closed . in closing this issue , the iv&v contractor noted that the availability of adequate resources was an ongoing concern , and the issue may be reopened at a later date . related human capital issues are discussed in a separate section of this report . critical path analysis . in august 2003 , the iv&v contractor noted that an effective critical path analysis had not been developed . a critical path defines the series of tasks that must be finished on time for the entire project to finish on schedule . each task on the critical path is a critical task . as of april 2004 , this weakness had not been effectively addressed . until hhs can develop an effective critical path analysis for this project , it does not have adequate assurance that it can understand the impact of various project events , such as delays in project deliverables . hhs' critical path report shows planned start and finish dates for various activities , but does not show the actual progress so that the impact of schedule slips can be analyzed . the iv&v contractor recommended that critical path analysis and discussion become a more prominent feature of ufms project management to monitor the resources assigned to activities that are on the critical path . earned value management system . in august 2003 , the iv&v contractor also noted that an effective earned value management system had not been implemented . earned value management attempts to compare the value of work accomplished during a given period with the work scheduled for that period . by using the value of completed work as a basis for estimating the cost and time needed to complete the program , earned value can alert program managers to potential problems early in the program . for example , if a task is expected to take 100 hours to complete and it is 50 percent complete , the earned value management system would compare the number of hours actually spent to complete the task to the number of hours expected for the amount of work performed . in this example , if the actual hours spent equaled 50 percent of the hours expected , the earned value would show that the project's resources were consistent with the estimate . as of april 2004 , this weakness had not been effectively addressed . without an effective earned value management system , hhs has little assurance that it knows the status of the various project deliverables in the context of progress and associated cost . in other words , an effective earned value management system would be able to provide quantitative data on the status of a given project deliverable , such as a data conversion program . on the basis of this information , hhs management would be able to determine whether the progress of a task was within the expected parameters for completion .