implement security capabilities . to ensure that each tic access point would be secure , omb required agencies that planned to be an access provider to evaluate their ability to meet 74 security capabilities and to report this information to dhs by april 2008 . the 74 security capabilities include technical capabilities , such as encryption of internet traffic and the use of firewalls ; capabilities related to availability , such as the presence of an uninterrupted power source ; physical access controls ; and capabilities that describe how an access provider maintains an acceptable level of service . of the 74 capabilities , 51 are designated as critical , 14 are designated as important , and 9 are categorized as desired . of the 51 critical capabilities , 40 are required for both single service and multi - service access providers . the 11 capabilities required only for multi - service access providers address the interaction with external customers , such as service level agreements , communication , and reporting . omb provided a template for agencies to report whether they currently met each of the capabilities and to indicate their plans for addressing any critical capabilities they did not meet . once agencies determined whether to be an access provider or to seek service from another provider , they were required to do one of the following: access provider agencies were required to develop plans for implementing any of the critical tic capabilities that they did not yet have in place . they were required to report on their progress toward implementing the critical capabilities to dhs in october 2008 and september 2009 . agencies that are seeking service from other access providers were not required to implement the critical capabilities ; however , they were required to acquire tic services from a multi - service access provider or a commercial vendor that had met the security capabilities through the networx contract . demonstrate consolidation of connections and implementation of tic security capabilities . access provider agencies , along with networx vendors that offer tic services , are required to undergo a tic compliance validation review , in which dhs assesses the degree to which the access provider meets the critical security capabilities and has consolidated its connections to approved tic access points . if any capabilities are not fully implemented or if further consolidation is required , the access provider is granted initial operating capability status and is required to develop plans to address the shortcomings and to submit the plans to dhs . all access providers are required to be re - assessed periodically to ensure the capabilities are still being met . all access provider agencies were required to schedule the on - site review with dhs by september 25 , 2009 . none of the 23 agencies has met all of the requirements of the tic initiative , and most agencies have experienced delays in their plans for reducing and consolidating connections . however , most agencies reported that they have made progress toward reducing and consolidating their external connections and implementing security capabilities . in addition , several access provider agencies have made more progress toward implementing the capabilities than others . the following describes the status of each requirement .