pursuing such an approach clearly pays off . one recent survey of 147 companies in 22 industries indicated a strategic approach to procurement had resulted in savings of more than $13 billion in one year . the very same practices employed by the private sector could serve as a foundation for improving the acquisition of services in dod . when adopting a strategic , best - practices approach for changing procurement business processes , companies begin with a “spend analysis” to examine purchasing patterns to see who is buying what from whom . by arming themselves with this knowledge , companies can leverage their buying power , reduce purchasing costs , and better manage their suppliers . in essence , spend analysis is the road map to procurement cost - savings and performance improvements . to follow up on our earlier work , you asked us to further evaluate ( 1 ) the best practices of leading companies as they relate to conducting and using spend analysis , and ( 2 ) the extent to which dod can pursue similar practices . to conduct this work , we reviewed the spend analysis practices of five leading companies that take a strategic approach to managing services acquisitions: international business machines ( ibm ) , chevrontexaco , bausch & lomb , delta air lines , and dell computer . after our visits , we provided a summary of the information obtained to ensure that we had accurately recorded and understood the information each company provided . we provided each company a copy of our draft report for review and comment . the companies we visited were bausch & lomb , rochester , new york ; chevrontexaco corporation , san ramon , california ; dell computer corporation , round rock , texas ; delta air lines , atlanta , georgia ; and international business machines corporation , somers , new york . to assess current efforts underway by dod to improve its enterprisewide knowledge of spending on services contracts , and how dod can better emulate the best practices learned from these leading companies , we interviewed procurement policy and management officials in the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology , and logistics ) and the military departments . to assess the feasibility of using internal accounts payable data similar to the data used in leading companies' spend analysis programs , we interviewed defense finance and accounting service officials knowledgeable about dod systems used to process invoices and pay commercial vendors for goods and services supplied to military and other dod organizations . we also reviewed policy memorandums , guidance , and other documents pertaining to ongoing and planned initiatives that affected service contracting . we discussed with these officials our assessment of the leading companies' approaches and obtained their views on their approaches' similarities and differences . in addition , we discussed potential challenges and barriers to employing the best practices approaches we identified . each group is responsible for one or more commodities , which may also include responsibility for a number of sub - categories . once the spending data have been organized and reviewed , companies use the data as the foundation for a variety of ongoing strategic efforts .