( see app . survey data indicate that most pension plans invested in hedge funds do so , at least partially , through funds of hedge funds . according to the pensions & investments' survey , 35 of the largest 48 db plans that reported investments in hedge funds used funds of hedge funds for at least some of their hedge fund investments . overall , funds of hedge funds represented 54 percent of total hedge fund investments for this group . compared with pension plans , endowments and foundations were much more likely to invest in hedge funds . greenwich associates' survey found that 75 percent of endowments and foundations ( with at least $250 million in assets ) were invested in hedge funds in 2006 . these investments amounted to slightly more than 12 percent of total assets for all endowments and foundations in their sample . according to pensions & investments , hedge fund investments reported among the largest pension plans increased from about $3.2 billion in 2001 to about $50.5 billion in 2006 , approximately a 1,500 percent increase ( see fig . furthermore , for those db plans that reported hedge fund investments in the 2006 pensions & investments survey , the investments represented about 3 percent of their total db assets under management . hedge funds seek absolute rather than relative return — that is , look to make a positive return whether the overall ( stock or bond ) market is up or down — in a variety of market environments and use various investment styles and strategies , and invest in a wide variety of financial instruments , some of which follow: convertible arbitrage: typically attempt to extract value by purchasing convertible securities while hedging the equity , credit , and interest rate exposures with short positions of the equity of the issuing firm and other appropriate fixed - income related derivatives . dedicated shorts: specialize in short - selling securities that are perceived to be overpriced — typically equities . emerging market: specialize in trading the securities of developing economies . we conducted this performance audit from september 2006 to january 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix presents summary information about the potential impact that pension law reform may have on the ability of hedge funds to attract pension plan investments and statistics on the extent of pension plan investments in hedge funds in recent years . section 611 ( f ) of the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ) amended the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) to , among other things , provide a statutory definition for “plan assets,” which essentially codified , with some modification , the department of labor's ( dol ) — the primary regulator of pension plans — existing plan asset regulation ( sometimes referred to as the 25 percent benefit plan investor test ) .