( see fig . title i funds are allocated through state educational agencies to districts using statutory formulas based primarily on census bureau estimates of the number of students from families below the poverty line in each district . states retain a share for administration and school improvement activities before passing most of the funds on to school districts . in turn , districts are required to allocate title i funds first to schools with poverty rates over 75 percent in rank order , with any remaining funds distributed at their discretion to schools in rank order of poverty either districtwide or within grade spans . a school's title i status can change from year to year because school enrollment numbers and demographics vary over time , and annual allocations to districts under title i formulas can vary considerably . in 2002 , nclba added several new provisions to the esea , as amended , to strengthen accountability of all schools identified for improvement , which included requiring states to develop academic achievement standards and establish proficiency goals for making adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) that will lead to 100 percent of their students being proficient in reading , mathematics , and science by 2014 . to measure their progress , states administer an annual assessment to students in most grade levels . in addition , each school's assessment data must be disaggregated in order to compare the achievement levels of students within certain designated groups with the state's performance goals . these student groups include the economically disadvantaged , major racial and ethnic groups , students with disabilities , and those with limited english proficiency , and each of these groups generally must make ayp in order for the school to make ayp . the last reauthorization of esea prior to nclba — the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( iasa ) — required that schools be identified for improvement if they did not make ayp for 2 consecutive years and that they take certain actions to improve student performance . nclba also includes a timeline for implementing specific interventions based on the number of years a school fails to make ayp and adds some interventions that were not required under iasa . ( see table 1. ) under nclba , schools that fail to make ayp for 2 consecutive years are identified for improvement and must develop an improvement plan in consultation with the district , school staff , parents , and outside experts . this plan , which is subject to district approval , must incorporate strategies to address the specific academic issues that caused the school to be identified for improvement . at this stage districts also must offer students in the school the opportunity to transfer to a higher - performing public school in the district — an option that is called offering public school choice . after the third year , districts must also offer supplemental educational services ( ses ) , such as tutoring . under nclba , if a school fails to make ayp for 4 consecutive years , it is required to implement one of the corrective actions identified in the law , such as implementing a new curriculum or extending the school year or day .