it investment management . omb and agencies need to address potentially duplicative it investments to avoid investing in unnecessary systems . in fiscal year 2011 , there were approximately 7,200 reported investments ( includes major and nonmajor investments ) totaling at least $79 billion . the department of defense ( defense ) reported the largest number of it investments ( 2,383 investments at $37 billion ) , followed by the department of energy ( energy ) ( 876 investments and $2 billion ) . geospatial investments . the federal government collects , maintains , and uses geospatial information — information linked to specific geographic locations — to help in decision making and to support many functions , including national security , law enforcement , health care , and environmental protection . many activities , such as maintaining roads and responding to natural disasters — floods , hurricanes , and fires — can depend on critical analysis of geospatial information . multiple federal agencies may provide services at the same geographic locations and may independently collect similar geospatial information about those locations . in august 2012 , the department of the interior estimated that the federal government invests billions of dollars in geospatial data annually and reported that duplication among investments is common . federal data center consolidation initiative . in february 2010 , the federal cio established the federal data center consolidation initiative to address the growing number of federal data centers . this initiative's four high - level goals are to promote the use of “green it” by reducing the overall energy and real estate footprint of government data centers ; reduce the cost of data center hardware , software , and operations ; increase the overall it security posture of the government ; and shift it investments to more efficient computing platforms and technologies . omb believes that this initiative has the potential to provide about $3 billion in savings by the end of 2015 . portfoliostat reviews . in march 2012 , omb launched the portfoliostat initiative , which requires agencies to conduct an annual agency - wide it portfolio review to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how their it investments align with the agency's mission and business functions . portfoliostat is designed to assist agencies in assessing the current maturity of their it investment management process , making decisions on eliminating duplicative investments ( such as geospatial information ) , and moving to shared solutions ( such as cloud computing ) in order to maximize the return on it investments across the portfolio . while omb's techstat reviews are intended to examine it performance at the specific project or investment - level , portfoliostat reviews are intended to examine the portfolio as a whole and draw on the agency's enterprise architecture to help identify and eliminate areas of duplication and waste . omb believes that the portfoliostat effort has the potential to save the government $2.5 billion over the next 3 years by , for example , consolidating duplicative systems . during the past few years , we have reported on it investment management — an important mechanism for identifying and analyzing duplicative investments — at key agencies .