most of the operations of idb are conducted through oc . the operations and resources of oc are maintained separately from those of idb's other entities and various funds . the members of the bank include 28 regional and 18 nonregional countries . developing regional members had subscribed approximately 50 percent of oc's total subscribed capital at december 31 , 1999 . oc provides development assistance in the form of loans made to or guaranteed by members as well as loans and loan guarantees to private sector enterprises located within its regional borrowing member countries . loans to the private sector without a member's guarantee are limited to 5 percent of the bank's outstanding loans and guarantees . the primary vehicle of oc's development assistance is direct lending . the united states is the largest member in most of these mdbs . tables 6 and 7 provide a summary of u.s. appropriations for contributions and approved callable capital subscriptions to the mdbs for fiscal years 1996 through 2001 . the department of the treasury oversees u.s. interests in the mdbs . nonaccrual loans include the principal portion only . undisbursed loans include loans that are committed but not yet disbursed . paid - in capital excludes amounts not yet due and receivables from members related to subscribed capital . because mdbs follow different accounting standards to prepare financial data , use different methodologies to estimate loan losses , and have different policies relating to nonaccrual loans , caution must be taken when comparing financial results . further , mdbs serve different purposes and borrowers , which also affects the comparability of financial data . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , from january 2001 through april 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . member countries must ensure that loans they have guaranteed also remain current . on may 11 , 2001 , we received comments from cognizant treasury officials and have incorporated those views and other technical suggestions into our report , where appropriate . multilateral development banks ( mdb ) are autonomous international financial entities that finance economic and social development projects and programs and provide technical assistance in developing countries primarily using money borrowed from world capital markets or contributed by governments of developed countries . in addition , ifc provides technical assistance and financial advice to businesses and governments . membership in ifc is open only to those countries that are members of the world bank . ifc had 174 members at the end of fiscal year 2000 . according to ifc's articles of agreement , investments are to be made in productive private enterprises . to be eligible for ifc financing , projects must meet profitability and project viability criteria , benefit the economy of the host country , and comply with stringent developmental impact requirements . ifc's main investment activity is making loans for private entrepreneurial projects , which may involve expansions and modernization efforts . its lending activities include cofinancing , loan syndication , underwriting , and guarantees , which act as a catalyst for additional project funding from other lenders and investors . ifc also makes equity investments , typically through the purchase of common or preferred stock .