dhs agreed with our recommendation . in july 2011 , we reported that tsa revised its eds requirements to better address current threats , and plans to implement these requirements in a phased approach . however , we reported that some number of eds machines in tsa's checked baggage screening fleet are configured to detect explosives at the levels established in the 2005 requirements . the remaining eds machines are configured to detect explosives at 1998 levels . when tsa established the 2005 requirements , it did not have a plan with the appropriate time frames needed to deploy edss to meet the requirements . to help ensure that tsa's checked baggage screening machines are operating most effectively , we recommended that tsa develop a plan to deploy edss to meet the most recent explosive - detection requirements and ensure that the new machines , as well as machines deployed in airports , are operated at the levels in established requirements . dhs concurred with our recommendation and has begun taking action to address it ; for example , dhs reported that tsa has developed a plan to evaluate its current fleet of edss to determine the extent to which they comply with these requirements . however , our recommendation is intended to ensure that tsa operate all edss at airports at the most recent requirements . until tsa develops a plan identifying how it will approach the upgrades for currently deployed edss — and the plan includes such items as estimated costs and the number of machines that can be upgraded — it will be difficult for tsa to provide reasonable assurance that its upgrade approach is feasible or cost effective . our prior work has also shown that not resolving problems discovered during testing can sometimes lead to costly redesign and rework at a later date . addressing such problems before moving to the acquisition phase can help agencies better manage costs . specifically: in january 2012 , we reported that tsa began deploying ait before it received approval for how it would test ait . for example , dhs's acquisition directive 102 required dhs to approve testing and evaluation master plans — the documents that ensure that programs are tested appropriately — prior to testing . however , we found that dhs did not approve tsa's testing and evaluation master plan until january 2010 , after tsa had completed qualification and operational tests and dhs had already approved tsa for full ait deployment . according to dhs , the dhs director of operational testing and evaluation assessed the testing of ait prior to the september 2009 arb meeting and recommended approving the decision to procure ait at that meeting , even though the arb did not approve its testing plans . additionally , we reported that dhs approved tsa's ait deployment in september 2009 , on the basis of laboratory - based qualification testing results and initial field - based operational testing results that were not completed until later that year . according to dhs officials , the department initially had challenges providing effective oversight to projects already engaged in procurement when the directive was issued .