we agree . as we note in the report , while payroll processing is more consolidated than in the past , agencies still use a variety of time and attendance ( ta ) systems , which can vary in the level of detail with which work or leave time is recorded depending on agency policies and systems . in addition , there are variations in the systems and processes of the payroll providers . these variations across agencies and across payroll providers underscore the importance of updated documentation for reporting and consistent monitoring of error reports . in addition , through its leadership role in the opm - managed human resources line of business , opm can consider action for ensuring data quality — for example , by including data quality indicators among its performance measures for the payroll providers . opm also provided technical comments which we incorporated , as appropriate . we will send copies to the appropriate congressional addressees and the director of the u.s. office of personnel management , as well as to other interested parties . in addition , the report is available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2700 or kingsburyn@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . the names of gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . this appendix presents selected results from our electronic testing of the ehri payroll data . the results are grouped into three categories: ( 1 ) tests for missing data , ( 2 ) tests for logical errors , and ( 3 ) tests for potentially invalid values . missing data tests incomplete data can limit both the ability to conduct desired analyses and the usefulness of any analysis conducted . for example , if a large amount of data is missing , as was the case with data missing for entire agencies for some pay periods , it may not be possible to complete analysis of that agency for the missing periods . if a smaller proportion of data is missing , analysis may still be possible . however , any analysis completed using these data will be limited in its accuracy and validity , which may increase the risk of drawing inappropriate or invalid conclusions . because the ehri payroll data have been identified as potentially useful for government - wide studies of telework behavior , we tested for missing data in telework - related fields . as shown in table 6 , we found data in these fields to be missing entirely in 2011 and largely incomplete in 2012 , years for which reporting on this variable was not required by opm . the percentage missing is based on the number of records without values out of all records within a fiscal year . as a result , estimates of governmentwide telework participation , as shown in table 7 , are likely to be inaccurate for these years . logical error tests logical testing can reveal data reliability issues among and within individual records .