assignments . a fellow at a host organization with a cyber or nuclear focus may be assigned to a utilization tour involving the development of strategies for cyber or nuclear warfare . training - with - industry participants are generally used in positions directly related to a corporation's area of expertise . for example , a training - with - industry participant at a private company that specializes in logistics and the transportation of items may be later assigned to a dod position in supply chain management . the military departments are responsible for the management of their respective fellowship and training - with - industry programs ( see app . ii on the life - cycle phases of a fellowship program for a more detailed description ) . in addition to statutory authorities and the dod instruction , the military services also have their own guidance or regulations covering their respective legislative fellowship , nonlegislative fellowship , and training - with - industry programs ( see app . iii for a list of service guidance ) . we determined that dod uses several statutory authorities for its fellowships and training - with - industry programs for military officers . primarily , it uses two explicit statutory authorities . however , for two types of fellowships — legislative and interagency — the underlying authorities are less explicit than they are for the others . we determined that dod's authority to pursue fellowships at non - dod educational institutions , foundations , and corporations derives primarily from section 2603 of title 10 of the united states code , which authorizes servicemembers to accept fellowships from certain organizations , and section 2013 of title 10 of the united states code , which authorizes the training of servicemembers at nongovernmental facilities . generally , dod's fellowships and training - with - industry programs are conducted under one or both of these authorities . section 2603 allows servicemembers , subject to regulations,a fellowship offered by a corporation , fund , foundation , or educational institution that is organized primarily for scientific , literary , or educational purposes , and the benefits may be accepted by the member in addition to the member's military pay and allowances subject to certain conditions . the member is required to agree in writing to serve on active duty after completion of the fellowship for a period of at least three times the length of the period of the education or training . to create fellowship and training - with - industry programs with a variety of nongovernmental facilities , dod also uses provisions in section 2013 that authorize it to enter into agreements or other arrangements for the training of servicemembers with nongovernmental organizations such as medical , scientific , technical , educational , research , or professional institutions , foundations , or organizations — in addition to the business , commercial , or industrial firms , corporations , or other nongovernmental facilities , as defined by section 2013 . these agreements or other arrangements are not subject to certain requirements normally applicable to government contracts . section 2013 also authorizes dod to pay expenses in connection with training at nongovernmental facilities in addition to the member's military pay .