the following are some highlights of our analysis . promotion outcomes in state's civil service were generally lower for racial or ethnic minorities than for whites . our descriptive analysis of state data for fiscal years 2002 through 2018 found that rates of promotion from gs - 11 through the executive rank were 16.1 to 42.0 percent lower for racial or ethnic minorities in the civil service than for their white counterparts , depending on the gs level . our adjusted analysis , controlling for factors other than race or ethnicity that could influence promotion , found that racial or ethnic minorities in the civil service were 4.3 to 29.3 percent less likely to be promoted from gs - 11 through the executive rank than their white counterparts . promotion rates in state's foreign service were generally lower for racial or ethnic minorities than for whites , but the differences in promotion odds were generally not statistically significant . our descriptive analysis of state data for fiscal years 2002 through 2018 found that , relative to whites , the rate of promotion for racial or ethnic minorities in the foreign service was 5.0 to 15.8 percent lower for promotions from class 4 through class 1 . controlling for factors other than race or ethnicity that could influence promotion , our adjusted analysis found that differences in the odds of promotion for racial or ethnic minorities and whites were generally not statistically significant . however , the odds of promotion from class 4 to class 3 were statistically significantly lower for racial or ethnic minorities than for their white counterparts . promotion rates were generally lower for women than men in state's civil service , but differences in the odds of promotion were not statistically significant . our descriptive analysis of state data for fiscal years 2002 through 2018 found that the rate of promotion in the civil service was generally lower for women than for men . specifically , for promotions from gs - 11 through the executive rank , promotion rates for women were generally 0.7 to 11.6 percent lower than the promotion rates for men , depending on the gs level . however , our adjusted analysis , controlling for factors other than gender that could influence promotion , did not find any statistically significant differences in the odds of promotion for women and men in the civil service . our adjusted analysis found that the odds of promotion were generally higher for women than men in state's foreign service . our descriptive analysis of state data for fiscal years 2002 through 2018 found that women in the foreign service experienced a higher rate of promotion than men from class 3 to class 2 and from class 2 to class 1 . our adjusted analysis , controlling for factors other than gender that could influence promotion , found that women in the foreign service had higher odds of promotion than men in early to mid career . for example , the odds of promotion from class 4 to class 3 were 9.4 percent higher for women than for men . state has identified some diversity issues in its reports to eeoc .