( see app . ii for information from our survey about universities' licensing activities with start - up companies. ) omb circular a - 110 establishes uniform requirements for the administration of federal grants and cooperative agreements with institutions of higher education , hospitals , and other nonprofit organizations . for example , the circular requires that funding recipients submit performance reports to the funding agency at least annually , with a final technical report normally due within 90 days after the grant's termination or expiration . however , the circular provides flexibility by allowing the agencies to specify the content of these reports or to waive the final technical report . the national science and technology council , established by executive order 12881 in november 1993 , coordinates the development of governmentwide science and technology policies . for example , the council's subcommittee on research business models is examining the effects of the changing nature of scientific research on business models for conducting federally funded research . in comparison , 62 universities reported that their policies require that only certain federal funding agencies be notified , 49 universities do not have a policy for notifying federal funding agencies about identified financial conflicts of interest , and 4 universities did not respond about their notification policies . our survey results indicate that several universities have tightened their policies for financial conflicts of interest in recent years to comply with the nih and nsf requirements . specifically , all of our 171 respondents reported that they have financial conflict of interest policies , while a survey reported in the november 2000 issue of the new england journal of medicine found that 15 of the 250 institutional respondents ( 6 percent ) did not have a policy on conflicts of interest . in addition , 7 federal agencies , 84 research universities , and 6 other research institutions participate in the federal demonstration partnership ( fdp ) , which seeks to streamline the administrative processes for implementing omb circular a - 110 . in july 1995 , the department of health and human services , which includes nih , promulgated regulations on objectivity in research and nsf revised its investigator financial disclosure policy to establish consistent requirements for universities and most other grantees to identify and manage financial conflicts of interest . specifically , the nih and nsf standards require that funding recipients implement policies for ( 1 ) scientists to disclose any “significant financial interests” to an official designated by the institution and ( 2 ) institutions to determine whether a real or apparent conflict exists and , if so , take appropriate actions to manage , mitigate , or eliminate the identified conflict . under these regulations , a conflict of interest exists when the institution's designated official determines that a significant financial interest could directly and significantly affect the research design , conduct , or reporting . the financial benefit may result , for example , from an investigator owning stock in a company providing the research funding , or from an investigator having ownership interest in a company that may profit from a university invention . conflicting interests are not necessarily unacceptable , and many can be managed through disclosure and oversight .