gao - 02-828 . washington , d.c.: june 21 , 2002 . ( see fig . once electricity is generated — whether by burning fossil fuels ; through nuclear fission ; or by harnessing wind , solar , geothermal , or hydro energy — it is sent through high - voltage , high - capacity transmission lines to electricity distributors in local regions . once there , electricity is transformed into a lower voltage and sent through local distribution wires for end - use by industrial plants , commercial businesses , and residential consumers . a unique feature of the electricity industry is that electricity is consumed at almost the very instant that it is produced . as electricity is produced , it leaves the generating plant and travels at the speed of light through transmission and distribution wires to the point of use , where it is immediately consumed . in addition , electricity cannot be easily or inexpensively stored and , as a result , must be produced in near - exact quantities to those being consumed . because electric energy is generated and consumed almost instantaneously , the operation of an electric power system requires that a system operator balance the generation and consumption of power . the system operator monitors generation and consumption from a centralized location using computerized systems and sends minute - by - minute signals to generators reflecting changes in the demand for electricity . the generators then make the necessary changes in generation in order to maintain the transmission system safely and reliably . absent such continuous balancing , electrical systems would be highly unreliable , with frequent and severe outages . historically , the electric industry developed initially as a loosely connected structure of individual monopoly utility companies , each building power plants and transmission and distribution lines to serve the exclusive needs of all the consumers in their local areas . such monopoly utility companies were typically owned by shareholders and were referred to as investor - owned utilities . in addition to these investor - owned utilities , several types of publicly owned utilities , including rural cooperatives , municipal authorities , state authorities , public power districts , and irrigation districts , also began to sell electricity . about one - third of these publicly owned utilities are owned collectively by their customers and generally operate as not - for - profit entities . further , nine federally owned entities , including the tennessee valley authority and the bonneville power administration , also generate and sell electricity — primarily to cooperatives , municipalities , and other companies that resell it to retail consumers . because the utilities operated as monopolies , wholesale and retail electricity pricing was regulated by the federal government and the states . the public utility holding company act of 1935 ( puhca ) and the federal power act of 1935 established the basic framework for electric utility regulation . puhca , which required federal regulation of these companies , was enacted to eliminate unfair practices by large holding companies that owned electricity and natural gas companies in several states .