thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact william b. shear at ( 202 ) 512-8678 or shearw@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include harry medina , assistant director ; paola bobadilla ; beth ann faraguna ; julia kennon ; john ledford ; jonathan meyer ; amanda miller ; marc molino ; mark ramage ; barbara roesmann ; kathryn supinski ; paul thompson ; and william woods . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the agency also faced delays in obtaining contracting support . more than a year after the agency began verifying businesses , a contractor began conducting site visits ( which further investigate control and ownership of businesses as part of the verification process ) . as of april 2010 , cve had 6.5 full - time equivalent position vacancies , and va officials told us existing staff have increased duties and responsibilities that also contributed to slowed implementation . the slow implementation of the program appears to have contributed to va's inability to meet the requirement in the 2006 act that it use its veteran preference authorities to contract only with verified businesses . currently , contracting officers can use the veteran preference authorities with both self - certified and verified businesses listed in vetbiz.gov . however , in its december 2009 rule va committed to awarding contracts using these authorities only to verified businesses as of january 1 , 2012 . according to our analysis of fpds - ng data , in fy09 the majority of contract awards ( 75 percent ) made using veteran preferences went to unverified businesses . in march 2010 , the recently appointed executive director of osdbu acknowledged in a congressional hearing before this committee how large an undertaking the verification program has been and some challenges associated with starting a new program . as of april 8 , 2010 , va had verified about 2,900 businesses – – approximately 14 percent of vosbs and sdvosbs in the vetbiz.gov database . va has been processing an additional 4,701 applications but the number of incoming applications continues to grow ( see fig . as of march 2010 , cve estimates it had received more than 10,000 applications for verification since may 2008 . as discussed previously , va must maintain a database of verified businesses and in doing so must verify the veteran or service - disability status , control , and ownership of each business . the rules that va developed pursuant to this requirement require vosbs and sdvosbs to register in vetbiz.gov to be eligible to receive contracts awarded using veteran preference authorities .