, cfo , coo ) . in some cases these opportunities have become reality . for example , as we testified last year , it is increasingly common to find federal , state , and local governments using the internet for basic transactional services , such as allowing citizens to submit and pay taxes , process renewal fees , and file applications . governments are also using the internet to buy the goods and services that support their operations and are establishing “portals” or integrated web sites for targeted citizen information and services . yet at the same time , a range of issues have emerged about how to best manage and integrate complex information technologies and management processes so that they are aligned with mission goals , strategies , and objectives . in my remarks today , i will briefly summarize the major governmentwide it challenges , describe the federal government's current information resources and technology management framework and discuss how it could be strengthened , describe various federal cio proposals under consideration , provide an overview of the structure and responsibilities of existing state cio models , and discuss the keys to maximizing the success of a federal cio . although the american people expect world - class public services and are demanding more of government , the public's confidence in the government's ability to address its demands remains all too low . the government's successful implementation of information technology could improve this confidence . indeed , according to the council for excellence in government , “electronic government can fundamentally recast the connection between people and their government . it can make government far more responsive to the will of the people and greatly improve transactions between them . it can also help all of us to take a much more active part in the democratic process.” government use of internet - based services is broadening and becoming more sophisticated . in particular , public sector agencies are increasingly turning to the internet to conduct paperless acquisitions ( electronic malls ) , provide interactive electronic services to the public , and tailor or personalize information . however , the government must still overcome several major challenges to its cost - effective use of information technology . at the beginning of this year we issued a series of reports — our performance and accountability series — devoted to framing the actions needed to support the transition to a more results - oriented and accountable federal government . to the extent that the billions of dollars in planned it expenditures can be spent more wisely and the management of such technology improved , federal programs will be better prepared to meet mission goals and support national priorities . however , we identified seven continuing it challenges that are key to achieving this goal: strengthening agency information security , improving the collection , use , and dissemination of government information , pursuing opportunities for electronic government , constructing sound enterprise architectures , fostering mature systems acquisition , development , and operational practices , ensuring effective agency it investment practices , and developing it human capital strategies .