counternarcotics . these 76 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $115 million , focused on assisting mexican agencies countering the illicit drug trade in mexico , primarily through technical assistance and equipment , including for forensic labs , drug detection , and surveillance . for example: intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance technology has been provided to the mexican navy to expand its capacity to conduct counternarcotics operations . the organization of american states implemented a project that expanded mexico's drug treatment courts , which offer rehabilitation services and other nonpunitive alternatives for drug offenders who would otherwise face time in prison . disrupt illicit finance . for example , two large projects — one $68 million project and one $56 million project that has since closed — provided a wide range of technical assistance to gom judges , public defenders , and attorneys general . another smaller project worked with law schools to adapt their curricula to the new criminal justice system . transparency and accountability . these 15 projects , with usaid funding estimated at $49 million engaged with mexican officials and civil society to address corruption and promote ethical behavior . projects helped mexican officials develop and implement anticorruption policies , strengthen transparency in their procurement processes , and implement gom's national anti - corruption system . for example , one project aimed to deter corruption and support transparency by improving the quality of investigative and data journalism in mexico . these nine projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $17 million , provided equipment , training , and a public awareness campaign to assist the gom in its efforts to address tco's money - laundering and other illicit financial activities . for example: one doj project provided anti – money laundering training to mexican prosecutors at the state and federal levels . another united nations office on drugs and crime project aims to combat money laundering through a public awareness campaign and complaint call center in mexico . professionalize the police . many of these 97 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $144 million , provided training and technical assistance to mexican law enforcement officials at all levels to improve their effectiveness , accountability , and adherence to the rule of law . an aspect of one project conducted surveys with law enforcement personnel and civil society to better inform effective police practices and to link these practices with levels of citizen trust . two other projects supported tours to the united states for mexican officials to study issues related to gender - based violence and women's access to justice . secure borders and ports . these 68 projects , with state / inl funding estimated at $217 million , focused on various efforts and equipment for gom border and military officials — including equipment for biometrics , surveillance , and telecommunications — to secure mexico's air , land , and sea borders and ports . for example , dhs's customs and border patrol provided mentors and training to gom border officials to improve their capacity to stem the northward flow of migrants entering mexico along its southern border .