attorneys . according to the u.s. attorney general , one of the key elements of the initiative will be to provide federal prosecutors with the assistance , training , and expertise they need to undertake export control prosecutions . for example , justice held a national export control conference in may 2007 . the following month , justice appointed its first national export control coordinator , who will be responsible for coordinating with other u.s. agencies the enforcement of export controls and development of training materials for prosecutors in an effort to enhance their capacity and expertise . the impact of the export enforcement initiative on justice's ability to prosecute export control cases is yet to be demonstrated as the initiative has just begun . although the u.s. government has announced that countering nuclear proliferation and nuclear networks is a high priority , it lacks the necessary information to assess the impact of its multiple efforts to do so . while u.s. assistance to foreign governments to help them strengthen their laws and regulations against nuclear proliferation networks has the potential for positive impact , u.s. agencies are not sufficiently monitoring aid recipients' actions to assess what u.s. assistance is accomplishing . state's assistance program is not completing and documenting risk analyses or program assessments , as required by program guidance . in addition , u.s. government agencies that engage in enforcement activities to counter nuclear proliferation networks are impaired from judging their progress in this effort because they cannot readily identify basic information on the number , nature , or details of their enforcement activities involving nuclear proliferation . without such information , agencies cannot identify what their efforts are , assess how their efforts are working , or determine what resources are necessary to improve their effectiveness . developing such information would be a necessary first step for u.s. agencies in beginning to assess how well their efforts to combat nuclear proliferation networks are working . as of october 2007 , these agencies may not know whether their capabilities for addressing the problem of nuclear proliferation networks have improved . to help assess the impact of the u.s. response to the threat of nuclear proliferation networks , we recommend that the secretary of state take the following two actions: ( 1 ) comply with its guidance to conduct periodic assessments of proliferation risk and the export control system for each country receiving exbs funding and ( 2 ) document each risk analysis conducted to evaluate the progress made in alleviating those risks . to help assess how u.s. government agencies that engage in export control enforcement activities are accomplishing their stated goal of combating nuclear proliferation , we recommend that the secretaries of commerce , homeland security , and treasury , and the u.s. attorney general individually direct that their respective agency's data collection processes be modified to support the collection and analysis of data that clearly identify when enforcement activities involve nuclear proliferation . for example , each agency could consider designating appropriate categories or codes for nuclear proliferation for staff to use when recording information in the databases and mandating completion of relevant data fields that would identify an enforcement action as related to nuclear proliferation .