gao - 09-955 . washington , d.c.: september 17 , 2009 . cor maintains the web site . as of december 1 , 2009 , 22 federal departments and independent agencies , including 13 of the 16 executive - level departments , had posted completed guidance for funding recipients on lep.gov . of these cabinet - level departments , recipient guidance for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , department of defense , and department of agriculture are listed as “pending.” table 1 lists the agencies that have posted their recipient guidance . the number of federal agencies that still must complete recipient guidance or lep plans could not be determined . the executive order does not assign doj the responsibility for ensuring agencies complete recipient guidance or lep plans . rather , under the executive order , executive branch agencies are responsible for determining the need to develop recipient guidance based on whether they provide financial assistance to entities that provide federal services to lep populations . likewise , agencies are responsible for determining if they must draft lep plans by assessing whether they have frequent or significant contact with lep persons . if an agency determines that it is not required to draft recipient guidance , an lep plan , or both , the agency is not required to report that determination to doj . doj has , however , provided technical assistance in many of these determinations and issued numerous reminders to agencies regarding their responsibilities under the executive order . for example , on november 12 , 2002 , the civil rights division issued a memorandum to heads of federal agencies , general counsels , and civil rights directors . section ii of that memorandum asks that each federal agency draft or update lep plans and urged each agency to place a copy of that plan on its web site and provide cor with the link so that it could be placed on lep.gov . other doj letters , speeches , and memoranda have encouraged agencies to publish recipient guidance and to issue or update lep plans . although the executive order requires agencies' recipient guidance to be placed in the federal register for public comment , there is no similar requirement that agencies make their lep plans publicly available . rather , doj officials stated that , while it has encouraged agencies to post lep plans and provide links to those plans on lep.gov , agencies are given the discretion to make their lep plans public . of the 58 agencies that had submitted lep plans to doj as of december 2009 , 17 agencies have posted their lep plans on lep.gov , these are listed in table 2 . our prior work has noted that high - performing organizations focus on the needs of their external stakeholders . additionally , on december 8 , 2009 , omb issued a memo directing agency heads to promote transparency and accountability by providing the public timely access to information on the activities of federal agencies . as such , publicly available lep plans could help ensure that federal agencies appropriately focus on the needs of lep communities by enhancing the transparency of agencies' efforts and allowing for stakeholder scrutiny .