gao - 18-678 . washington , d.c.: september 10 , 2018 . dod concurred with this recommendation . the air force is also trying to manage a shortage of aircraft maintainer personnel — both uniformed personnel and depot civilians . in september 2018 , we found that the air force reported losing experienced maintainers , either to retirement or to other programs such as the f - 35 lightning ii ( f - 35 ) . for example , we reported that the air force's c - 17 , which is a long - range , heavy logistics transport aircraft , requires depot modifications to keep it viable , but there was a shortage of depot maintainer personnel due to attrition , inability to retain skilled workers , and hiring freezes . the air force has several initiatives underway , including hiring additional maintainer personnel and temporarily transitioning active - duty maintenance units from some legacy aircraft . as of august 2018 , the air force had requested an increased end strength of 8,000 personnel to fill critical personnel needs in maintenance and pilots . officials stated that progress was being made in increasing end strength and hiring additional personnel , which should address these challenges . however , according to air force officials , it may take several years before newly hired maintainer personnel will have the training and experience they need to improve aircraft availability rates . we have work underway to examine the air force's management of its aircraft maintainer workforce and dod depot skill gaps and plan to report on these issues over the next 6 months . air force aircraft availability has been limited by challenges associated with aging aircraft , maintenance , and supply support . according to the air force , the average age of the fleet is 28 years . the average ages of the b - 52 strategic bomber and the kc - 135 tanker each exceed 50 years , and the air force expects to continue to use these aircraft for decades . the air force spends billions of dollars each year to sustain its fixed - wing aircraft fleet — comprised of both legacy and new aircraft — which needs expensive logistics support , including maintenance and repair , to meet its availability goals . we reported in september 2018 that from fiscal year 2011 through 2016 , the air force generally did not meet aircraft availability goals while it continued to accrue increased maintenance costs . figure 2 summarizes the sustainment challenges we reported that face selected air force aircraft . sustainment challenges are not just an issue for older aircraft , but represent an enduring challenge for the air force . the f - 35 — which is intended to replace a variety of legacy fighter aircraft in the air force and more broadly represents the future of tactical aviation for dod — has projected sustainment costs of over $1 trillion over a 60-year life cycle . in october 2017 , we reported that dod's projected operating and support costs estimate for the f - 35 rose by 24 percent from fiscal year 2012 to fiscal year 2016 and are not fully transparent to the military services .