compliance schedule . the 2003 rule required newly defined cafos to apply for permits by april 2006 and existing cafos to develop and implement nutrient management plans by december 31 , 2006 . according to epa officials , the 2003 rule was expected to ultimately lead to better water quality because the revised regulations would extend coverage to more animal feeding operations that could potentially discharge and contaminate water bodies and subject these operations to periodic inspections . three laws provide epa with certain authorities related to air emissions from animal feeding operations , but , unlike the clean water act , they do not specifically cite cafos as regulated entities . the clean air act regulates any animal feeding operation , regardless of size , that exceeds established air emission thresholds for certain pollutants . for example , in certain specific situations , hydrogen sulfide , ammonia , or particulate matter may be regulated . in addition , section 103 of cercla and section 304 of epcra require owners or operators of a facility to report to federal , state , or local authorities when a “reportable quantity” of certain hazardous substances , such as hydrogen sulfide or ammonia , is released into the environment . together , cercla's and epcra's reporting requirements provide government authorities , emergency management agencies , and citizens the ability to know about the source and magnitude of hazardous releases . epa also works with usda to address the impacts of animal feeding operations on air and water quality and human health . in 1998 , epa entered into a memorandum of understanding with usda that calls for the agencies to coordinate on air quality issues related to agriculture and share information . in addition , in 1999 , the two agencies issued a unified national strategy aimed at having the owners and operators of animal feeding operations take actions to minimize water pollution from confinement facilities and land application of manure . to help minimize water pollution from animal feeding operations and meet epa's regulatory requirements , usda , through its natural resources conservation service , provides financial and technical service to cafo operators in developing and implementing nutrient management plans . because no federal agency collects accurate and consistent data on the number , size , and location of cafos , it is difficult to determine precise trends in cafos . according to usda officials , the data usda collects for large farms raising animals can be used as a proxy for estimating trends in cafos nationwide . expanded cafo definitions . all types of poultry operations , as well as all stand - alone operations raising immature animals , were included in the 2003 cafo rule . more stringent design standard for new facilities in the swine , poultry , and veal categories . the 2003 rule established a no - discharge standard for new facilities that could be met if they were designed , constructed , and operated to contain the runoff from a 100-year , 24-hour storm event . best management practices . growth rates varied dramatically by animal type . for instance , broiler chickens farms showed the largest increase , almost 1,200 percent , followed by hogs at more than 500 percent .