omb staff agreed with this recommendation . the 22 executive agencies within the scope of our review identified 665 initiatives ( planned retrospective regulatory analyses ) in the final review plans and subsequent updates prepared in response to executive orders 13563 and 13610 . between january 2011 and the end of august 2013 , the agencies completed and had taken at least some final action on 246 of those planned analyses ( see table 1 ) . because agencies' analyses are part of an ongoing process , the information in table 1 represents a snapshot of agencies' progress reported as of august 31 , 2013 . agencies' reports on the progress of their planned retrospective analyses and related documentation showed that analyses completed by the end of august 2013 almost always resulted in the agencies taking additional specific actions , as shown in figure 1 . in 225 of the 246 completed analyses we examined ( more than 90 percent ) , the reviews led to agencies amending sections of the cfr to revise , clarify , or eliminate regulatory text . for example , dhs amended regulations administered by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) to allow for the publication of seizure and intent - to - forfeit notices on an official government forfeiture website . in a broader context however , reexamining benefits and costs achieved after a regulation is implemented could provide data useful for performance reviews , including assessments of apgs , and is consistent with regulatory executive orders and guidance . one of the principles in executive order 13563 states that the regulatory system must measure , and seek to improve , the actual results of regulatory requirements . subsequent guidance from the oira administrator noted that this “points to the need for empirical assessment of the consequences of rules.” broadening the focus to think about retrospective reviews as a contributor to agency performance metrics related to apgs , rather than only in the context of examining a single regulation , may encourage agencies to revisit opportunities for more of this type of analysis . the focus of retrospective analyses differs from agency performance reviews . agencies' retrospective analyses tended to examine regulations on a micro level rather than their contribution to broader apgs . regulations are developed and implemented individually , and often re - examined individually . in addition , the impetus for reviews is often statutory requirements , changes in the regulatory environment that affect the rule , availability of agency resources , or executive order requirements . the selection of which rule to review is typically tied to criteria such as the number of complaints or comments from regulated parties and the public , whether there have been changes in technology or other conditions since the regulation was issued , the potential for burden reduction , or the number of years since a regulation was promulgated or last reviewed , rather than whether it will be subject to upcoming performance goal discussions . the regulatory process and executive orders outlining how to conduct retrospective reviews have helped to shape the focus and timing of reviews . in contrast , agencies' performance reviews are designed to examine measures that cut across programs and policy tools at a macro level .