these issues are discussed below . recent operational testing has revealed that a freedom variant lcs was not able to meet all its interim lethality requirements . specific details of these shortcomings were redacted because the information is classified . dot&e officials told us that the amount of live testing done to date on the lcs suw mission package is insufficient to provide statistical confidence that lcs can consistently demonstrate this level of performance . the dod acquisition instruction states that scientific test and analysis techniques — which dot&e states includes statistically based measures — should be employed in a test program and provide required data to characterize system behavior . the amount of testing to date is consistent with the approved test plan , but dot&e stated that the tests were constrained due to the navy not providing the funding and resources to allow for further testing . due to the limited number of live operational test runs , dot&e believes the existing evidence is not sufficient , nor does it predict lcs's performance in varied environments ( eg , bad weather ) or provide sufficient confidence that lcs could repeat this performance in other tests . so , while there is no requirement in the test plan to achieve statistical confidence , as dot&e states the sparse data available do not allow a strong statement about lcs's ability to meet requirements in other operational scenarios . as an illustration of this point , the same ship and crew attempted the same operational test event one week prior to the successful run and were unsuccessful before the test event was cancelled due to range restrictions . as such , dot&e has not yet made its determination that lcs is operationally effective in performing the suw mission because of a stated lack of available data to support such an assessment . the navy's operational test organization has made its determination about effectiveness , which is documented in its final report . further information about their assessment is classified . further , while operational testing did demonstrate that lcs could defeat the interim requirement number of fast inshore attack craft ( fiac ) , range safety considerations made this testing less operationally stressing than a real - world encounter . additional information about these issues was redacted because it contained classified information . this operational testing of suw was conducted using only a freedom variant lcs . while the guns are the same on the two variants and in the mission package , the gunfire control systems , sensors , consoles , and some enabling software are all different , as are the gun placements and ship handling characteristics . as such , testing on a freedom variant cannot be used to predict performance of the suw mission package on an independence variant . the navy will not operationally test the initial suw mission package on the independence variant until september 2015 . as shown in table 4 , most of the suw operational testing on this variant is in the future and program officials told us that the navy is still gaining an understanding of the effectiveness of the 57mm gun weapon system on the independence variant .