( see fig . these percentages were similar in 2013 through 2015 . however , previous research found more than 94 percent of transition - age youth on ssi reported being enrolled in school . further , although some youth on ssi may not report their student status , ssa policy instructs staff to develop and verify school attendance for youth under 18 who report that they expect to earn over $65 in a month . ssa also has procedures for capturing an individual's student status during his or her initial application and during a redetermination . despite these procedures , the fact that many youth with earnings are not receiving seie suggests that ssa may not be confirming student status or applying seie in a timely manner or in accordance with policy . ssa officials told us that the agency does not regularly analyze seie data and said they do not believe doing so would help them better understand seie's effectiveness or reach . however , our recent data request uncovered potential undercounting of earnings and seie use . federal standards for internal control state that an agency should identify , analyze , and respond to risks related to achieving its objectives . absent this analysis , ssa cannot know the extent to which various factors may contribute to the low percentage of transition - age youth with earnings receiving seie , or whether errors made by staff or data system errors are precluding some ssi recipients from receiving an income exclusion for which they are eligible . given that seie should be applied automatically for all eligible students who have reported earned income , ssa officials offered the following possible reasons , other than ssa user or system error , for why youth with earnings might not have benefited from seie: they were not students or they did not report their student status to ssa . similarly , the number of transition - age youth on ssi who benefited from other ssa - administered work incentives and employment supports was either unknown or low . for example , ssi's earned income exclusion , which excludes the first $65 of income earned each month from benefit calculations and half of earnings after that , is available to the broadest set of ssi recipients with earnings . however , ssa officials told us that ssa has not conducted analysis to determine the extent to which transition - age youth on ssi benefit from this incentive . ssa officials told us that their systems automatically apply this exclusion to any earned income remaining after the seie has been applied and that any individual with earned income ( whether or not the seie applies ) automatically receives this exclusion . ssa data for impairment - related work expenses ( irwe ) , blind work expenses ( bwe ) , and the plan to achieve self - support ( pass ) show low uptake by transition - age youth on ssi for each of these provisions as well . for example , ssa data show that no transition - age ssi recipients benefited from irwe or bwe and no more than five had a pass in any calendar year 2012 through 2015 , the most recent data available .