( see fig . 2 for an illustration of a wedge barrier. ) although state prefers to have the wedge barrier , contractors prefer the sliding gates because they are less expensive . we , therefore , believe our recommendation remains valid . congress did not act on the proposed amendment . in december 2008 , state officials told us the department plans to revise the 2007 proposal by opening competition for necs only to u.s. companies that meet the specified security requirements . state uses a two - phase solicitation process for awarding contracts for necs . in the first phase , the prequalification of offerors , contractors submit documentation attesting how they meet the legal , technical , and financial qualifications for each project on which they wish to bid . state then reviews this documentation to certify whether contractors do , in fact , meet the criteria . once state completes these reviews , it issues a list of contractors eligible to bid for each contract award . only companies that state certifies as prequalified under the first phase receive , and may respond to , subsequent requests for proposals ( rfp ) for major construction awards . in the second phase , rfps , state solicits and evaluates contractors' bids for construction awards , including technical and price proposals . contractors bid a firm , fixed price for a project ; therefore , the winning contractor will deliver the defined scope of the project for the price of the contract . after state awards a design - build contract , the contractor must develop a project design and work plan that incorporates all construction and security features outlined in the rfp and contract documents . during this design phase , the contractor must also begin preparing for construction by obtaining local building permits , buying or ordering materials , and mobilizing workers . in addition , under the design - build delivery method , contractors can begin construction of some buildings and systems that do not require security clearances — such as perimeter walls , warehouses , and mechanical support buildings — before the full design is approved . however , construction of the main office building — the chancery or consulate — generally does not proceed until the design is approved and state certifies to congress that it meets all security requirements . during the construction phase , obo monitors contractors' schedules , inspects and reviews contractors' work , and certifies that construction is substantially complete once contractors meet all requirements of the contract . once construction is certified as being substantially complete , state conducts final commissioning to ensure that building systems — such as fire protection , electrical , and mechanical — were installed properly and operate according to design criteria and manufacturer specifications . once all systems pass the commissioning process , the building is certified to be occupied and post staff may move in . in september 2008 , state reported that construction costs had increased dramatically since 2001 and that the trend was likely to continue .