no waivers were granted . one petitioner requested that it be allowed to operate stage 2 airplanes after december 31 , 1999 ; that petition was denied . the other nine petitioners requested permission to operate nonrevenue flights for purposes of stage 3 modifications , storage , maintenance , and / or exportation . faa notified these petitioners that it did not have the authority to authorize such operations under the provisions of the law . for a limited time , foreign carriers were also allowed to apply for a waiver from the final compliance deadline for transition to stage 3 noise standards , but according to an faa official , faa received no requests for such waivers . in november 1999 , the congress amended anca to allow the operation of stage 2 aircraft in nonrevenue service after december 31 , 1999 , under specific conditions . faa chose to implement the provision by issuing special flight authorizations . an operator of a stage 2 airplane that wanted to operate in the contiguous united states for any of the purposes listed in the revised statute had to apply in advance . applications are due 30 days in advance of the planned flight and must provide the information necessary for faa to determine that the planned flight is within the limits prescribed by law . figures 2 through 4 show the stage 3 aircraft noise standards and the increases in noise allowed as aircraft weight increases . as figure 2 illustrates , the noise standards for takeoff operations also vary with the number of engines . the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) develops international noise standards to provide consistent aircraft noise standards across nations . icao , the international body charged with ensuring the safe and orderly growth of international civil aviation throughout the world , operates under the convention on international civil aviation , ratified in 1947 . although not a regulatory body , icao promulgates standards and recommends practices for international civil aviation . according to the terms of the convention , icao makes its decisions through an assembly and a council with various subordinate committees , commissions , and panels , including the committee on aviation environmental protection ( caep ) , which conducts most of icao's technical environmental work . caep does its technical work through various working groups relying on the participation and technical expertise of its member countries . the assembly , composed of representatives from icao's 187 member countries , is icao's ultimate decisionmaking body . it meets at least once every 3 years to review ongoing work and set policy for the coming years . each member country is entitled to one vote , and decisions of the assembly are taken by a majority of the votes cast except when otherwise provided in the convention . according to faa , in practice , most assembly decisions are made by consensus . the council , composed of representatives from 33 countries , is elected by the assembly for a 3-year term .