portfoliostat . in order to eliminate duplication , move to shared services , and improve portfolio management processes , in march 2012 , omb launched the portfoliostat initiative . specifically , portfoliostat requires agencies to conduct an annual agency - wide it portfolio review to , among other things , reduce commodity it spending and demonstrate how their it investments align with the agency's mission and business functions . portfoliostat is designed to assist agencies in assessing the current maturity of their it investment management process , making decisions on eliminating duplicative investments , and moving to shared solutions in order to maximize the return on it investments across the portfolio . omb believes that the portfoliostat effort has the potential to save the government $2.5 billion over the next 3 years by , for example , consolidating duplicative systems . given the magnitude of the federal government's annual it budget , which is expected to be more than $82 billion in fiscal year 2014 , it is important that agencies leverage all available opportunities to ensure that their it investments are acquired in the most effective manner possible . to do so , agencies can rely on it acquisition best practices , incremental development , and initiatives such as omb's it dashboard and omb - mandated techstat sessions . additionally , agencies can save billions of dollars by continuing to consolidate federal data centers and by eliminating duplicative investments through omb's portfoliostat initiative . best practices are intended to help ensure successful major acquisitions in 2011 , we identified seven successful acquisitions and nine common factors critical to their success and noted that ( 1 ) the factors support omb's objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions across the federal government and ( 2 ) wide dissemination of these factors could complement omb's efforts . specifically , we reported that federal agency officials identified seven successful acquisitions , in that they best achieved their respective cost , schedule , scope , and performance goals . notably , all of these were smaller increments , phases , or releases of larger projects . the common factors critical to the success of three or more of the seven acquisitions are generally consistent with those developed by private industry and are identified in table 2 . these critical factors support omb's objective of improving the management of large - scale it acquisitions across the federal government ; wide dissemination of these factors could complement omb's efforts . it dashboard can improve the transparency into and oversight of major it investments the it dashboard serves an important role in allowing omb and other oversight bodies to hold agencies accountable for results and performance . however , we have issued a series of reports highlighting deficiencies with the accuracy and reliability of the data reported on the dashboard . for example , we reported in october 2012 that defense had not rated any of its investments as either high or moderately high risk and that , in selected cases , these ratings did not appropriately reflect significant cost , schedule , and performance issues reported by us and others . we recommended that defense ensure that its cio ratings reflect available investment performance assessments and its risk management guidance .