i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time . i am pleased to be here today to discuss the effect of school closures on student veterans . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has provided $94 billion in education benefits under the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) to over 2 million veterans since the program began in 2009 , according to va . this program provides funding that helps cover eligible veterans' tuition and fees ( that va pays directly to schools ) , as well as monthly housing benefits and book stipends ( that va pays directly to veterans ) . these benefits enable veterans to pursue a higher education and develop skills to help them re - enter the workforce . however , recent news reports about school closures have raised questions about the effect of these closures on student veterans' education benefits . my remarks today address three objectives: ( 1 ) the distribution of post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fee payments among schools , ( 2 ) the outcomes of students at schools that receive the most post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fee payments , and ( 3 ) how school closures can affect student veterans . to answer objective one , we analyzed school - level data from va on post - 9 / 11 gi bill beneficiaries , tuition and fee payments , and school characteristics for fiscal year 2017 , the most recent data available . for help covering the costs of their postsecondary education , veterans may also be eligible for grants and loans available from federal student aid programs administered by education , such as pell grants and direct loans . according to education data , an estimated 32 percent of student veterans had received pell grants and 28 percent had taken out direct loans , during school year 2015-16 . va education payments , such as post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits , are not considered when calculating eligibility for federal student aid and do not affect the amount of aid a veteran can receive from education . student veterans may also be eligible for state and institutional aid ( scholarships from state governments or schools , for example ) . to receive education benefits through the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , students submit applications to va , schools certify enrollments , and va processes claims and payments . nearly 700,000 student veterans received post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fee benefits to attend almost 6,000 schools in fiscal year 2017 . va paid about 40 percent of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fee payments to public schools , 30 percent to nonprofits , and 30 percent to for - profits ( see fig . most student veterans used post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fee payments to attend schools that provided 4-year undergraduate programs ( see fig .