this is known as the 50 / 50 requirement . dod is also required to report annually on past and projected workload allocations . dod directive 4151.18 requires that usd ( at&l ) monitor compliance with the directive and review the adequacy of dod maintenance programs and resources . additionally , it requires dod components develop tools and management procedures to implement the content of the directive . additionally , dod instruction 4151.20 provides instruction for determining “core” maintenance requirements as defined in section 2464 of title 10 of the u.s. code . the national defense and require that dod maintain a logistics capability that is government - owned and government - operated to ensure dod can effectively respond to a mobilization , national defense contingency situations , and other emergency requirements in a timely manner . to ensure that life - cycle sustainment planning is done early in a weapon system's development phase , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 revised the assessment of core maintenance requirements and directed dod to identify such requirements at acquisition milestones . department of defense instruction 4151.20 , depot maintenance core capabilities determination process , january 5 , 2007. example , congress passed the weapon system acquisition reform act of 2009 , requiring dod to ensure competition or the option of competition throughout a weapon system program's life cycle , in part , by requiring dod to consider purchase of complete technical data packages when cost - effective . in may 2011 , however , we reported that dod continues to face challenges that could undermine competition of maintenance contracts , including shortcomings in how programs' technical data rights requirements that are necessary for competition are determined . we recommended , and dod agreed , that the department should update its acquisition and procurement policies to clarify requirements for documenting technical data requirements and to issue instructions for program managers to use when conducting analyses used to determine technical data rights needs for a weapon program . office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics , better buying power: guidance for obtaining greater efficiency and productivity in defense spending , september 14 , 2010. to ( 1 ) conduct a business - case analysis that outlines the technical data rights the government will pursue to ensure competition and ( 2 ) include the results of this analysis in acquisition strategies at a program's entrance into the engineering and manufacturing development phase of the acquisition . at the departmental level , neither dod nor the individual military departments know the extent to which weapon system programs rely on long - term maintenance contracts . this includes the most basic information — how many of such contracts are currently in use . dod does not collect or maintain such information during its reviews of acquisition strategies or life - cycle sustainment plans , nor do existing data collection systems provide the type of information needed to do so . consequently , we worked with the military departments to identify a number of long - term maintenance contracts and selected 10 contracts supporting seven major weapon systems for detailed review .