two employees . a business establishment is the physical location of a certain economic activity , such as a factory , mine , store , or office . for example , the home depot is a large national business with multiple store locations nationwide . for our study , each store counted separately as an employer . we chose to survey personnel at individual business establishments rather than corporate headquarters because these employers are more likely than headquarters staff to be responsible for local hiring and training practices , such as use of one - stops . what has the department of labor ( labor ) done to support employer awareness and use of the workforce system and how does labor measure its success in meeting the needs of employers ? we defined the size of employers by their number of employees: small: 2-49 , medium: 50-499 , and large: 500 or more . one - stop centers: all services provided to employers through one - stop career centers , including services such as applicant screening , skills assessment , and training ; america's job bank ( ajb ) : an employment web site ; and labor market information funded by labor , such as current wage rates . large private sector employers from a nationwide database of businesses and generalized our survey results to all private sector business establishments in the united states . we achieved a 54 percent response rate after adjusting for cases that were ineligible for our study or whose eligibility could not be determined . we interviewed some of those that did not respond to our survey and found that their views did not differ substantially from the views of those that responded to our survey . we surveyed employers between june and october 2004 . we report on their use of one - stop services during the 12 months prior to the period when we surveyed them . for more details about our survey methods and the limitations to the survey , see appendix ii . their collection of information on services to employers . we received responses from all 50 states and 463 of the 568 local workforce investment areas ( 81.5 percent ) . employment growth rates: florida , michigan , oklahoma , and wyoming . in each state , we visited urban and rural areas and interviewed workforce officials and employers of various size that had either used or not used their local one - stops . we interviewed labor officials about their efforts to support employer awareness and use of the workforce system and reviewed related documentation . we interviewed representatives from employer associations , such as the u.s. chamber of commerce and others . awareness and use increases with employer size . of all employers aware of the one - stops , about one - quarter of small employers are likely to use one - stop services , while approximately one - half of medium and three - quarters of large employers are likely to do so . about three - quarters of employers that used one - stops said that they are satisfied with the services they received , and 83 percent would consider using them again in the future .