regulations . faa regulations govern the routine operation of most aircraft in the national airspace system . do not contain provisions to address issues relating to unmanned aircraft . as we highlighted in our previous report , existing regulations may need to be modified to address the unique characteristics of uas . today , uas continue to operate as exceptions to the regulatory framework rather than being governed by it . this has limited the number of uas operations in the national airspace , and that limitation has , in turn , contributed to the lack of operational data on uas in domestic operations previously discussed . one industry forecast noted that growth in the non - military uas market is unlikely until regulations allow for the routine operation of uas . without specific and permanent regulations for safe operation of uas , federal stakeholders , including dod , continue to face challenges . the lack of final regulations could hinder the acceleration of safe and routine integration of uas into the national airspace . given the remaining obstacles to uas integration , we stated in 2008 that congress should consider creating an overarching body within faa to coordinate federal , academic , and private - sector efforts in meeting the safety challenges of allowing routine access to the national airspace system . while it has not created this overarching body , faa's joint planning and development office has taken on a similar role . in addition , congress set forth requirements for faa in its february 2012 reauthorization to facilitate uas integration . additionally , we made two recommendations to faa related to its planning and data analysis efforts to facilitate the process of allowing uas routine access to the national airspace , which faa has implemented . title 14 , code of federal regulations ( 14 cfr ) . dhs is one of several partner agencies of faa's joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) working to safely integrate uas into the national airspace . tsa has the authority to regulate the security of all transportation modes , including non - military uas , and according to tsa officials , its aviation security efforts include monitoring reports on potential security threats regarding the use of uas . while uas operations in the national airspace are limited and take place under closely controlled conditions , this could change if uas have routine access to the national airspace system . further , dhs owns and uses uas . security is a significant issue that could be exacerbated with an increase in the number of uas , and could impede uas use even after all other obstacles have been addressed . in 2004 , tsa issued an advisory in which it stated that there was no credible evidence to suggest that terrorist organizations plan to use remote controlled aircraft or uas in the united states . however , the tsa advisory also provided that the federal government remains concerned that uas could be modified and used to attack key assets and infrastructure in the united states . tsa advised individuals to report any suspicious activities to local law enforcement and the tsa general aviation hotline .