production schedule . the cost estimate reflects the coast guard's plan to switch from building one offshore patrol cutter per year to building two offshore patrol cutters per year beginning with the fourth and fifth vessel in the class . if the coast guard cannot achieve or maintain this build rate due to budget constraints , it may choose to stretch the schedule for the program which in turn could increase costs . coast guard program officials generally agreed that these three variables are important to the cost of the offshore patrol cutter and are key reasons why the coast guard expects one offshore patrol cutter to cost less than half of one national security cutter . however , these officials recognized that the cost estimate for the offshore patrol cutter is still uncertain since the cutter has yet to be designed — thus , the national security cutter's actual costs are more reliable . coast guard program officials also added that the cost estimate for the offshore patrol cutter is optimistic in that it assumes that the cutter will be built in accordance with the current acquisition strategy and planned schedule . they noted that any delays , design issues , or contract oversight problems — all of which were experienced during the purchase of the national security cutter — could increase the eventual price of the offshore patrol cutter . according to the april 2012 acquisition decision memorandum , which documents dhs's approval for the coast guard to move forward and award design contracts for the offshore patrol cutter , dhs office of policy and the office of the chief financial officer raised concerns about the potential for cost growth and this program crowding out other coast guard programs in future austere budget years . in response to concerns about affordability , dhs is requiring the coast guard to return for a special program review — one that is not required by acquisition guidance — before it awards a production contract , which is currently planned for fiscal year 2016 . dhs program accountability and risk management officials told us that a new life cycle cost estimate is not required if the coast guard can demonstrate during this meeting that the acquisition cost and schedule in the approved acquisition program baseline are still valid . however , if there is a significant difference from the currently approved life cycle cost estimate , dhs would direct the coast guard at that time to update the life cycle cost estimate . the coast guard has established an acquisition governance framework that includes the following teams: executive oversight council , systems integration team , and resource councils . the coast guard is currently working on an update to its major systems acquisition manual that will articulate expectations for how these groups will interact . we found that the highest level team , the executive oversight council — a group of admirals and senior executives — has actively conducted oversight meetings to govern the acquisition process for major acquisitions in the coast guard's portfolio . however , these meetings were focused on individual programs and the council has not acted upon some information presented to it that could help to manage the portfolio as a whole .