attorneys . the association believes that doing so will allow assistant u.s . attorneys to better ensure due process in opr investigations . however , opr's position is that it is prohibited under the privacy act from releasing specific information related to its investigations — such as the name of the accused attorney — unless otherwise identified by the act's routine - use clause . however , according to opr , this clause allows opr to share information on its investigations with congress and for routine - use exceptions , such as for bar disciplinary action or in response to a written request by a judicial officer where it is relevant to the judicial office or the court . to help provide greater transparency of its investigations , opr provides summaries of its findings in its annual reports . opr has implemented processes to better manage professional misconduct complaints since 2011 , and doj is taking steps to help address how it identifies and prevents such misconduct among department attorneys . discipline . to what extent does doj have processes to manage complaints of professional misconduct to discipline attorneys for findings of misconduct , and that advise on performance awards for these attorneys ? how do supervisors determine work responsibilities for attorneys accused of , or who have been found to have engaged in , professional misconduct ? what are doj's policies for paying or reimbursing the attorneys fees and costs of departmental employees in actions relating to allegations of contempt of court or prosecutorial misconduct , and what is the extent to which doj is paying for such costs ? to address our first objective , we reviewed doj guidance related to establishing and overseeing attorney standards of conduct , including ethical conduct , such as outlined in the usam and published regulations . we assessed agency - wide policies establishing doj's processes for identifying , investigating , and disciplining professional misconduct , including opr's analytical framework — which provides guidance on the types of behavior identified as professional misconduct — and how opr conducts investigations into misconduct . we compared opr's process for supervisory review of professional misconduct complaints with internal control standards to ensure that opr management provided oversight of the receipt , review , and investigation of misconduct complaints . we reviewed opr complaint data from fiscal years 2008 through 2013 in order to describe what , if any , changes occurred in the number of complaints and the length of time to complete inquiries and investigations since doj's process for managing complaints of professional misconduct changed in 2011 . we reviewed internal doj personnel and disciplinary documentation for all 40 cases for which opr investigated attorneys for professional misconduct and for which pmru was responsible for considering discipline from fiscal years 2011 through 2013 , and compared doj's practices for documenting disciplinary actions with internal controls . we interviewed knowledgeable officials in opr and pmru , and selected doj components , such as the criminal division and the executive office for u.s .