community first choice option . states have asked cms questions pertaining to program eligibility , data collection , and quality improvement requirements , among others . additionally , some states have had questions about replacing their state plan personal care services benefit with community first choice . for example , maryland is interested in consolidating personal care services available under three existing state medicaid programs — the state plan personal care benefit and two waiver programs — under community first choice . ( see fig . states have covered hcbs through a wide and complex range of options within medicaid , including through state plan benefits and through waivers . a state medicaid plan defines how the state will operate its medicaid program , including which populations and services are covered . states are required by federal medicaid law to cover certain mandatory benefits in their state medicaid plan . what is known about states' plans to use the ppaca medicaid home - and community - based services options ? what factors affect states' decisions regarding implementing medicaid home - and community - based services options under ppaca ? to determine how the four medicaid home - and community - based services options in ppaca are structured to increase the availability of services , we reviewed relevant federal statutes and regulations , examined guidance and other documents issued by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , and interviewed cms officials responsible for overseeing medicaid programs covering home - and community - based services . to determine what is known about states' plans to use the ppaca medicaid home - and community - based services options , we interviewed program officials at cms responsible for each of the four options and obtained copies of proposed and approved state applications for the balancing incentive program , state plan amendments for community first choice and the 1915 ( i ) state plan option , and state operational protocols for money follows the person that states had submitted for these options to cms . to understand the factors affecting states' decisions on implementing the medicaid home - and community - based services options in ppaca , we conducted interviews with state medicaid and other state agency officials in 10 states: florida , maine , michigan , mississippi , montana , nevada , new jersey , new mexico , oklahoma , and oregon . the states were judgmentally selected by stratifying all states and the district of columbia on their percentage of medicaid long - term services and supports spending on home - and community - based services and then identifying 10 states that reflected the range of state spending on home - and community - based services . we conducted the state interviews between november 2011 and february 2012 . to supplement the state interviews , we also conducted interviews with officials from several state associations and health policy organizations that track medicaid home - and community - based services issues , including the national association of states united for aging and disabilities , national academy for state health policy , national association of medicaid directors , national association of state directors of developmental disabilities services , and the national association of state mental health program directors .