gao - 10-296 . washington , d.c.: march 5 , 2010 . the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) critical infrastructure protection cost - benefit report . gao - 09-654r . washington , d.c.: june 26 , 2009 . table 1 lists the ssas and their sectors . what approach should dhs take to review the information before it is disseminated to ensure that resiliency practices identified by dhs at one facility or in one sector are valid and viable , and applicable across facilities and sectors ? what additional resources and at what additional cost , if any , would dhs need to devote to gathering and broadly disseminating information about resiliency practices across facilities and sectors ? what actions can dhs take to measure the extent to which asset owners and operators are using resiliency information provided by dhs , and how can dhs use this information to make improvements , if needed ? by determining the feasibility of overcoming barriers and developing an approach for disseminating resiliency information , dhs could better position itself to help asset owners and operators consider and adopt resiliency strategies , and provide them with information on potential security investments , based on the practices and experiences of their peers both within and across sectors . in the wake of concerns by stakeholders , including members of congress , academia , and the private sector that dhs was placing emphasis on protection rather than resilience , dhs has increased its emphasis on critical infrastructure resiliency in the nipp . consistent with these changes , dhs has also taken actions to increase its emphasis on resilience in the programs and tools it uses to assess vulnerability and risk that are designed to help asset owners and operators identify resiliency characteristics and gaps . these actions continue to evolve and could be improved if dhs were to strengthen program management by developing measures to assess the extent to which asset owners and operators are taking actions to address resiliency gaps identified during vulnerability assessments ; and updating psa guidelines to articulate psa roles and responsibilities with regard to resiliency during their interactions with asset owners and operators . by developing performance measures to assess the extent to which asset owners and operators are taking actions to resolve resiliency gaps identified during the various vulnerability assessments , dhs would , consistent with the nipp , be better positioned to demonstrate effectiveness in promoting resiliency among the asset owners and operators it works with and would have a basis for analyzing performance gaps . dhs managers would also have a valuable tool to help them assess where problems might be occurring , or alternatively provide insights into the tools used to assess vulnerability and risk and whether they were focusing on the correct elements of resiliency at individual facilities or groups of facilities . furthermore , by updating psa guidance to discusses the role psas play during interaction with asset owners and operators , including how psas can work with them to mitigate vulnerabilities and strengthen their security , dhs would have greater assurance that psas are equipped to help asset owners and operators have the tools they need to develop resilience strategies .