tions . in 2010 , mda made significant progress in implementing some of these recommendations by finalizing a new baseline phase review process in which the agency set detailed baselines for several bmds elements , or portions of elements , for the first time . specifically , mda established resource , schedule , test , operational capacity , technical , and contract baselines for several bmds components . it reported these to congress in its june 2010 bmds accountability report . mda also identified three phases of development where baselines are approved — technology development , product development , and initial production phases — and specified the key knowledge that is needed at each phase . mda officials stated that they expect that aligning the development efforts with the phases will help to ensure that the appropriate level of knowledge is obtained before the acquisitions move from one phase to the next . in another key step , approval of the product development and initial production baselines will be jointly reviewed by the director of mda and the respective service acquisition executive , as a number of missile defense systems are expected to eventually transition to the military services for operation . in addition , in regard to these new phases , the agency established a process for approving baselines . as a result of mda's new baseline phase review process , its 2010 bmds accountability report is more comprehensive than its 2009 report . program and that its test and targets program needed to be managed way that fully supported high - priority near - term programs . we reported last year that mda extensively revised the test plan to address these concerns . mda's new approach now bases test scenari os r on modeling and simulation needs and extends the test baseline to cove the future years defense program which allows for better estimation of art of its new target needs , range requirements , and test assets . also , as p test plan , mda scheduled dedicated periods of developmental and operational testing , during which the system configuration will rema fixed to allow the warfighter to carry out training , tactics , techniques , and procedures for developmental and operational evaluation . additionally , the new test plan is expected to provide sufficient time after test events to conduct a full post - test analysis . as we reported last year , these improvements are important because bmds performance cannot be assessed until models and simulations are accredited and validated and the test program cannot be executed without meeting its target needs . our assessment of the schedule baselines determined that we could not compare the asset delivery schedule to the prior year's baseline because mda has stopped reporting a comprehensive list of planned asset deliveries . finally , we found the test baseline to be well documented . however , because it is success oriented , any problems encountered in executin the plan can cause ripple effects throughout remaining test events . th frequent changes that continue to occur undermine the value of the test baseline as an oversight tool .