planning . this phase involves identifying the mission need for the contract , alternatives for obtaining the goods or services , estimated costs , and any program or technical risks . federal regulations state that the agency should use an integrated team approach — involving all personnel responsible for significant aspects of the contract award process — to developing the plan and associated milestone schedule . the plan should also identify the appropriate contract type for the work , considering the alternatives and risks . in addition , a selection official is designated , and an evaluation board is formed to carry out the contract award process . developing the solicitation . generally , the evaluation board , with input from technical and other advisors , develops a statement of work for the contract and criteria that will be used to evaluate proposals submitted by companies . during this phase , doe may also do market research to determine if sources capable of meeting the agency's needs exist . finally , doe issues the request for proposals that describes the work to be done , provides instructions to companies on how and when to submit their proposals , and describes the criteria that will be used to evaluate the proposals and select a contractor . evaluating proposals and awarding the contract . once proposals are received , the evaluation board evaluates the proposals against the established criteria . evaluation criteria may differ for each contract , but generally include factors such as a company's proposed technical approach ; past performance on doe , other federal agency , and commercial contracts ; the proposed cost ; and the qualifications of the key personnel identified in the proposal . during this phase , doe may determine that it is necessary to hold discussions with individual companies about issues raised during the evaluation of their proposals . based on a written report of the evaluation board that outlines the strengths and weaknesses of each proposal , the selection official should select a proposal that represents the best value for the government . the doe contracting officer , who has generally provided contracting support to the evaluation team , then awards the contract . the competition in contracting act of 1984 provides statutory authority for gao to decide cases involving bid protests . gao's bid protest decisions address specific allegations raised by unsuccessful companies claiming that particular contracting actions were contrary to federal laws and regulations . a bid protest may be filed by an “interested party,” defined as an actual or prospective bidder or offeror with a direct economic interest in the contract . unless the protest is dismissed at the outset because it is procedurally or substantively defective , such as if the protest was not filed in a timely manner , the contracting agency is required to file a report with gao responding to the protest . gao will consider the facts and legal issues raised and is required to resolve the protest not later than 100 days from the date the protest was filed , either by sustaining the protest and recommending that the agency take corrective action , or by denying or dismissing the protest .