no relief from adjustment . figure 1 provides an overview of the basic process of a map request for assistance . appendix iii provides illustrative examples of dispute resolution cases and resolutions . once usca has determined its position , it begins negotiating with the foreign competent authority to resolve the dispute . these cases can take several years to resolve with some taking much longer than the average , particularly if there is a fundamental disagreement . for example , usca's apma inventory data from 2013 to 2017 indicate the average processing time was around 2 years , but cases ranged from as little as a few months to 5 years to resolve , with a few cases taking even longer . in addition , the inventory data show that disputes are generally over taxable income from prior years . for example , a map case resolved in 2017 could have been filed in 2008 for a dispute over 2005 taxable income . however , cases may be shorter when the tax treaties include provisions for binding arbitration . the united states has treaties with four counties that include provisions for binding arbitration . if the two countries are unable to resolve the dispute within 2 years , the taxpayer can request that the case go to arbitration for a decision . throughout the entire process , the taxpayer has a right to withdraw the request and accept the tax authority's adjustment which may entail double taxation . according to tax experts that we interviewed , if the adjustment is small , a taxpayer may prefer to accept the double taxation rather than incur the cost of going through the map process . these costs can include direct costs of retaining tax advisors as well as the indirect costs of listing the amount of funds that are in dispute on their financial statement as an unresolved tax issue . the taxpayer can also refuse the negotiated or arbitrated resolution and appeal the case to the irs office of appeals or foreign tax authority . usca provides information about the map process through an irs web page on competent authority assistance . the webpage includes contact information for usca offices and a link to a document that describes the process for requesting assistance . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix v . as noted earlier , to assess the extent to which the internal revenue service ( irs ) evaluates management of dispute resolution cases , we interview irs officials . having determined that the advanced pricing mutual agreement program ( apma ) does not conduct analysis of mutual agreement procedure ( map ) case data , we used information from its existing inventory data to illustrate the types of analysis that may be possible . the inventory database apma provided us contained all map cases that were closed from 2013 to 2017 , as well as the current stock of open map cases . because of a change in the method of recording the outcome variable between 2013 and 2014 , we restricted our analysis of outcomes to 2014 to 2017 .