borrowers . substantial proportions of the nonprime loans made over the 8-year period we examined also did not meet the safe harbor interest rate and debt burden requirements , although the proportions varied by year: the proportion of nonprime originations that did not have a fixed interest rate for at least 5 years rose from 52 percent in 2000 to 64 percent in 2004 ( see fig . this increase can be attributed primarily to a shift in the alt - a market away from fixed - rate mortgage products to adjustable - rate products . for example , in 2000 about 88 percent of alt - a loans were fixed rate , but by 2004 this figure had dropped to about 38 percent . beginning in 2005 , the percentage of nonprime originations with adjustable rates began falling , reaching 37 percent in 2007 . the decline was due in large part to a trend in the alt - a market toward fixed - rate mortgages . as figure 4 also shows , the proportion of nonprime originations that did not have a dti ratio under 41 percent grew over the 8-year period , rising from 43 percent in 2000 to 51 percent in 2006 , although it fell slightly in 2007 . the generally increasing trend is partly a result of house prices growing faster than borrowers' incomes over the period and of lenders allowing borrowers to take out larger mortgages relative to their incomes . for example , from 2000 through 2006 , average home prices grew by 38 percent nationally , while over the same period , average incomes grew by just 23 percent . finally , the proportion of nonprime arm originations with initial interest rates not less than 3 percentage points over a generally accepted interest rate index ( 3 percent test ) ranged from a high of 96 percent in 2002 to a low of 48 percent in 2007 ( see fig . several studies have examined the impact of state and local anti - predatory lending laws on subprime mortgage markets . our review of eight such studies found evidence that anti - predatory lending laws can have the intended effect of reducing loans with problematic features without substantially affecting credit availability , but also that it is difficult to generalize these findings to all anti - predatory lending laws or to the potential effect of the bill . the studies we reviewed fell into two broad categories: those that focused solely on the north carolina law and those that examined laws in multiple states and localities . the corresponding figures for longer - term arms , payment - option arms , and fixed - rate mortgages were 3.7 percent , 1.3 percent , and 3.5 percent , respectively . borrower credit score . we found that lower credit scores were associated with a higher likelihood of default . for each product type , we estimated the default probability assuming a borrower credit score close to the 75th percentile for that product ( base assumption ) and compared this with the estimated default probability assuming a borrower credit score close to the 25th percentile for that product ( alternative assumption ) .