farm programs . in june 2013 , we reported that usda needed to do more to prevent improper payments to deceased individuals made under various farm programs , including those related to farm income , disasters , conservation , and crop insurance . we found that while one usda component had developed procedures for reviewing ssa's dmf and recovered approximately $1 million , certain payments to deceased individuals that were deemed to be proper did not have sufficient support for the decisions . further , the other two usda components we reviewed did not have procedures in place to prevent potentially improper payments to deceased individuals . we recommended that usda strengthen its existing dmf review processes and establish review processes for its two remaining components . as of march 2015 , usda reported that it is still working to address our recommendations . rural housing . in may 2012 , we reported that usda could enhance its efforts to identify and reduce improper rental assistance payments . we found that usda's efforts to identify improper payments did not examine payments made on behalf of deceased tenants , among other types of payment errors . recovery auditing . the department of agriculture ( usda ) reported that section 281 of the department of agriculture reorganization act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques.specifically , the agency reported that section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state , a county , or an area committee is final , no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed as a result of the decision , unless the participant had reason to believe that the decision was erroneous . this statute is commonly referred to as the finality rule , and according to usda , it affects the farm service agency's ability to recover overpayments . while agencies continue to face challenges , there are a number of strategies that can help agencies in reducing improper payments , including analyzing the root causes of improper payments to identify and implement effective preventive and detective controls . detective controls are critical for identifying improper payments that have already been made , but strong preventive controls can serve as the frontline defense against improper payments . one example of preventive controls is up - front eligibility verification through data sharing , which allows entities that make payments to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate . specifically , one type of data sharing we are highlighting today is the use of ssa death data . because of its mission , ssa is uniquely positioned to collect and manage death data at the federal level , and these data can be helpful in preventing improper payments to deceased individuals or those who use deceased individuals' identities . ssa maintains two sets of death data . the complete file of death data , which we refer to as ssa's full death file , includes data from multiple sources―such as funeral directors , family members , certain federal agencies , and states―and is available to certain eligible entities .