g . survivors of both veterans / servicemembers and civilian federal employees may draw on other government benefits and additional sources of income concurrently . for example , social security may allow spouses of veterans , servicemembers , and federal employees to collect survivor benefits based on the deceased's employment earnings , and also may provide survivor payments to the deceased's unmarried children . in addition , past reports on dic indicate that some dic benefit recipients also receive survivor payments from the survivor benefit plan , a survivor benefit available to those collecting a military pension . military survivors may also receive burial assistance , and health and education benefits . finally , survivors of both military personnel and civilian federal employees may draw income from their own employment and receive life insurance payments . we provided a draft of this report to va for its review and comment . the agency provided comments that were technical in nature and we incorporated them as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to relevant congressional committees , the secretary of veterans affairs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on gao's web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7215 or at bertonid@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . our review focused on ( 1 ) the extent to which dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) replaces department of veterans affairs ( va ) disability compensation or active duty military pay lost due to the death of a veteran or servicemember , and ( 2 ) how dic benefits compare to benefits for survivors of civilian federal employees . to address these objectives , we obtained and analyzed data on dic benefits , va disability compensation , and military pay . we also obtained information on programs that provide survivor benefits to federal employees and compared these survivor payments to dic payments . to obtain additional context , we reviewed past evaluations of dic and interviewed officials at va and several organizations representing veterans , servicemembers , and their survivors . we conducted this performance audit from february 2009 to november 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings based on our audit objectives . we obtained and analyzed data from va's benefits delivery network ( bdn ) data system on all survivors who received dic payments in september 2008 , the last month of fiscal year 2008 . these data included information on individual dic recipients , such as the recipient's age and the level of dic payments the recipient received .