( recommendation 1 ) . the extent to which the 24 agencies listed in the chief financial officers act of 1990 , as amended ( cfo act ) , complied with the six criteria listed in the improper payments elimination and recovery act of 2010 ( ipera ) , for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 , and the trends evident since 2011 , as reported by their inspectors general ( ig ) . the extent to which cfo act agencies addressed requirements for programs and activities reported as noncompliant with ipera criteria for 3 or more consecutive years , as of fiscal year 2016 , and communicated their strategies to congress for reducing improper payments and achieving compliance . the extent to which the office of management and budget ( omb ) made determinations regarding whether additional funding would help cfo act programs and activities reported as noncompliant with ipera criteria for 2 consecutive years , as of fiscal years 2016 and 2017 , come into compliance . although the responsibility for complying with provisions of improper payment - related statutes rests with the head of each executive agency , we focused on the 24 agencies listed in the cfo act because estimates of their improper payments represent over 99 percent of the total reported estimated improper payments for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 . our work did not include validating or retesting the data or methodologies that the igs used to determine and report compliance . we corroborated all of our findings with omb and all 24 cfo act agencies and igs . to address our first objective , we identified the requirements that agencies must meet by reviewing the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) , ipera , and omb guidance . we reviewed the cfo act agency igs' ipera compliance reports for fiscal years 2016 and 2017 , which were the most current reports available at the time of our review . we also received technical comments from dol , the department of veterans affairs , the general services administration , hhs , the department of housing and urban development , and the treasury oig , which we incorporated in the report as appropriate . the remaining agencies and oigs either did not provide comments or notified us via email that they had no comments . in its comments , ssa stated that it provided information to congress on measurable milestones , designated senior officials , and accountability mechanisms in its afr . in the report , we acknowledge that these types of additional information are similar to information that agencies are required to provide to congress or omb in other reports , such as annual afrs . however , our analysis was based on ssa's fiscal year 2016 notifications to congress for programs reported as noncompliant under ipera , in which this specific information was not reported . as such , we continue to believe that omb should take steps to update omb guidance to help ensure that agencies report such significant information and include it in their notifications to congress . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees , the director of the office of management and budget , and other interested parties .