xl , no . hoxby , c. “benevolent colluders ? the effects of antitrust action on college financial aid and tuition.” national bureau of economic research working paper , no . june 2000 . netz , j . 3 ( summer 1991 ) : 193-2002 . shepherd , g. “overlap and antitrust: fixing prices in a smoke - filled classroom,” the antitrust bulletin . winter ( 1995 ) : 859-884 . winston , g. , and c. hill . “access to the most selective private colleges by high - ability , low - income students: are they out there ? ” unpublished paper . october 2005 . “antitrust and higher education: was there a conspiracy to restrict financial aid ? ” rand journal of economics , vol . 1 ( spring 1995 ) : 131-147 . epple , d. , r. romano , s. sarpca , and h. sieg . “profiling in bargaining over college tuitions,” unpublished paper . january 21 , 2005 . hill , c. , and g. winston . “access: net prices , affordability , and equity at a highly selective college.” unpublished paper . december 2001 . hill , c. , g. winston , and s. boyd . “affordability: family incomes and net prices at highly selective private colleges and universities.” the journal of human resurces , vol . kim , m. “early decision and financial aid competition among need - blind colleges and universities.” unpublished paper . may 1 , 2005 . morrison , r. “price fixing among elite colleges and universities,” the university of chicago law review , vol . “non - profits and price - fixing: the case of the ivy league.” unpublished paper . november 1999 . netz , j . “the end of collusion ? : competition after justice and the ivy league settle.” unpublished paper . fall 2000 . salop , s. , and l. white . “antitrust goes to college,” journal of economic perspectives , vol . the same analysis was done for the v2 measures . the test was reported for both samples , consisting of type 1 students and all students . the results reported in table 8 suggest that there was no difference in efc variations across the two groups , using type 1 students . the results using all students , however , are inconclusive for the v1 estimate , but suggest that non - 568 schools have smaller efc variation for the v2 estimate . the results based on the type 1 sample are more useful as a stand - alone descriptive finding , because this sample controls for student characteristics . the finding based on the combined data requires further analysis to control for student characteristics that we were unable to perform due to data limitations . we used the ksmirnov command in stata to perform the tests . the consensus approach implementation did not significantly change the amount of total grant aid received by students in ca schools compared to non - ca schools . need - based total grant aid:the consensus approach implementation increased the amount of need - based total grant aid received by students in ca schools compared to non - ca schools by about $6,125 , with a confidence interval of between $239 and $12,011 .