( see appendix i. ) overall a decline in per capita nurse employment occurred in 26 states and the district of columbia between 1996 and 2000 . according to the fnhp survey , of those rns responding who had considered leaving the patient - care field for reasons other than retirement over the past 2 years , 18 percent wanted more money , versus 56 percent who were concerned about the stress and physical demands of the job . however , the same study reported that 27 percent of current rns responding cited higher wages or better health care benefits as a way of improving their jobs . another study indicated that 39 percent of rns who had been in their current jobs for more than 1 year were dissatisfied with their total compensation , but 48 percent were dissatisfied with the level of recognition they received from their employers . aha recently reported on a survey that found that 57 percent of responding rns said that their salaries were adequate , compared to 33.4 percent who thought their facility was adequately staffed , and 29.1 percent who said that their hospital administrations listened and responded to their concerns . providers have changed staffing patterns in the past , employing fewer or more nurses relative to other workers such as nurse aides . for example , following the introduction of the medicare prospective payment system ( pps ) , hospitals increased the share of rns in their workforces . however , in the early 1990s , in an effort to contain costs , acute care facilities restructured and redesigned staffing patterns , introducing more non - rn caregivers and reducing the percentage of rns . while the number of rns employed by hospitals remained relatively unchanged from 1995 to1997 , hospitals reported significant growth in rn employment in 1998 and 1999 . some localities are experiencing greater difficulty than others . national data are not adequate to describe the nature and extent of these potential nurse workforce shortages , nor are data sufficiently sensitive or current to allow a comparison of the adequacy of the nurse workforce size across states , specialties , or provider types . however , total employment of rns per capita and the national unemployment rate for rns have declined , and providers from around the country are reporting growing difficulty recruiting and retaining the number of nurses needed in a range of settings . another indicator that suggests the emergence of shortages is a rise in recent public sector efforts related to nurse workforce issues in many states . the national unemployment rate for rns is at its lowest level in more than a decade , continuing to decline from 1.5 percent in 1997 to 1.0 percent in 2000 . at the same time , total employment of rns per capita declined 2 percent between 1996 and 2000 , reversing steady increases since 1980 . between 1980 and 1996 , the number of employed rns per capita nationwide increased by 44 percent . at the state level , changes in per capita nurse employment from 1996 to 2000 varied widely , from a 16.2 percent increase in louisiana to a 19.5 percent decrease in alaska .