( see fig . in some cases , the resumes showed some underwriting experience but less than 3 years of experience . in other cases , the resumes cited experience only in loan administration , processing , or origination — activities that can encompass a range of duties that may or may not involve significant underwriting responsibilities . although some hud officials told us that they knew from first - hand knowledge that the underwriters met hud's experience standards , others indicated that they were not aware of the standards , had applied the standards loosely , or had drawn inferences about the underwriters' qualifications without knowing whether these inferences were accurate . ( 3 ) has hud held any map lenders accountable for noncompliance with program requirements ? to address these questions , we reviewed the activities of hud's office of multifamily housing and 8 of its 51 multifamily field offices in baltimore , maryland ; chicago , illinois ; cleveland , ohio ; denver , colorado ; fort worth , texas ; phoenix , arizona ; san antonio , texas ; and san francisco , california . our work focused on the 35 new construction and substantial rehabilitation loans insured under the map program by these 8 offices between may 2000 and august 2001 , and the 20 lenders that made these loans . the 35 loans had a total value of approximately $500 million , or about 75 percent of the value of all new construction and substantial rehabilitation loans insured under the map program during that period . the 20 lenders accounted for about half of those that made map loans during that timeframe . appendix ii provides detailed information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . established by the national housing act , fha administers several programs that support multifamily housing for low - and moderate - income families by insuring loans made by private lenders . specifically , these programs insure mortgage loans for the construction , purchase , substantial rehabilitation , and refinancing of multifamily apartments and health care facilities . fha insures most of its mortgages for multifamily housing under its general insurance fund and special risk insurance fund . to cover lenders' losses , fha collects insurance premiums that borrowers pay to the lenders and deposits the premiums into the funds . in addition , because the funds were not designed to be self sustaining , congress provides budget authority as part of fha's budget each fiscal year to cover anticipated costs — known as “credit subsidy costs” — for some of the multifamily insurance programs . in fiscal year 2001 , congress provided $101 million in credit subsidy budget authority to fha . when a default occurs on an insured loan , the lender may elect to assign the mortgage to hud — effectively making the department the new lender for the mortgage — and file an insurance claim with hud for the unpaid principal balance of the loan . as a result , the lender is protected from financial losses stemming from a borrower's default . fha's multifamily insurance programs also benefit borrowers by providing favorable financing terms .