dod has implemented each of these recommendations . for example , in january 2016 dod updated its biometric directive that , among other things , now assigns responsibility for ensuring that its biometric - related systems conform to federal standards . in addition , in january 2016 the assistant secretary of defense for homeland defense and global security , in coordination with the department of homeland security , updated guidance to further improve the sharing of biometric , biographical , and identity - management data between the two departments for screening and identity - verification purposes . forensic exploitation laboratories . army officials expect to transition these laboratories to an enduring , base - funded capability in 2019 . officials from the defense forensics science center noted that the army's draft expeditionary forensic strategy calls for an expeditionary lab to be aligned with each of the six geographic combatant commands . identity dominance system . the navy and marine corps are jointly pursuing a replacement for their existing biometric collection device , the secure electronic enrollment kit , which , according to navy and marine corps officials , is scheduled to reach end - of - life in 2019 . socom biometric collection device . socom has initiated an acquisition program to replace its existing secure electronic enrollment kit and biosled collection devices , which currently fulfill validated requirements . socom officials anticipate that the replacement capability will be available in 2019 . dod officials stated that the department has made progress in transitioning enduring biometric and forensic materiel capabilities from oco to base budget funding . for example , army officials stated that dod abis has transitioned from a combination of oco and base budget funding to an enduring capability funded through dod's base budget . the navy , marine corps , and socom have also developed comprehensive programs of record for their biometric and forensic materiel capabilities that are expected to be funded through their respective base budgets . in addition , the army anticipates transitioning its forensic exploitation laboratories from oco to base funding by 2019 . officials from across dod noted the importance of continuing to transition biometric and forensic materiel capabilities from oco to base funding , to better ensure their continued availability . dod's efforts to institutionalize its enduring deployable biometric and forensic capabilities are limited by strategic planning gaps and acquisition management challenges . these limitations include the absence of a current biometric strategic plan and supporting implementation plan , the absence of acquisition professionals to oversee centcom's near real time identity operations solution , the absence of a geographically dispersed dod abis back - up capability , and difficulties in hiring and retaining qualified personnel to operate and maintain dod abis . while dod has a current and approved forensic strategic plan , it does not have a current and approved biometric strategic plan . according to standards for internal control in the federal government , strategic plans set the goals and objectives for an entity to achieve more effective and efficient operations and to minimize waste . furthermore , the standards call for set goals and objectives to be reviewed periodically and updated as necessary . in 2015 dod issued a forensic strategic plan to guide its forensic enterprise through fiscal year 2020 .