recommendations . we also conducted interviews with faa officials and industry stakeholders — including boeing , the largest u.s. aircraft manufacturer — and representatives from all eight trade associations that participated in the two aviation rulemaking committees . related gao products are footnoted throughout the statement . the reports and testimonies cited in this statement contain detailed explanations of the methods used to conduct our prior work . we provided a draft of the new information contained in this statement to the department of transportation ( dot ) for technical review and addressed its views in the body of our statement where appropriate . the work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . located in faa's office of aviation safety ( aviation safety ) , the aircraft certification service ( aircraft certification ) and flight standards service ( flight standards ) issue certificates and approvals for new aviation products to be used in the national airspace system as well as for new operators in the system , such as air carriers , based on federal aviation regulations ( see fig . faa inspectors and engineers interpret and implement these regulations governing certificates and approvals through faa policies and guidance , including orders , notices , and advisory circulars . additionally , faa also has the authority to use private individuals and organizational entities , known as designees , to carry out many certification activities on behalf of the faa administrator in order to enable faa to better concentrate its limited staff resources on safety - critical functions . in aircraft certification , approximately 880 engineers and inspectors issue certifications and approvals to the designers and manufacturers of new aircraft and aircraft engines , propellers , parts , and equipment , including the avionics and other equipment required for modernizing the air traffic control system under the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . since 2005 , aircraft certification has used a project sequencing system to nationally prioritize certification submissions on the basis of available resources . for the first phase , to be included in the july 2014 update of its implementation plan , faa will include metrics to measure the progress of the implementation of the initiatives . for the second phase , faa plans to subsequently develop metrics for measuring the outcomes of each initiative . for the third phase , working with the aerospace industries association , faa plans to develop metrics for measuring the global return on investment in implementing all of the initiatives , to the extent that such measurement is possible . we believe that this plan for establishing performance measures is reasonable . unlike faa's efforts to improve the certification process , although faa has made some progress towards addressing the regulatory consistency recommendations , the details remain unclear about how faa will structure its efforts .