( see app . ii for a list of countries that have signed all or parts of the bilateral maritime agreements and the interdiction support clause. ) moreover , to offset the closing of howard air force base in panama in 1999 , the united states has reached agreements with other nations in the region to station u.s. military and civilian aircraft . in return , the united states has upgraded the facilities at these airbases . the facilities at manta , ecuador ; comalapa , el salvador ; and curacao are used by u.s. civilian and military aircraft , while the facilities in aruba ; liberia ; costa rica ; and panama are used by the coast guard and cbp . access to these facilities allows aircraft to spend more time monitoring and interdicting drug trafficking activities and also allows them to range further west into the pacific ocean . overall , since fiscal year 2000 , the availability of u.s. and allied assets provided for detecting and disrupting drug trafficking activities in the transit zone has varied . on - station ship days peaked in fiscal year 2001 and flight hours peaked in fiscal year 2002 , but both have declined since then , primarily because defense has provided fewer assets . declines in defense assets in recent years were mostly offset by additional ship days and aircraft hours provided by the coast guard , cbp , and allied nations . however , the ship days and flight hours provided by the allied nations are primarily in the eastern caribbean sea where the united states does not usually conduct monitoring and detection activities . nevertheless , according to jiatf - south , it cannot detect many of the known maritime cocaine movements reported in the western caribbean sea and the eastern pacific ocean because it cannot get ships or aircraft to the suspected movement in time . despite a rise in fiscal year 2001 , the total number of ship days spent on interdiction missions in the transit zone has generally decreased since fiscal year 2000 from about 3,600 ship days to about 3,300 ship days ( or about 8 percent ) in fiscal year 2005 . u.s. navy ship days declined from about 1,980 in fiscal year 2000 to about 890 in fiscal year 2005 . defense officials said that the navy reduced its ship days because of other national security concerns ; in particular , the need to provide support for the armed conflicts in afghanistan and iraq . the reduction in u.s. navy ship days was partly offset by increases in ship days by the coast guard . after a decline to about 1,160 ship days in fiscal year 2003 ( compared to 1,330 days in 2002 ) , the coast guard increased its ship days to about 1,660 in 2004 and almost 1,700 in 2005 — becoming the primary provider of maritime surface vessels in the transit zone . figure 2 illustrates the total on - station ship days in the transit zone by provider for fiscal years 2000-2005 .