before data collection . the bureau is already using administrative records to validate and update the address list . the bureau is drawing on address lists and map information from state , local , and tribal governments , in addition to information obtained from commercial sources , to update its own address list continuously throughout the decade , reducing the need for a more costly door - to - door canvassing during the 2 years prior to the census , as was done for the 2010 census . in addition , bureau officials reported research is about to begin on how to better use records to identify group quarters , such as dormitories , prisons , nursing homes , and homeless shelters , and to target outreach , that is , encourage cooperation of staff at these locations with the census . the bureau historically uses special procedures to enumerate at these places , and administrative records could potentially jump start the time and effort spent getting ready for them . during data collection . the bureau is considering using administrative records in lieu of some follow - up visits for the purpose of quality control of field work . in past decennials , the bureau has called or sent enumerators to re - interview some respondents . relying on administrative records could reduce fieldwork and respondent burden , or enable the bureau to better target re - interviews of respondents . the bureau is also researching how administrative records can be used to help process responses that do not have a census id number on them ( this activity is called non - id processing ) . the bureau may receive such responses from households that lost or never received mailings or other advance communication with an id number from the bureau . a test in 2015 in the savannah , georgia , media market area demonstrated that a large collation of administrative records from many sources was effective in helping the bureau correct or fill in missing address information . this enabled the bureau to better locate where those responses should be counted . the bureau is also researching how other records may help it validate responses or the identities of those who submit responses as part of this processing . after data collection . when the bureau still does not have information on a housing unit after collecting data during field operations , it will attempt to impute the data — as it has done since 1970 . according to bureau officials , in 2020 the bureau will use administrative records to help improve how it imputes three related types of data: ( 1 ) whether or not a unit is occupied , ( 2 ) how many people live in the unit , and ( 3 ) the residents' demographic characteristics , such as sex , race , and ethnicity . finally , the bureau is considering how administrative records might help it evaluate census accuracy . the bureau has identified and obtained access to nearly all of the sources that it believes it needs in order to leverage all of the opportunities it has identified ( see figure 2 ) .