fiscal year 2015 . rhs used two main approaches to try to avoid or lessen the effect of funding gaps on owners of the 943 properties ( about 6 percent ) whose agreements rhs could not renew . rhs tried to decrease the likelihood of a funding gap by asking congress to prohibit second renewals — meaning that , if legislation were enacted , any agreement that fully expended its funding in less than 12 months could not be renewed another time in the same fiscal year . congress enacted legislation containing the prohibition on december 16 , 2014 ( about 2-1 / 2 months into fiscal year 2015 ) , but any agreements entered into before that date were eligible for second renewals . fiscal year 2013 . rhs offered owners who did not receive rental assistance payments at the end of the fiscal year several options to lessen the financial effect . according to rhs , 308 of approximately 15,000 properties ( about 2 percent ) were affected by the funding gap that year . the options rhs offered included allowing owners to use money from the property's capital reserve account for operating purposes , suspend payments to the capital reserve account , and defer payments on their rhs mortgages ( loan deferral ) . however , according to rhs officials , some owners declined the options rhs offered and none of the owners were compensated for the rental assistance payments they did not receive that year . sequestration and rescissions . in fiscal year 2013 , sequestration and rescissions cut about $70 million of the rental assistance program's approximately $907 million budget . these cuts also had implications for the rental assistance program in fiscal year 2014 because they pushed renewals that could not be funded at the end of 2013 into the subsequent year . unreliable estimation methods . rhs's methods for calculating the dollar amount for annual renewal agreements and budget requests had weaknesses . in fiscal years 2013 – 2015 , rhs calculated the amount of renewal funding each property would receive by multiplying the number of rental assistance units by a state - wide , per - unit average cost . because actual rental assistance costs at each property generally differed from the state - wide average , this method resulted in some properties receiving agreement renewals that provided less funds than needed for 1 year ( resulting in the need for an additional renewal within the same 12-month period ) and other properties receiving more funds than needed for 1 year ( tying up funds that could have been obligated to other properties ) . in the aggregate , for agreements renewed in fiscal years 2013 – 2015 , approximately 35 percent of the amounts were sufficient to make 11 – 13 rental assistance payments — that is , about 1 year ( see fig . in contrast , about 20 percent lasted for fewer than 11 payments , including 17 percent with funding that lasted for 8 – 10 payments and about 3 percent with funding that lasted for fewer than 8 payments .