green . due to the strong demand , the airline requested that the airport construct a terminal expansion , which allowed southwest to expand to four gates over the next couple of years . according to airline officials , both of these alternate regional airports met the airline's expectations . the mpos that conduct regional airport planning have no authority over which airport improvement projects are priorities in their regions and , as a result , the rasps they produce have little direct influence over airport capital investment and other decisions . because mpos do have authority over surface transportation projects — only projects prioritized by mpos are eligible to receive federal funding from the federal transportation administration ( fta ) and the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) — mpos can directly influence surface projects that affect airport access , but cannot directly affect the capacity of these airports . none of the airports we met with during the course of our review are required to consider or incorporate the recommendations of rasps into their alps or airport master plans . in most of the 6 regions that have developed or are developing rasps , airport officials — such as those at lax and sfo — stated that they would consider the region's perspective in an informal fashion , even though recommendations included in rasps are not binding . other airports we interviewed were more guarded about their consideration of regional airport planning conducted by mpos . airport officials at john wayne airport in the los angeles region stated that the region's rasp is not a primary driver of airport decision making , in part because regional planning priorities are likely to differ from those of the airport , particularly regarding mitigation strategies for surrounding communities . airport officials at philadelphia international stated that the airport does its own planning without input from regional planners , although the airport is active in the development of regional airport plans . as a result , regional priorities may not be reflected in the decision - making documents that guide capital improvements at airports . ongoing research being developed for the acrp similarly notes that while regional airport planning could fill the gap between airport - and national - level planning , most regional airport planning conducted to date has not been influential due in part to the fact that airport sponsors retain authority over planning and development decisions . according to faa , it is also not required to consider mpo - developed rasps , even when these plans are funded with faa grants . faa officials stated that the inclusion or absence of a project in a rasp had little influence whether the agency approved aip grants for an individual airport project , serving in some cases as a tiebreaker but not guiding project prioritization . faa considers aip grants for capital improvements on an airport - by - airport basis , based on national criteria . airports justify improvement projects individually using forecasts from their own service areas , and the national criteria that faa uses does not consider how improvements exist in a regional context , except during the environmental review process .