we provide more information on eligibility verification below . fcc has not met the timeframe broadband pilot program: fcc established the broadband pilot program to gather data about how lifeline could be used to support broadband adoption . fcc announced the broadband pilot program in december 2012 , and it authorized approximately $13.8 million for 14 projects spanning 21 states and puerto rico . for example , according to state to reduce the burden on applicants and etcs , the order set a goal for developing an automated means for verifying lifeline eligibility ; however , as mentioned previously , fcc has not met the time frame defined in the order or established any revised time frames for when , how , or if this automated means would be available . these goals were: ( 1 ) to ensure the availability of voice service for low - income americans , ( 2 ) to ensure the availability of broadband for low - income americans , and ( 3 ) to minimize the universal service fund contribution burden on consumers and businesses . fcc identified performance measures it will use to evaluate progress toward these goals , but it has not yet fully defined them . the pilot projects completed offering subsidized service at the end of october 2014 , but data are still being collected from participants on how the service was used and retained after the pilot finished . fcc has not announced when or how it would share the results of the projects . we provide more information on the broadband pilot program below . performance goals and measures: the order established performance goals for the lifeline program to help fcc determine whether lifeline is being used for its intended purposes and is accomplishing its objectives . for example , the order stated that the goal of ensuring the availability of voice service will be measured by comparing telephone penetration levels ( the percentage of households with telephone service ) among low - income households to households with the next highest level of income , but fcc officials note that they are working on defining these measures using the census bureau's american community survey data , which was made available in late 2014 . in the order , fcc established outcome - based goals and noted that the gap in penetration rates for telephone service between low - income and higher - income households has narrowed . we previously concluded that outcome - based performance goals and measures will help illustrate to what extent , if any , the lifeline program is fulfilling the guiding principles set forth by the congress . once adopted , performance measures can help fcc track progress toward reaching its goals . however , performance measures alone will not fully explain the contribution of lifeline toward reaching the program goals , because performance measurement does not assess what would have occurred in the absence of the program . according to fcc , lifeline has been instrumental in narrowing the penetration gap between low - income and non - low income households .