we disagree . dod's july 2004 rfid policy does not represent a sound strategic approach because it lacks a number of key management principles necessary for good program management . specifically , we found that the policy ( 1 ) contains only general and descriptive goals and objectives that do not define specific expected results , and no annual goals are identified , as suggested by the principle ; ( 2 ) describes specific actions related to operational processes but does not provide specific actions related to things such as obtaining necessary workforce skills , considering human resource issues , identifying major capital resources , identifying major technological resources , and obtaining needed information resources , which could provide the basis for monitoring corrective actions that may be needed ; ( 3 ) does not include performance measures to assess the progress of implementation actions for passive rfid ; and ( 4 ) contains only short - term schedules rather than comprehensive schedules and milestones for meeting deadlines . despite dod's assertion in its comments that it already has sufficient guidance to ensure that rfid is efficiently and effectively implemented throughout the department , implementation of the technology is adequately funded , benefits are being achieved , and progress is being reported as part of the department's supply chain management improvement plan , we continue to believe that the incomplete incorporation of these key management principles in dod's rfid policy may impede dod's ability to achieve these things . the lack of clear , comprehensive , and integrated performance goals and measures has handicapped dod efforts for several undertakings , including business management transformation , critical spare parts shortages , installation preparedness , and depot maintenance . we continue to believe that dod needs to develop a more comprehensive strategic management approach to guide the implementation of rfid technology throughout the department . the department concurred with our recommendation for each of the military services and other dod military components to develop individual comprehensive management approaches for implementing rfid . in its comments , the department said that the services , dla , and u.s. transportation command have rfid implementation plans in varying stages of development . the department stated that osd will direct that these plans be completed by september 30 , 2005 , and that these plans will incorporate the key management principles cited in our report and will correct deficiencies cited in our report . the department noted that it would be premature to expect detailed implementation plans until rfid funding is solidified . we believe that this approach will satisfy the intent of our recommendation if , prior to the military components developing their plans , the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology , and logistics ) takes additional actions to develop a dod - wide comprehensive strategic management approach that would then be supported by the plans developed by the military components . the department did not concur with our recommendation to develop a plan to identify challenges impeding passive rfid implementation and actions needed to mitigate those challenges . the department stated that the challenges outlined in our report have either already been mitigated or represented a misunderstanding on our part .