year of agreement . the year in which the m&i water user and the corps signed the water storage agreement also affects corps' water storage prices , according to corps officials . specifically , inflation may increase the prices that the corps charges for storage over time ( in nominal dollars that are not adjusted for inflation ) . environmental mitigation . corps officials said that water resources' project costs and water storage prices have increased over time due to the environmental mitigation costs associated with corps' projects . specifically , corps officials explained that m&i water storage agreements signed after certain environmental laws were enacted may have higher costs of storage as a result of the laws . in particular , one official cited the national environmental policy act of 1969 , and the endangered species act of 1973 , which potentially result in increased costs from analysis and mitigation actions to reduce or eliminate adverse environmental effects caused by changes to a corps' project . electricity costs . according to a corps official , variation in electricity costs may be due to factors such as volatility in oil , gas , or thermal power prices . more specifically , when applying the benefits foregone method to set the price for m&i use under a water storage reallocation agreement , the corps calculates the benefits lost by power marketing administrations , which operate electric systems and sell the electrical output of federally owned and operated hydroelectric dams , from the reallocation of storage . in doing so , the corps identifies the costs to the power marketing administration to produce a similar amount of electricity from another source . specific costs . the specific costs for a project are costs serving only one project purpose . for example , according to corps officials , the specific costs for m&i water supply could include the costs of a corps - constructed intake structure that would allow a specific m&i water user to withdraw water from the project . joint - use costs . the joint - use costs for a project consist of the sum of the separable costs for each project purpose ( i.e. , the costs to add that purpose to the project ) , plus a share of the remaining costs ( i.e. , total project costs minus the sum of the separable costs ) . for m&i water storage , the joint - use costs would be the share allocated to m&i water users of all project costs not associated with specific project features . for example , joint - use costs could include the costs of constructing the project's dam , a cost that benefits all project purposes . corps officials we interviewed said that the last projects with originally authorized m&i water storage were constructed in 1991 , and the corps has not constructed a new water storage project since the early 1990s . corps officials we interviewed also said that the agency is not studying or planning the construction of any new projects , as of the time of our review . as a result , corps officials said that the corps has not recently used this pricing method .