confusing terminology . rsos at five posts stated that the standards and guidance are sometimes worded in a confusing manner . specifically , while some standards are worded as mandatory measures that “must” be taken , others are worded in a way that could be interpreted as mandatory or discretionary . for example , some measures “should” or will “ideally” be taken , or are “recommended” ; likewise , some standards “must be considered,” while others “should be considered.” ds officials told us that the intent of using various terms in the guidance is to give rsos some flexibility in deciding which measures are applicable to their posts . however , a number of rsos told us that they sometimes had difficulty deciding whether and how to apply certain standards because of their confusing wording . these rsos said that difficulties in distinguishing the nuances between the various terms used in the standards sometimes resulted in their uncertainty as to whether the residences at their posts were fully in compliance with the standards . unclear housing categories . while the new standards issued in may 2014 include a section outlining specific security measures for residential compounds , ds headquarters officials told us that they have had difficulty defining what differentiates this type of housing from single family homes located in gated communities , which are subject to a separate set of security measures . officials added that in the absence of clearly defined housing categories , it is difficult for rsos to know which standards to apply . in addition to finding state's residential security standards and guidance to be confusing in nature , we identified multiple gaps and inconsistencies , including the examples described below . the previous version of the fam subchapter detailing state's program for residential security stated that when a post experiences a change in its security environment threat list rating , the post must resurvey residences to determine what security upgrades , if any , are needed . however , a new version of the fam subchapter published in august 2014 does not include this requirement . when we asked ds officials about this , they told us it was an oversight and stated that the requirement still exists . they also stated that because we brought this issue to their attention , they plan to revise the standards issued in may 2014 to include the requirement . while the new standards released in may 2014 call for pedestrian and vehicle gates at residences to have locking devices , ds officials noted that the standards as written do not explicitly require the residences to have gates . they told us they plan to modify the wording of this standard to clarify that gates are required . in addition to announcing the completion of residential security standards to address terrorism , the notification ds sent to posts in october 2014 enumerated other sets of security standards for posts to apply , including standards to address crime and standards for newly acquired on - compound housing . however , the notification did not mention the security standards in effect at the time for existing on - compound housing .