( see fig . this does not represent the full amount of funding provided to ffrdcs by federal agencies , however , since it does not include non - r&d funding . nevertheless , it is the only centrally reported information on federal funding for ffrdcs . for a list of the 38 ffrdcs currently sponsored by the u.s. government , see appendix ii . the four agencies we reviewed use cost - reimbursement contracts with the organizations that operate their ffrdcs , and three of these agencies generally use full and open competition in awarding these contracts . while the agencies require that their ffrdcs be free from organizational conflicts of interest in accordance with federal regulations , only dod and doe have agencywide requirements that prescribe specific areas that ffrdc contractors must address to ensure their employees are free from personal conflicts of interest . we used a case study methodology to conduct our review . we chose three agencies with a long history of sponsoring ffrdcs — the departments of defense ( dod ) , energy ( doe ) , and health and human services ( hhs ) — as well as a fourth agency that has more recently established ffrdcs — the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . from the 29 ffrdcs that these four agencies sponsor , we selected a nongeneralizable sample of eight ffrdcs for in - depth review . the dhs ffrdc laboratory director said he routinely approves any work - for - others requests but gives first priority to the dhs - sponsored work . the sponsor for this ffrdc also periodically assesses whether its work for others impairs its ability to perform work for its sponsor . hhs and dod also have work - for - others programs for the ffrdcs they sponsor . for example , at hhs's ffrdc the program is conducted under a bilateral contract between the entity that is requesting the work and the ffrdc to perform a defined scope of work for a defined cost . while some agencies we reviewed awarded ffrdc contracts through other than full and open competition in the past , including sole - source contracts , three have generally used full and open competition in recent years . starting in the mid - 1990's , doe took steps to improve ffrdc laboratory contractors' performance with a series of contracting reforms , including increasing the use of competition in selecting contractors for its labs . areas for knowledge sharing could include , for example , implementing personal conflicts of interest safeguards and processes for completing the justification reviews prior to renewing sponsoring agreements , among others . the departments of health and human services and homeland security concurred with our recommendation that they revise their conflict of interest policies . in addition , the departments of defense , energy , and homeland security all concurred with our recommendation to establish a forum to share best practices , while hhs is considering participation in such a forum . we received letters from defense , energy , and health and human services , which are reprinted in appendixes iii , iv , and v , respectively .