information about observed climate impacts and vulnerabilities . decision makers will need site - specific and relevant baselines of environmental , social , and economic impacts and vulnerabilities resulting from observed changes in the climate against which past and current decisions can be monitored , evaluated , and modified over time . projections of what climate change may mean for the local area . this includes , for example , projections based on easily understandable best - and worst - case scenarios with confidence and probability estimates and examples of potential climate impacts . the projections may need to be downscaled from complex global - scale climate models to provide climate information at a geographic scale relevant to decision makers . then , the information would need to be translated into impacts at the local level , such as how increased stream flow for a particular river may increase flooding . information on the economic and health impacts of climate change . observed and projected local impacts must be translated into costs and benefits , since this information is needed for many decision - making processes . agencies across the federal government collect and manage many types of climate information , including observational records from satellites and weather monitoring stations on temperature and precipitation , among other things ; projections from complex climate models ; and other tools to make this information more meaningful to decision makers . for example , over 750 federal climate - related datasets were publicly accessible through the www.data.gov / climate web portal as of august 2015 . risk management explicitly addresses uncertainty . risk management explicitly takes account of uncertainty , the nature of that uncertainty , and how it can be addressed . as a result , according to united kingdom officials , the adaptation sub - committee provides independent oversight of the climate information system . also , the met office hadley centre — a government - funded climate science and services center — conducts climate observations and modeling , and develops authoritative projections for future climate scenarios . the most recent version of these projections is called the uk climate projections 2009 or ukcp09 . these projections are considered the authoritative source of climate information in the united kingdom and are used across the united kingdom by government agencies , organizations that translate the information to meet decision makers' needs , and decision makers themselves , according to documents we reviewed and officials we interviewed . another government entity — the environment agency's climate ready support service — leads the efforts to assist decision makers in using climate information to adapt to the effects of climate change in england . it mainly works through intermediaries outside the government , such as nonprofit organizations , consultants , universities , and trade and professional associations to translate climate information for decision makers , according to government officials . for example , the environment agency partially funds climate uk , a network of regionally based nonprofits that help decision makers at the regional and local level incorporate climate information into their planning and connect with intermediaries . in addition , the climate ready support service supports the local government association , which works with local authorities on adapting to climate change .