more workers would have the option to have their taxes withheld . because worker participation would remain voluntary , the need to determine default percentages or dollar amounts for withholding could be avoided as long as the worker met the quarterly requirement for paying estimated taxes . the platform economy is relatively new . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . one set of options we identified focused on simplifying aspects of the tax system to help platform workers comply with their tax obligations . for all of them , sufficient evidence did not exist on how the option would be designed or on the tradeoffs such as costs and benefits . some of the options require legislative action , and other options could be costly for the internal revenue service ( irs ) to implement . balancing the pros and cons is a policy decision for irs and the department of the treasury ( treasury ) or congress to make and more research would be needed . the following discusses our analyses of these options including what information would be needed to design the option and compare the tradeoffs . according to some stakeholders , properly tracking and deducting expenses from gross income can be burdensome for self - employed workers , including platform workers . a common feature of platform work is using an asset , such as a car or house , for personal and business use ; for example , a car owner may use his or her personal car for occasional ride - hailing work . stakeholders and several articles from our review discussed how the rules for apportioning expenses for personal and business use and determining which ones are deductible can be complicated , especially for part - time or short - term drivers or renters . some stakeholders as well as some articles mentioned that congress could consider creating a standard business deduction that platform workers could use . platform workers , especially those who may not have the necessary knowledge or experience , may not track all eligible business deductions and overpay income and self - employment taxes . they may improperly overstate their expense deductions to offset income , contributing to the tax gap . creating a standard business deduction could reduce the complexity associated with the current system . however , different businesses involve different expenses , and it may be difficult to create an appropriate standard deduction across all business types . creating multiple standard deductions for different types of businesses could be complicated and burdensome , and could ultimately reduce tax revenue if the standard deduction exceeds actual expenses for many platform workers . additionally , a standard business deduction limited to only platform workers would be difficult to design because no regulatory or statutory definition of the term platform worker exists . further , providing the standard deduction option only for platform workers would raise disparate treatment concerns . given the limited data on the number and tax reporting characteristics of platform workers , we could not analyze the potential benefits and costs of creating a standard deduction .