destructive event . a tsunami is a series of ocean waves typically generated by an underwater earthquake . a tsunami wave may be very small in the deep ocean , but as it approaches land can increase to tens of feet in height and reach shore as a fast - moving wall of turbulent water . tsunamis pose an inundation threat to low - lying coastal communities from multiple destructive waves that can penetrate far inland . tsunamis are categorized as either distant or local . distant tsunamis travel long distances from their triggering events to strike the coast hours later , allowing time to warn and evacuate threatened communities . local tsunamis strike the coast minutes after their near - shore triggering event , allowing little time for warning and evacuation . however , the frequency of damaging tsunamis in the united states has been low , compared with other natural hazards , such as hurricanes , earthquakes , and floods . the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) manages federal tsunami detection and warning efforts . noaa's national weather service ( nws ) operates two tsunami warning centers whose staff monitor seismic data and , based on the location and magnitude of earthquakes , issue warnings when tsunamis are likely . the warning centers transmit a tsunami warning message to nws forecast offices and state emergency management centers , among others . nws forecast offices transmit the warning over noaa weather radio all hazards ( noaa weather radio ) and the emergency alert system . noaa weather radio is a nationwide network of radio stations broadcasting continuous weather information , including warnings , watches , forecasts and other hazard information , 24 hours a day directly from nws weather forecast offices . the federal communication commission's emergency alert system , designed to provide the president a means to communicate with the american people in the event of an emergency , can decode and retransmit noaa weather radio warning messages over radio and television broadcast and cable systems . federal , state , and local government agencies are all involved in efforts to reduce the potential impacts of tsunamis through education , hazard assessment , mitigation planning , and other activities . for example , noaa operates a tsunami preparedness recognition program known as tsunamiready that encourages communities to educate citizens on tsunami hazards , develop tsunami hazard plans , and establish local warning systems , among other things . in addition , noaa provides leadership and funding for the national tsunami hazard mitigation program ( nthmp ) . this program , initiated in 1996 , has been a partnership between noaa ; the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) ; the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; and five states — alaska , california , hawaii , oregon and washington — to assess tsunami hazards , improve and coordinate tsunami warning systems , and develop state and local hazard mitigation programs . for example , under the nthmp , noaa provides funding and technical support to help the states produce inundation maps showing the extent to which coastal areas may be flooded by a tsunami .