( recommendation 3 ) . we provided a draft of this report for review and comment to the executive office of the president , and the departments of homeland security , defense , justice , and state . dhs and dod provided written comments , which are reproduced in appendixes i and ii respectively . in their comments , dhs and dod concurred with their respective recommendation ( s ) . local assets are used to the extent that they are available . the secret service and the department of state have implemented a memorandum of understanding detailing their respective roles and responsibilities and , as required by law , the secret service is to reimburse the department of state for all costs incurred in support of the secret service's protective operations . documentation provided by the secret service confirmed that donald trump jr. , eric trump and their spouses flew on commercial aircraft . officials from the 89th airlift wing confirmed that no military aircraft supported these trips . secret service agents protecting the trump family flew by commercial aircraft . additionally , reimbursement documentation provided by both the state department and the secret service confirmed that no costs were incurred for chartered air travel . as with all protective missions , secret service officials noted that the number of agents assigned to the detail depended on the number of protectees and the threat environment , among other things . the trips to the dominican republic and uruguay each included only one protectee , and the trip to the united arab emirates included four protectees . for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 we found that , of the three agencies required to report costs incurred for protecting the president and others under the presidential protection assistance act , only the coast guard reported semiannually on costs under the act . the secret service did not do so consistently , and dod did not report any protection costs during this time frame . coast guard: the coast guard submitted the semiannual reports required under the act for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 . to facilitate complying with the presidential protection assistance act , the coast guard developed and implemented a policy for preparing the semiannual reports to congress . the policy contains business rules identifying what information is to be collected and by whom , who is responsible for compiling the information , and time frames for when the information is to be submitted internally . for example , the coast guard operationalized collection of this information by requiring a form to be used when collecting information related to protective details for the vice president and the president . its internal policy and additional guidance also require that information be submitted internally no more than 14 days after each event and validated no more than 30 days after each event . according to agency officials , these business rules and forms are published and provided to all coast guard field units , and quarterly reminders about completing the forms are disseminated via email . secret service: the secret service has not consistently submitted the semiannual reports to congress and does not have a policy for ensuring that the semiannual reports are prepared .