state . spi also maintains publicly available lists of the major sanctions laws and executive orders that state has a role in implementing . these lists are organized by sanctioned country and by functional program . licht , amanda a . “hazards or hassles: the effect of sanctions on leader survival.” political science research and methods , vol . 5 , no.1 ( 2017 ) : pp . marinov , nikolay . “do economic sanctions destabilize country leaders ? ” american journal of political science , vol . 3 ( 2005 ) : pp . peksen , dursun . “coercive diplomacy and press freedom: an empirical assessment of the impact of economic sanctions on media openness.” international political science review , vol . 4 ( 2010 ) : pp . peksen , dursun . “economic sanctions and human security: the public health effect of economic sanctions.” foreign policy analysis , vol . 3 ( 2011 ) : pp . peksen , dursun , and a. cooper drury . “coercive or corrosive: the negative impact of economic sanctions on democracy.” international interactions , vol.36 , no . 3 ( 2010 ) : pp . wood , reed m. “‘a hand upon the throat of the nation': economic sanctions and state repression , 1976 – 2001.” international studies quarterly , vol . 3 ( 2008 ) : pp . in addition to the contact named above , drew lindsey ( assistant director ) , michael maslowski ( analyst in charge ) , eugene beye , nisha rai , michael hoffman , reid lowe , christopher keblitis , grace lui , justin fisher , leia dickerson , michael simon , and julia robertson made key contributions to this report . ” journal of peace research , vol . 1 ( 2013 ) : pp . drezner , daniel w. “sanctions sometimes smart: targeted sanctions in theory and practice.” international studies review , vol . 1 ( 2011 ) : pp . drezner , daniel w. “the hidden hand of economic coercion.” international organization , vol . 3 ( 2003 ) : pp . drury , a. cooper , and dursun peksen . “women and economic statecraft: the negative impact economic sanctions visit on women.” european journal of international relations , vol . 2 ( 2014 ) : pp . forrer , john . “economic sanctions: sharpening a vital foreign policy tool.” atlantic council issue brief . washington , d.c.: atlantic council , june 2017 . harrell , peter . using sanctions too aggressively ? the steps washington can take to guard against overuse.” foreign affairs . september 11 , 2018 . peksen , dursun . 3 ( 2011 ) : pp . treasury . ofac maintains a publicly available list of all sanctions laws and executive orders that treasury has a role in implementing . the list is organized by sanctioned country and functional program . for each country - based , country - related , or functional program , the entry in the list includes a discussion of statutory authorities , executive orders , and regulations under which the program is implemented .