we agree . as previously stated , we will add this policy to the “acquisition special topics” webpage on the oag intranet page . a notice and other cross - references to this permanent location of the policy will be disseminated via acquisition alerts and acquisition updates . we anticipate completing this by the end of september 2007 . with regard to accountable assets and related policies , since december 2006 , our office of publications and logistics management have undertaken actions to reinforce existing policies and procedures and to implement an improvement work plan . these include: entering into collaborative agreements with our operations and systems components to establish mechanisms for correcting property management issues and policies ; developing a new user's guide for the sunflower asset system ( sfa ) , our property management system . the new guide contains not only the “how” but also the “why” to give users a better understanding of property management ; reviewing and revising internal policy guides , administrative instructions manual systems ( aims guides ) ; developing stronger lines of communication with employees responsible for property management ( eg , established a quarterly property management teleconference , updated and distributed news letters on property management , offered sunflower training sessions , website updates , etc .

 ) ; updating and clarifying the listing of “items to be bar - coded” ; and continuing to reinforce the importance of asset accountability and management . finally , for the 317 assets noted on page 13 of the report , we have requested gao provide us specific asset details to assure our inventory system includes the required information . the following team members made key contributions to this report: steven r. haughton , assistant director ; william ( ed ) brown ; sharon byrd ; rich cambosos ; marcia carlsen ; lisa crye ; leslie c. jones ; brent j. lapointe ; margaret mills ; and robert martin . we disagree . with respect to the policies and procedures directed to micro - purchasers and contracting officers ( not requestors ) , we do not concur with this recommendation and find it too broad . contracting officers ( cos ) are already aware of the file documentation required for their purchases , whether paid with the purchase card or otherwise . we believe that our current guidance , “micro - purchasing in ssa,” contains sufficient information for micro - purchasers and their approving officials regarding file documentation and retention . micro - purchasers and approving officials must take this course prior to being appointed and , beginning in fiscal year 2008 , they will be required to take refresher training every three years . additionally , oag and regional cos conduct acquisition management reviews ( amrs ) of micro - purchase activity . when oag conducts reviews of purchases made by micro - purchasers in headquarters , and when regional cos conduct on - site amrs within their regions , we review the purchase log and the file documentation associated with the purchases . oag also conducts “remote” amrs of purchases made in the regions . these remote reviews currently do not entail a review of an entire contract file .