pub . 93-633 , tit . i ( 1975 ) ( codified as amended at 49 u.s.c . its policies and procedures for transporting hazmat in a safe , timely , and cost - effective manner , we selected and visited several dod locations involved in transporting hazmat , including the u.s. defense supply and distribution center ( richmond , virginia ) ; dover air force base ( dover , delaware ) ; and norfolk naval base ( norfolk , virginia ) . we selected these locations because they provided a cross section of the various modes of transportation and hazardous - material classes . we focused our review on surface and air modes of transport — on surface transport because most individual shipments are transported by highway ( 94 percent in fiscal year 2013 ) and on air transport because that mode generally has more - restrictive requirements ( eg , the quantity of certain hazmat like acetic acid , a class 8 hazmat , allowed on a passenger air transport is lower than other modes due to its corrosive properties ) . we reviewed data from transcom's global air transportation execution system for 5 fiscal years ( 2009 through 2013 ) and defense transportation tracking system records for 2 fiscal years ( 2012 and 2013 ) to analyze records related to pretransportation and transportation functions ( eg , handling , labeling , and packaging activities and the transport of hazmat in commerce to the final destination point ) , respectively . we compared data from those records with requirements in the defense transportation regulation and found that the data we examined were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying challenges and the extent to which they affect the transport of hazmat . to corroborate our understanding of the documents and data we analyzed , we interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense ; the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for transportation policy ; the defense logistics agency ; the army , the air force , the navy , and the marine corps ; and dot's pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration . see appendix i for more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from april 2013 to may 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . hazmat is any substance or material that the secretary of transportation has determined is capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health , safety , or property when transported in commerce . the secretary of transportation designates hazmat under the hazardous materials transportation act and its implementing regulations . within the federal government , dot has the primary responsibility to issue regulations for the safe transport of hazmat in intrastate , interstate , and foreign commerce .