( see app . 1 for tfwg membership and process. ) although the u.s. government provides a range of training and technical assistance to countries it deems vulnerable to terrorist financing , it lacks an integrated strategy to coordinate the delivery of this assistance . specifically , the effort lacks key stakeholder acceptance of roles and practices , a strategic alignment of resources with needs , and a process to measure results — three elements that previous gao work has identified as critical to effective strategic planning within and across agencies . thank you for your leadership in this area . as you have stated on prior occasions , madame chairwoman , disrupting terrorist financing can raise terrorists' costs and risks of gathering and moving assets and is necessary to impede their ability to carry out significant operations . the united nations ( un ) reports that more than ever before , security threats are interrelated ; a threat to one country can be a threat to all , and no country by its efforts alone can make itself invulnerable . it is in every country's interest , accordingly , to cooperate both internally and with other countries in addressing threat priorities . in gao's october 2005 report on u.s. efforts to counter terrorist financing abroad , we noted that the united states plays an active and ongoing role in building international support for measures to combat terrorist financing . for example , the u.s. government has participated in efforts to develop and implement international standards to combat terrorist financing , sometimes leading these efforts . the united states also conducts various intelligence and law enforcement activities designed to identify and disrupt the flow of terrorist financing abroad . these activities include , among others , gathering intelligence and sharing information with other countries . further , the united states provides training and technical assistance to help countries that are vulnerable to terrorist financing establish effective counter - terrorism - financing regimes . to coordinate the delivery of this training and assistance to about two dozen “priority countries” — those considered most vulnerable — as well as to other vulnerable countries , the national security council ( nsc ) established the interagency terrorist finance working group ( tfwg ) , whose members include , among others , the department of state ( state ) , which chairs the group ; the treasury ; and the department of justice ( justice ) . in addition , the united states has participated in global efforts to publicly designate individuals and groups as terrorists and to block access to their assets . u.s. officials have worked with members of the un to develop and support un security council resolutions to freeze the assets of designated individuals or groups that conduct or facilitate terrorist acts . the united states successfully participated in bilateral efforts with saudi arabia and jointly designated more than a dozen saudi - related entities and multiple individuals as terrorists or terrorist supporters . officials of the department of the treasury ( treasury ) have stated that public designations discourage further financial support and encourage other governments to more effectively monitor the activities of the designated individuals or groups .