this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for information regarding this testimony , please contact linda d. koontz , director , or valerie melvin , assistant director , information management issues at ( 202 ) 512-6240 . other individuals making key contributions to this testimony include michael alexander , tonia d. brown , derrick dicoi , and mary j. dorsey . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . ssa has drafted but not yet finalized the implementation strategy for the rollout . ssa has performed several important project tasks since beginning the accelerated initiative in 2002 . for example , it has implemented limited claims - intake functionality as part of the electronic disability collect system , and begun additional upgrades of this software . in addition , it has developed two internet applications for on - line forms to aid claimants in filing for disability benefits and services . claimants who are initially denied benefits can ask to have the dds reconsider its denial . if the decision remains unfavorable , the claimant can request a hearing before a federal administrative law judge at an ssa hearings office , and , if still dissatisfied , can request a review by ssa's appeals council . upon exhausting these administrative remedies , the individual may file a complaint in federal district court . each level of appeal , if undertaken , involves multi - step procedures for the collection of evidence , information review , and decision making . many individuals who appeal ssa's initial decision will wait a year or longer — perhaps up to 3 years — for a final decision . to address concerns regarding the program's efficiency , in 1992 ssa initiated a plan to redesign the disability claims process , emphasizing the use of automation to achieve an electronic ( paperless ) processing capability . the automation project started in 1992 as the modernized disability system , and was redesignated the reengineered disability system ( rds ) in 1994 . rds was to automate the entire disability claims process — from the initial claims intake in the field office to the gathering and evaluation of medical evidence at the state ddss , to payment execution in the field office or processing center , and including the handling of appeals at the hearings offices . however , our prior work noted that ssa had encountered problems with rds during its initial pilot testing . for example , systems officials had stated that , using rds , the reported productivity of claims representatives in the ssa field offices dropped . they noted that before the installation of rds , each field office claims representative processed approximately five case interviews per day . after rds was installed , each claims representative could process only about three cases per day .