however , this has not always been the case . a brief description of each of the erps is presented below .  the general fund enterprise business system ( gfebs ) was initiated in october 2004 and is intended to support the army's standardized financial management and accounting practices for the army's general fund , with the exception of that related to the army corps of engineers , which will continue to use its existing financial system , the corps of engineers financial management system . gfebs is intended to allow the army to share financial , asset and accounting data across the active army , the army national guard , and the army reserve . the army estimates that when fully implemented , gfebs will be used to control and account for about $140 billion in annual spending .  the global combat support system - army ( gcss - army ) was initiated in december 2003 and is expected to integrate multiple logistics functions by replacing numerous legacy systems and interfaces . the system is intended to provide tactical units with a common authoritative source for financial and related nonfinancial data , such as information related to maintenance and transportation of equipment . the system is also intended to provide asset visibility for accountable items . gcss - army will manage over $49 billion in annual spending by the active army , national guard , and army reserve .  the logistics modernization program ( lmp ) was initiated in december 1999 and is intended to provide order fulfillment , demand and supply planning , procurement , asset management , material maintenance , and financial management capabilities for army's working capital fund .  approximately two - thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered into gfebs from the invoicing and receiving system ( i.e. , wide area work flow ) due to interface problems . dfas personnel told us that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data that will have to be manually entered as gfebs is deployed to additional locations . army officials acknowledged that there is a problem with the interface between wide area work flow and gfebs and that this problem had reduced the effectiveness of gfebs , and that they are working with dod to resolve the problem .  gfebs lacks the ability to run ad hoc queries or to research data to resolve problems or answer questions . the army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that army officials expect will better support the users' needs .  manual workarounds are needed to process certain accounts receivable transactions such as travel debts . the military departments' integrated personnel and pay systems replace the defense integrated military human resources system that was initiated in february 1998 and intended to provide a joint , integrated , standardized personnel and pay system for all military personnel .  the defense agencies initiative ( dai ) was initiated in january 2007 and is intended to modernize the defense agencies' financial management processes by streamlining financial management capabilities and transforming the budget , finance , and accounting operations . the third and final deployment of lmp occurred in october 2010 .