firearms . the numbers and types of firearms the components in our review reported having in their inventories varied . as of november 2017 , all components reported inventories of pistols and shotguns , five components reported rifles , and three reported fully automatic firearms . officials noted that they make decisions about what to have in their inventories based on factors such as their number of fleos and mission needs . all components issued pistols to fleos to carry , in accordance with their statutory authority . officials stated that these firearms are to be carried on duty so fleos are prepared for potentially dangerous circumstances , such as serving warrants on armed individuals . similarly , qualified fleos in all components can temporarily carry rifles or shotguns in anticipation of , or in response to , high - risk situations , such as active shooter threats or arrests of suspects who are believed to be dangerous . to what extent have selected agencies accurately reported purchases of firearms and ammunition in publicly - available data on usaspending.gov ? what types and quantities of firearms , ammunition , and selected tactical equipment do hhs , epa , and irs have documented to be in their inventory systems , as of november 2017 ? what inventory controls and procedures are in place at hhs , epa , and irs , and to what extent do these agencies follow these procedures at selected locations ? this report is the public version of a sensitive report that we issued in october 2018 . hhs , irs and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) deemed some of the information in our october report to be sensitive , which must be protected from public disclosure . therefore , this report omits sensitive information about the number of fleos at the tsa , an illustration of how hhs's national institutes of health police secures its firearms , and the number and types of some firearms , ammunition , and tactical equipment in nih's and irs's inventory . although the information provided in this report is more limited , the report addresses the same objectives as the sensitive report and uses the same methodology . to address our first question , we selected the 20 agencies from the departments named in the chief financial officers act that employed 250 or more fleos at any point from fiscal years 2010 through 2017 . we also excluded military and intelligence agencies from our review , such as all department of defense ( dod ) branches and the u.s. coast guard , which is part of dhs . table 1 shows the agencies in our scope for our first question . for the first question , we analyzed the amount 20 federal agencies reported spending on firearms , ammunition , and tactical equipment and refer to these internal agency records as spending data .