gao - 03-57 . washington , d.c.: february 11 , 2003 . since then there has been a decrease in reliability . as of november 2002 , development test aircraft have been completing only 0.29 hours between maintenance actions . additionally , the program was slow to fix and correct problems that had affected reliability . at the time of our review in july 2002 , program officials had identified about 260 different types of failures and had identified fixes for less than 50 percent of the failures . to achieve reliability goals will require additional design changes , testing , and modifications . therefore , additional problems and costs can be expected if the system is fielded with the level of reliability achieved to date . the f / a - 22 did not take advantage of evolutionary , knowledge - based concepts up front and now , the best it can hope for is to limit cost increases and performance problems by not significantly increasing its production until development is complete — signified by developmental and operational testing and reliability demonstrations . to that end , we have recommended that the air force reconsider its decision to increase the aircraft production rate beyond 16 aircraft per year . the program is nearing the end of developmental testing and plans to start initial operational testing in october 2003 . if developmental testing goes as planned , which is not guaranteed , operational testing is expected to be completed around september 2004 . by the end of this fiscal year , 51 f / a - 22s will be on contract as low rate production began in 2001 . our march 2003 report identifies various problems still outstanding that could have further impacts on cost , schedule , and delivered performance that are in addition to undemonstrated reliability goals . the problems identified are of particular concern , given air force plans to increase production rates and make a full rate production decision in 2004 . the problems include: unexpected shutdowns ( instability ) of the avionics , excessive movement of the vertical tails , overheating in rear portions of the aircraft , separations of the horizontal tail material , inability to meet airlift support requirements , and excessive ground maintenance actions . these problems are still being addressed , and not all of them have been solved as yet . for example , air force officials stated they do not yet understand the problems associated with the avionics instability well enough to predict when they would be able to resolve them , and certain tests to better understand the vertical tail problem have not yet begun . despite remaining testing and outstanding problems , the air force plans to continue acquiring production aircraft at increasing annual rates and make the full rate production decision in 2004 . this is a very risky strategy , given outstanding issues in the test program and the system's less than expected reliability . the air force may encounter higher production costs as a result of acquiring significant quantities of aircraft before adequate testing and demonstrations are complete . in addition , remaining testing could identify problems that require costly modifications in order to achieve satisfactory performance .