equipment . transitioning to another spectrum band could require public safety users to purchase new equipment such as radios . some radios can only operate on one spectrum band , so moving to a new band requires purchasing new radios that can operate on that band . alternatively , users could purchase multi - band radios , which can operate on more than one radio frequency band . according to public safety officials we spoke with , multi - band radios might be the best option since it is not clear which frequencies they will ultimately be relocated to . however , they also noted that multi - band radios are substantially more expensive than single band radios . for example , officials with the boston fire department told us a regular radio costs approximately $5,000 each while multi - band radios cost up to $8,000 . these officials told us that relocating from the t - band would mean replacing approximately 1,800 radios with multi - band units , meaning that just replacing the boston fire department's handheld and portable radios could cost more than $14 million . additionally , public safety officials in boston and new york city added that local building codes in those areas require buildings of a certain size to install equipment that amplifies wireless signals throughout a building and improves coverage . these systems help first responders , such as police and firefighters , communicate with each other in large buildings . infrastructure . infrastructure costs could include new radio towers and antennas and fiber - optic cable systems . because different radio frequencies have different characteristics and can cover different distances , depending on to which spectrum band public safety users are relocated , circumstances may require more radio towers and antennas . for example , officials with the boston fire department told us that if space were available and they were to relocate from the t - band to the 800 mhz public safety band , they would need additional radio towers . specifically , these officials said their current system consists of 42 receivers and five transmitting sites and estimated that a system in the 800 mhz band would likely require up to 60 receivers and five - to - nine transmit sites . fcc officials told us that based on the characteristics of other spectrum bands allocated to public safety , users may need to build between two and three times as much infrastructure to provide the same coverage . the officials noted this would substantially increase relocation costs . additionally , public safety officials in boston and new york city told us they are able to use the t - band to communicate in the tunnels beneath each city because of infrastructure investments like the t - band specific radiating cables , which allow first responder's radios to work underground . officials from new york city police , fire , emergency - management department and the mayor's office said that relocating to a new spectrum would require installing a new radiating cable system in hundreds of miles of subway , train , and vehicle tunnels . these officials estimated that replacing the radiating cable infrastructure alone would take at least a decade and cost over $1 billion .