fcc did not provide comments . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . we will send copies of this report to the secretary of transportation , the chairman of the federal communications commission , and the administrator of the national telecommunications and information administration and appropriate congressional committees . we incorporated these comments as appropriate . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . we reviewed documentation of the efforts of dot and automobile manufacturers related to vehicle - to - infrastructure ( v2i ) technologies , such as the 2015 fhwa's v2i draft deployment guidance and products and documentation on completed and ongoing research . we identified materials published in the past 4 years that were related to the terms “vehicle - to - infrastructure” and “v2i” through searches of bibliographic databases , including transportation research international documentation and worldcat . while a variety of v2i technologies exist for transit and commercial vehicles , for the purpose of this report we limited our scope to passenger vehicles since much of dot's connected vehicle work is focused on passenger vehicles . to determine the challenges affecting the deployment of v2i technology and dot's existing or planned actions to address potential challenges , we reviewed fhwa's v2i draft guidance to assist in planning for future investments and deployment of v2i systems . in addition , we interviewed officials from fcc and ntia about challenges related to the potential for spectrum sharing in the 5.9 ghz band . we interviewed dot's privacy officer , two privacy experts , and several stakeholders to understand privacy concerns regarding the deployment of v2i technologies . we collected information on anticipated benefits of these technologies through interviews with officials from dot , automobile manufacturers , industry associations , and experts identified by national academy of sciences and other stakeholders , and through reviews of studies they provided . to specifically address the potential costs associated with v2i technologies , we analyzed two reports , aashto's national connected vehicle field infrastructure footprint analysis and nchrp's 03-101 , cost and benefits of public - sector deployment of vehicle - to - infrastructure technologies report , both of which addressed acquisition , installation , backhaul , operations , and maintenance costs . according to dot officials and other stakeholders we interviewed , those two reports were the primary sources of information for v2i potential deployment costs estimates and actual costs . we used v2i costs estimates from the aashto footprint analysis to give examples of potential costs for deployment .