gao - 05-817 . washington , d.c.: september 6 , 2005 . most of these transition plans are currently being drafted . the only bmds element that has transferred to a service is the patriot , which was transferred to the army in 2003 . the missile defense agency plans to develop and field capabilities in 2- year blocks . the configuration of a given block is intended to build on the work completed in previous blocks . block 2004 , which was scheduled to be deployed during calendar years 2004-2005 , is the first biennial increment of bmds that is intended to provide an integrated set of capabilities . table 2 below shows , for each block of capability , the cumulative total number of each element that the missile defense agency plans to deliver . the capabilities in bolded text show cumulative totals and show new or additional capabilities from the previous block . dod's framework for bmds ground and flight testing through block 2006 ( december 2007 ) is established in the integrated master test plan . this plan defines the test plans for the bmds and its elements and identifies test objectives . in 2006 , the missile defense agency plans to conduct 10 flight tests — 3 for the aegis ballistic missile defense element , 4 for the terminal high altitude area defense element , and 3 for the ground - based midcourse defense element . we reported last year that the missile defense agency has conducted a variety of tests that provide some degree of confidence that the limited defensive operations will operate as intended . however , we also pointed out that some elements have not been fully tested and that performance of the system remains uncertain because the missile defense agency has not conducted an end - to - end flight test using operationally representative hardware and software . in addition , dod's fiscal year 2005 annual test report states that “…there is insufficient evidence to support a confident assessment of limited defensive operations…” whereas the missile defense agency is the developer of bmds , the u.s. strategic command is responsible for coordinating ballistic missile defense operations that will be conducted by multiple commands , such as u.s. northern command and u.s. pacific command . strategic command developed an overall strategic concept of operations for ballistic missile defense in november 2003 that explains how all aspects of the system are to be integrated . strategic command is also tasked with directing , coordinating , and reporting military utility assessments of the ballistic missile defense system . military utility assessments are iterative , event - driven assessments that document the combatant commanders' views on the expected military utility of the system . these assessments are intended to independently examine the degree to which delivered capabilities support the warfighter's ability to execute the missile defense mission , record all data and results from flight tests , ground tests , and wargame / exercises , and focus on the overall ballistic missile defense system rather than the individual elements . as of january 2006 , one assessment had been completed ( april 2005 ) and the scope was limited due to the system's immaturity at that time .