we disagree . while dod presently has efforts underway , as noted in this report , it has not yet established the processes and detailed guidance for effectively implementing either ipia or the recovery auditing act . in its comments , dod did not provide any new evidence that was not considered in our report . accordingly , we continue to believe that our recommendations are critical for dod to enhance its efforts to minimize improper payments and recover those that are made . the following paragraphs illustrate the nature of dod's comments and our analysis of its key points . dod disagreed with our three recommendations aimed at enhancing dod's risk assessment processes . we recommended the dod comptroller require dod agencies and the military services to establish and implement risk assessment methodologies , along with documentation of key factors considered and the rationale for assessing the risk level for the payment activity . dod stated that such direction was not necessary as it had established ipia program baselines and measures and reports on all of its ipia programs annually in accordance with omb guidance . as described in our report , dod's risk assessment process was inadequate to ensure that appropriate consideration was given to the risks associated with its payment activities as we found an additional $322 billion in dod outlays that had not been assessed under ipia . for payment activities assessed , dod did not require its agencies and military services to document their risk methodologies , including risk factors considered , the potential or actual impact on their program operations , and the rationale for assessing risk as either low , medium , or high . as such , none of the nine dod components that conducted risk assessments described their methodology or rationale for the low level of risk assigned to each applicable payment activity . given the lack of supporting documentation and evidence for the risk assessments as well as dod's history of long - standing internal control weaknesses , including gao's prior designation of eight functional dod areas as high risk , the low risk levels are not based on sufficient analysis , are likely unrealistic , and are not reflective of the wide range of vulnerabilities that exist within dod . dod also disagreed with our recommendation that it develop and implement a statistically valid methodology to estimate and report commercial improper payments ( contract and vendor over - and underpayments ) . dod stated that it has followed guidance provided by omb and that commercial improper payments are to be identified , recovered and reported in accordance with the recovery auditing act . as described in our report , dod stated that reporting improper commercial payments under ipia would create duplicate reporting because this information was captured as part of dod's efforts to address recovery auditing act requirements . however , we disagree because those actions are not sufficient to address ipia . both acts must be addressed with regard to commercial payment activity . each act has a different scope of review and reporting requirements . based on the improper payment definition under ipia and omb's guidance that instructs agencies to develop a statistically valid estimate , the statistical sampling requirement would apply to commercial payments under ipia .