in all cases . our 3.2 imt - 2000 environmental losses – dod's model assumed that 90 percent of the power radiated from imt - 2000 base stations would be lost to the environment before reaching satellite orbital altitudes irrespective of the local elevation angle ; thus dod assumed that in calculating an urban center's interference contribution using equation , db in all cases . industry's model assumed an elevation angle - dependent environmental loss factor as follows: ) ε ) ) ) we incorporated a suitable form of equation into our reproduction of industry's model . we noted that neither dod nor industry made conservative assumptions regarding environmental losses . for example , during our limited review of the air force's imt - 2000 interference model , we discussed environmental losses with aerospace corporation representatives . the air force model assumed environmental losses would be much less than either dod or industry assumed . we were generally able to reproduce the value of the peak imt - 2000 interference levels predicted by dod's and industry's original models for each orbital shell to within about 0.1 db . in addition , the locations of those peaks generally corresponded well with those predicted by dod and industry . it should be noted , however , that because dod calculated psd values for every point on a 1-degree longitude by 1-degree latitude lattice , whereas our psd values were calculated over a 2-degree longitude by 2-degree latitude lattice , some minor differences exist in the location of the peak psd value on the orbital shell . tables 2 and 3 summarize these results for dod and industry , respectively . with respect to table 3 , we did not attempt to resolve the – 0.6 db discrepancy with industry representatives . as discussed above , we used a slightly different approach to calculating the imt - 2000 base station penetration factor , which might account for part of this difference . moreover , we did not attempt to review , in detail , industry's assumptions regarding values used for fundamental physical constants , or rounding of intermediate calculations . while additional work would likely have resolved this discrepancy , the – 0.6 db difference is not large enough to justify that exercise . spectrum reallocation impacts all of these areas . due to time and information constraints on dod's initial technical and operational analyses , further study is required in these areas . for example , the dod report predicts interference to satellite operations from third generation wireless systems by the year 2006 and states that this interference could impede command and control of dod satellites , especially low - earth orbit satellites . however , officials from the telecommunications industry have a different view . an industry analysis states that interference from third generation mobile wireless systems to dod satellite receivers will be at acceptable levels and that sharing between these systems and dod satellites is possible without any efforts to mitigate interference levels from the commercial systems . our review of the dod and industry reports , as described below , however , found that the two parties used different assumptions to calculate the extent of potential interference and the impact this interference will have on satellites .