for those where multiple purposes were indicated , they were so identified . doj guidance states that the recipient ( i.e. , fiscal agent ) in each disparate jurisdiction is responsible for monitoring “subawards” and for “oversight of subrecipient spending and monitoring of specific outcomes and benefits attributable to the use of recovery act funds by its subrecipients.” doj guidance provides detailed information on financial and accounting requirements for direct recipients and subrecipients of doj grant programs . the guidance also states that fiscal agents must implement and communicate a policy for reviewing subrecipient data . to what extent are doj's recovery act jag performance measures consistent with promising practices ? this report expands upon our may 2010 recovery act report , which described selected states' uses of jag funding and accountability provisions related to recovery act jag , as well as our july 2009 recovery act report , which discussed observations of recovery act jag fund obligations and planned uses of the funds . in july 2009 , we reported that the 16 states and the district of columbia in our review had not obligated their total recovery act jag awards , in part because they were determining how the funds would be used and passed through to local entities . in our may 2010 report , we visited 7 of the states from our july 2009 sample and found that all 7 had obligated their recovery act jag awards and reported planned uses consistent with their states' priorities and bja's allowable uses of jag funds . to conduct our work for this review , we evaluated recovery act jag awards in a nonprobability sample of 14 states . the states we selected for our review of recovery act jag spending are a subset of a 16-state ( plus the district of columbia ) sample that we used for our earlier recovery act work , but we did not include florida , new jersey , or the district of columbia since the doj office of the inspector general was already engaged in audit work on the jag program in these states . the awards to the 14 states in this review accounted for approximately 50 percent of all of the recovery act jag funds provided . where statements are attributed to state and local officials , we did not analyze state and locality data sources but relied on state and local officials and other state sources for relevant state data and materials . we also tabulated and analyzed some recipient - reported data submitted to recovery.gov for the quarterly reports that had been due as of june 30 , 2010 . we used these data because they are the official source of recovery act spending data and determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we reviewed the relevant guidance doj provides to recovery act jag recipients on financial and program reporting as well as recovery act guidance related to federal recipient reporting to understand federal reporting requirements and associated time frames and interviewed doj officials who administer the recovery act jag program .