this approach relies on the development of data standards . it will provide a set of analytic tools for fraud detection to be shared across the federal government . although this work is just starting , working group members have identified several challenges including reaching consensus among federal agencies on a set of common data attributes to be used and obtaining changes needed to existing privacy laws to allow access to certain types of protected data and systems . a forum we co - hosted in january 2013 , along with the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency and the recovery board , explored these challenges and identified next steps to address them . forum participants identified a range of challenges , including a lack of data standards and a universal award identifier that limit data sharing across the federal government and across federal , state , and local agencies . working groups or other structures have been formed to forward these issues . for example , we are leading a community of practice for federal , state , and local government officials to discuss challenges and opportunities related to data sharing within and across government agencies . in many cases , the transparency initiatives of the gat and recovery boards , omb , and key federal agencies build on lessons learned from the operation of existing transparency systems . but as new transparency initiatives get under way , we believe there are opportunities to give additional consideration to these lessons to help ensure new transparency programs and policies are implemented successfully . first , we found that in implementing the recovery act , omb directed recipients of covered funds to use a series of standardize data elements and report centrally into the recovery board's reporting web site . the transparency envisioned under the recovery act required the development of a system that could quickly trace billions of dollars disbursed to thousands of recipients , across a variety of programs . agencies had systems in place that captured such information as award amounts , funds disbursed , and , to varying degrees , progress being made by recipients . however , the lack of uniform federal data and reporting standards made it difficult to obtain these data from federal agencies . because agencies did not collect spending data in a consistent manner , the most expedient approach for recovery act reporting was to collect data from fund recipients , which placed additional burden on them to provide these data . second , we found that early in the development of both the recovery act reporting system and its procedures , federal officials listened to the concerns of recipients and made changes to guidance in response , which helped ensure they could meet those requirements . given the daunting task of rapidly establishing a system to track billions of dollars in recovery act funding , omb and the recovery board implemented an iterative process which allowed many stakeholders to provide insight into the challenges that could impede their ability to report recovery act expenditures .