we are here to present our preliminary observations on these issues . we will report our final findings and any recommendations we may develop at a later date . in summary: providing safe drinking water requires that water systems , regulators , and public health agencies fulfill individual roles , yet work together in a coordinated fashion . it is particularly important that these entities report and communicate information to each other in a timely and accurate manner . recent public statements and corrective actions by the responsible entities , particularly epa and wasa , clearly indicate that coordination could have been better in the years preceding the current controversy . as our work continues , we will seek to examine ( to the extent appropriate ) specific ways in which improved coordination between epa and wasa could help both agencies better fulfill their responsibilities . we will also examine interrelationships among other key agencies ( such as the aqueduct and the d.c. department of health ) ; how other water systems in similar situations interacted with federal , state , and local agencies ; and what the experiences of these other jurisdictions may suggest concerning how improved coordination can better protect drinking water in the district of columbia . other water systems facing elevated lead levels used public notification and education practices that appear to offer lessons for conducting outreach to water customers , including those in the district of columbia . for example , some of the practices of the two systems we have begun to examine — the massachusetts water resources authority and the portland water bureau — include tailoring their communications to varied audiences in their service areas , testing the effectiveness of their communication materials , and linking demographic and infrastructure data to identify populations at greatest risk from lead in drinking water . wasa faces challenges in collecting the information needed to identify district citizens at greatest risk from lead in drinking water . specifically , it has partial information on which of its customers have lead service pipes , although it is currently in the process of obtaining more complete information . in our future work , we will examine the efforts of other water systems to go one step further by linking data on at - risk populations ( such as pregnant mothers , infants , and small children ) with data on homes suspected of being served by lead service pipes and other plumbing fixtures that may leach lead into drinking water . much is known about the hazards of lead in the human body and about how lead from paint , soil , and dust enter the body . however , little research has been done to determine actual lead exposure from drinking water , and the information that does exist is dated . in our future work , we will examine the plans of epa and other organizations to fill this key information gap . lead is unusual among drinking water contaminants in that it seldom occurs naturally in source water supplies like rivers and lakes . rather , lead enters drinking water primarily as a result of the corrosion of materials containing lead in the water distribution system and in household plumbing .