we did not review these plans or the specific initiatives . our review was performed from february 2000 to april 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the director , defense logistics agency . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions regarding this report . we did not independently verify these data . from these data , we selected three systems for review that had experienced difficulties in achieving mission - capable goals or in the case of the f - 100-220 engine readiness goals for the number of usable engines on hand . we also reviewed data on cannibalizations provided by the air combat command , hampton , virginia ; the office of the secretary of the air force , installations and logistics directorate , washington , d.c. ; and seymour - johnson air force base , goldsboro , north carolina . using the data , we discussed with maintenance personnel the impact of cannibalizations on spare parts shortages . we also used data from studies conducted by the department of defense regarding spare parts shortages and their impacts . lastly , we drew relevant information from our recently issued reports . to determine the reasons for these part shortages , we visited the air logistics centers at tinker air force base ( e - 3 ) , oklahoma city , oklahoma ; warner - robins air force base ( c - 5 ) , robins , georgia ; kelly air force base ( f - 100-220 aircraft engine ) , san antonio , texas ; and the defense supply center richmond , richmond , virginia . to identify specific reasons , we discussed the specific parts shortages with those who manage these items at these locations . we also reviewed our related work on air force and department of defense inventory management practices to identify systemic management problems that are contributing to spare parts shortage . to determine what overall actions are planned or under way to address overall spare parts shortages for air force aircraft and the management framework for implementing the overall initiatives , we visited the air force headquarters , the joint chiefs of staff logistics directorate , and the office of the secretary of defense , located in the washington , d.c. area ; the defense logistics agency located at fort belvoir , virginia , and the defense supply center located in richmond , virginia ; the air force materiel command , dayton , ohio ; and the air logistics centers at tinker air force base , oklahoma ( e - 3 ) , warner - robins air force base , georgia ( c - 5 ) , and kelly air force base , texas ( f - 100-220 ) . we discussed with officials at each of these locations air force initiatives regarding spare parts , their progress and results to date , the planned completion dates for some initiatives , and additional steps needed to address spare parts shortages .