( see app . iii for details about adverse event reporting requirements. ) most of the call records we reviewed did not completely record demographic or medical history information about the consumer . information about age , sex , weight , height , the amount of product used , and the duration of use was frequently not recorded . handwritten call records were difficult to read and interpret . information was often inconsistent across different versions of the same call record . ( 3 ) how do our counts of reported serious adverse events compare with those of other reviews for those events counted by metabolife international ? in responding to your request , we reviewed all the pages of documentation voluntarily provided to us by metabolife international . we did not independently verify that we received all of the call records held by metabolife international . we excluded from our review call records that duplicated other records . to determine the extent to which consumer information was comprehensive , interpretable , and consistently recorded in the call records , we recorded information about the adverse event , demographic information about the individual consumer , and other details in the call record . specifically , we recorded background information similar to that used by fda in the reporting of adverse events , including age , sex , weight , height , the amount of metabolife 356 used , the duration of use , and whether any medical history was noted in the call record . to assess how many call records reported health - related problems and how many of those were serious , we first counted the number of call records that reported at least one adverse event . within this set of call records , we then counted the number of reports of heart attack , stroke , seizure , and death — the types of serious adverse events identified in fda's proposed label warning . we also counted the number of reports of the 23 other types of adverse events that were described as serious or potentially serious in fda's 1997 proposed rule on dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids . for call records that did not report any of the above adverse events , we counted the number of records , but did not count the number of other specific types of adverse events reported . we classified events in the call records based solely on the words and phrases therein ; we did not attempt to diagnose a consumer's condition or to otherwise interpret the information presented . we did not apply medical judgment in the process of classifying events and we did not independently verify the accuracy of the information in the records or determine the validity of the claims made in the call records . we also did not attempt to determine whether metabolife 356 caused the reported adverse events . our results may either overestimate or underestimate the number and severity of adverse events because the call records generally do not include medical diagnoses made by qualified professionals . to determine how our counts of reported serious adverse events compare with those of other reviews , we examined the six previous reviews of metabolife international's call records .