limiting costs to taxpayers before and after a disaster . our prior work has shown that the losses already generated by nfip , as well as the potential for future losses , have created substantial financial exposure for the federal government and nfip likely will not generate sufficient premium revenue to repay the billions of dollars borrowed from treasury . the study provided some discussion of how cbfi could potentially limit costs to taxpayers by encouraging communities to pursue mitigation options that reduce risk of flood damage and result in lower premiums , or by potentially reducing administrative and transaction costs . however , the study also said that — given administrative costs required to design and set up the program — these cost savings could be limited if few communities decide to enroll . finally , fema officials said that the cbfi study's findings met their needs . according to the officials , the study's broad discussion of areas for further research as well as potential benefits and challenges of cbfi informed their opinion on the prospects for cbfi . the fema report , which included the study , provides a brief set of related conclusions from fema , including that fema should not implement cbfi . fema officials explained that , after reviewing the results of the study , they concluded that fema should not conduct further related research or implement cbfi for several reasons: the challenges outlined in the study — such as administrative burden on communities and fema , unavailable data , unclear cost distribution among community members , and potential legislative requirements — are significant and likely outweigh the benefits . a limited number of communities would be likely to participate in a cbfi option , as only one community expressed positive interest in cbfi after fema presented the idea during previous nfip reform listening sessions . dedicating fema's resources to other potential nfip reforms and strengthening existing programs would be a better use of these resources . based on the factors cited by fema officials and our prior work , we agree that fema's conclusion that it was not advisable to implement cbfi at this time was reasonable . we have previously reported on how some of the challenges that the cbfi study outlined apply to nfip more broadly . for example , we have previously reported that fema's resource constraints may jeopardize potential nfip reform efforts . in 2008 , we reported that implementing a combined federal flood and wind program could make addressing existing management challenges even more difficult , given the resources that would be required to administer and oversee a new program . in 2015 we reported that while fema had begun taking some actions to improve its capacity to administer nfip , it was unclear whether fema had the resources required to complete its efforts to implement both the biggert - waters act and hfiaa reforms . also , starting in 2013 , we have stated in multiple reports that fema does not collect some data necessary to determine flood risk — a key factor for determining nfip premiums for individual policyholders or , potentially , communities . in addition , we have reported that some communities may face challenges administering nfip and flood mitigation programs .