we do not agree . in order to ensure that the sbinet contract is consistent with the far , we continue to believe that it should be modified to include a maximum quantity , either units or a dollar value , rather than the total amount of miles to be secured . this concludes our prepared testimony . we would be happy to respond to any questions that members of the subcommittee may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please call richard m. stana at ( 202 ) 512-8816 or stanar@gao.gov or randolph c. hite at ( 202 ) 512-3439 or hiter@gao.gov . other key contributors to this statement were william t. woods , director ; robert e. white , assistant director ; deborah davis , assistant director ; richard hung , assistant director ; e. jeanette espínola ; frances cook ; katherine davis ; gary delaney ; joseph k. keener ; sandra kerr ; raul quintero ; and sushmita srikanth . the sbinet december 2006 expenditure plan , including related documentation and program officials' statements , satisfied four legislative conditions , partially satisfied four legislative conditions , and did not satisfy one legislative condition . the nine legislative conditions and the level of satisfaction are summarized in the table below . satisfied this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . elements of sbi will be carried out by several organizations within dhs . we also interviewed cognizant program officials and contractors . we did not review the justification for cost estimates included in the expenditure plan . effective program planning and execution require a range of management controls . the program management task order is also to establish the capabilities to manage and oversee all of the other task orders . the risk of concurrency is further increased because , as discussed earlier , dhs does not have all the management processes in place to mitigate the risk and successfully manage the program . the greater the degree of concurrency among related and dependent program tasks and activities , the greater a program's exposure to cost , schedule , and performance risks . sbi and sbinet officials told us that they understand the risks inherent in concurrency and are addressing these risks . however , as of december 2006 , they had not provided evidence that identified the dependencies among their concurrent activities and that they were proactively managing the associated risk . the legislatively mandated expenditure plan for sbinet is a congressional oversight mechanism aimed at ensuring that planned expenditures are justified , performance against plans is measured , and accountability for results is ensured .