va's appeals plan does not include this information . the three board options will be: 3 . request board review of existing record: the veteran appeals to the board and asks it to review only the existing record without a hearing . request board review of additional evidence , without a hearing . request board review of additional evidence , with a hearing . the act also requires va to submit to the appropriate committees of congress and gao , within 90 days of the date of enactment , a comprehensive plan for ( 1 ) processing appeals under the legacy process until there are no more to process , ( 2 ) implementing the new appeals process , ( 3 ) processing of claims under the new appeals process in a timely manner , and ( 4 ) monitoring implementation of the new appeals process . in addition to these four broad elements , the act lists 18 elements required to be included in the plan that relate to , among other things: staffing , information technology ( it ) , and other resources required to implement the plan ; estimated timelines for hiring and training va employees ; and a description of risks associated with each element of the plan . the act also includes a provision for gao to assess the plan within 90 days after va submits it . the act also requires va to provide progress reports to the appropriate committees of congress and gao at least once every 90 days ( starting after va submits its plan ) , until the date the act's legal changes to the appeals process generally go into effect and then at least once every 180 days after this date for 7 years . for example , the act's section 3 ( b ) ( 10 ) required va's plan to include a description of the modifications to the it systems that vba and the board require to carry out the new appeals system , including cost estimates and a timeline for making the it modifications . we concluded that va's plan addressed all sub - parts of this element because it provided a description of required it modifications , a reference to costs included in the appeals modernization it budget , and a timeline . however , our determination that va addressed this element should not be construed to necessarily mean that va fully identified or described all it requirements , or provided complete estimated costs and timelines associated with those requirements , or that the information in va's appeals plan comported with sound planning practices . this type of assessment was outside the scope of this objective . the act also authorized va to carry out a program to test any assumptions relied upon in developing its comprehensive plan and test the feasibility and advisability of any facet of the new appeals process . in its appeals plan , va reported its decision to pilot test two of the five new options by allowing veterans with pending appeals in the legacy process ( known as legacy appeals ) to elect the vba supplemental claim or the higher - level review options beginning in november 2017 .