b . if the manufacturer's or importer's sale price per thousand large cigars is $500 , before chipra the tax rate was the maximum tax of $48.75 per thousand ; after chipra it became $263.75 per thousand based on the new ad valorem tax rate . c. if the manufacturer's or importer's sale price per thousand large cigars is $800 , before chipra the tax rate was the maximum tax of $48.75 per thousand ; after chipra it became $402.60 , which is the new maximum tax rate per thousand . treasury is responsible for administering and collecting the federal excise tax on all tobacco products , among other things . in general , federal excise taxes are collected when tobacco products leave the domestic factory or , in the case of imports , when the products are released from customs custody . tobacco manufacturers and importers are required to obtain a treasury permit to operate and must comply with treasury's recordkeeping , reporting , and other requirements . tobacco product wholesalers and distributors are responsible for paying state and local excise taxes , but they are not required to obtain a treasury permit and are not subject to treasury recordkeeping requirements . figure 5 shows the major steps in the tobacco supply chain , including the key points at which taxes are paid . in the tobacco control act passed in june 2009 , congress amended the food , drug , and cosmetic act by inserting a chapter governing tobacco products and granting fda authority to regulate the manufacture , distribution , and marketing of tobacco products under that chapter . the act aims to , among other things , reduce the use of tobacco products to decrease health risks and social costs associated with tobacco - related diseases . it recognizes that virtually all new users of tobacco products are adolescents under the age of 18 . according to the law , fda's regulation of tobacco products is based , in part , on a public health standard rather than the safety and effectiveness standard by which fda regulates pharmaceutical drugs and medical devices . for example , fda can issue restrictions on the sale , distribution , advertising , and promotion of a tobacco product , if the public health standard is met . this standard requires fda to demonstrate that the proposed regulation is appropriate for the protection of public health , based on a consideration of the risks and benefits to the population as a whole , including users and nonusers of tobacco products . the act specifies that fda's authority over tobacco products under chapter ix of the food , drug , and cosmetic act shall apply to cigarettes , roll - your - own tobacco , cigarette tobacco , and smokeless tobacco , as well as any other tobacco products that the agency deems by regulation to be subject to such authority . fda does not at present regulate pipe tobacco and small and large cigars . to implement the tobacco control act , fda has established the center for tobacco products . large federal excise tax disparities among tobacco products resulting from chipra caused sizable market shifts from higher to lower - taxed products .