mandated report . it also the report and demonstration efforts , led by two different organizational units in cms , face similar design considerations . both must define the esrd services to be included in a payment bundle , design a case - mix adjustment model to account for differences in patients' use of resources , and develop a payment policy for exceptional cases , known as an outlier policy . however , despite similar goals , each unit has a different focus . cera is a drug that the manufacturer — f . hoffmann laroche — hopes to introduce in the united states sometime in 2007 . certain products currently in development , which are several years away from entering the market , could have a distinct advantage over injectable products , as they are expected to be long - lasting oral therapies . the composite rate for routine dialysis - related services was the first of medicare's several payment systems that , in broad terms , sets a fixed , prospective rate for a set of clinically related services . consistent with payment policy , the congress has required cms to develop a system tha would no longer pay for each injectable esrd drug under a separate rat but would bundle payment for these drugs together with other esrd services under a single rate . a bundled rate would have advantages for achieving efficiency and greater clinical flexibility . cms's design of a bundled rate is under way but behind schedule , making the implementation of a fully bundled payment system , based on this design , at least several years away . any payment system changes based on report or demonstration would require legislation . medicare's approach to paying for most services provided by facilities is to pay for a group — or bundle — of services using a prospectively set rat e. for example , under prospective payment systems , medicare makes bundled payments for services provided by acute care hospitals , skilled nursing facilities , home health agencies , and inpatient rehabilitation facilities . in creating one payment bundle for a group of associated items and services provided during an episode of care , medicare encourages providers to operate efficiently , as providers retain the difference if medicare's payment exceeds the costs they incur to provide the services . medicare's composite rate for routine dialysis - related services was introduced in 19 and was the program's first bundled rate . medpac ) , and cms have recommended expanding the bundled payment in recent years , we , the medicare payment advisory commission ( for esrd services to include not only the services paid under the composite rate but also the drugs that facilities currently bill for separately . experts contend that a bundled payment for dialysis - related services would have two principal advantages . asp rates are calculated and posted every quarter . the rates reflect the sales price on average from 6 months earlier . since 2003 , several legislative and regulatory changes have been implemented affecting medicare's composite rate for routine esrd services and payment rates for separately billable esrd drugs .