the responses from the airlines have been varied . one airline indicated that they needed further information to process refunds , while another airline informed dod that it may not be able to accommodate dod's refund claims due to its weak financial position . to date , dod has not exerted its rights afforded by federal law to offset payments due to the airlines for the amount of unused tickets . as a result , to date none of the potentially over $21 million of unused ticket money has been returned to dod by the airlines . the millions of dollars wasted on unused airline tickets , improper payments , and fraudulent activities provide another example of why dod financial management is one of our “high - risk” areas , with dod highly vulnerable to fraud , waste , and abuse . while dod has acknowledged the control weaknesses we identified and has taken actions to address some of these weaknesses , dod needs to take a more active role in identifying and resolving control weaknesses . in each case identified in our two most recently issued reports , dod officials acknowledged that they were not aware of these significant and long - standing control breakdowns prior to our audit . dod must proactively identify control weaknesses and implement a system of internal controls that provide reasonable assurance to both dod senior management and the taxpayers that the billions of dollars in travel expenses paid for with centrally billed accounts are spent prudently . as our nation continues to be challenged with growing budget deficits and increasing pressure to reduce spending levels , it is important that dod improve its management of the travel program , which will save millions of dollars annually . madam chairman and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . for further information regarding this testimony , please contact gregory d. kutz at ( 202 ) 512-9505 or kutzg@gao.gov , john j. ryan at ( 202 ) 512-9587 or ryanj@gao.gov , john v. kelly at ( 202 ) 512-6926 or kellyj@gao.gov , or tuyet - quan thai at ( 206 ) 287-4889 or thait@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included beverly burke , matthew brown , francine delvecchio , aaron holling , jeffrey jacobson , barbara lewis , julie matta , kristen plungas , and sidney h. schwartz . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the traveler kept the payment until our audit . because of potential fraud , we have referred these cases to the dod office of inspector general for further inquiry , and potential referral to the appropriate u.s. attorney for further consideration . we also found that inadequate security resulted in improper and fraudulent use of the centrally billed accounts . specifically , dod did not adequately protect the centrally billed accounts from being used to purchase airline tickets based on fictitious travel orders and from being compromised and used for personal gain . these weaknesses exposed the centrally billed accounts to increased risk of fraud and abuse .