these key initiatives are discussed below . ● comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative: in january 2008 , president bush began to implement a series of initiatives aimed primarily at improving the department of homeland security and other federal agencies' efforts to protect against intrusion attempts and anticipate future threats . while these initiatives have not been made public , the director of national intelligence stated that they include defensive , offensive , research and development , and counterintelligence efforts , as well as a project to improve public / private partnerships . ● the information systems security line of business: the goal of this initiative , led by omb , is to improve the level of information systems security across government agencies and reduce costs by sharing common processes and functions for managing information systems security . several agencies have been designated as service providers for it security awareness training and fisma reporting . ● federal desktop core configuration: for this initiative , omb directed agencies that have windows xp deployed and plan to upgrade to windows vista operating systems to adopt the security configurations developed by the national institute of standards and technology , department of defense , and department of homeland security . the goal of this initiative is to improve information security and reduce overall it operating costs . ● smartbuy: this program , led by the general services administration , is to support enterprise - level software management through the aggregate buying of commercial software governmentwide in an effort to achieve cost savings through volume discounts . the smartbuy initiative was expanded to include commercial off - the - shelf encryption software and to permit all federal agencies to participate in the program . the initiative is to also include licenses for information assurance . ● trusted internet connections initiative: this is an effort designed to optimize individual agency network services into a common solution for the federal government . the initiative is to facilitate the reduction of external connections , including internet points of presence , to a target of 50 . we currently have ongoing work that addresses the status , planning , and implementation efforts of several of these initiatives . in summary , the threats to federal information systems are evolving and growing , and federal systems are not sufficiently protected to consistently thwart the threats . ● attackers can more easily remain anonymous . table 2 identifies the types and techniques of cyber attacks that are commonly used . government officials are increasingly concerned about the potential for a cyber attack . according to the director of national intelligence , the growing connectivity between information systems , the internet , and other infrastructures creates opportunities for attackers to disrupt telecommunications , electrical power , and other critical infrastructures . as government , private sector , and personal activities continue to move to networked operations , as digital systems add ever more capabilities , as wireless systems become more ubiquitous , and as the design , manufacture , and service of it have moved overseas , the threat will continue to grow . over the past year , cyber exploitation activity has grown more sophisticated , more targeted , and more serious .