location . an activity that does not have to be performed locally is considered a stronger candidate for a feasibility study . fragmentation . an activity that is the minor responsibility of a large number of positions , while difficult to compete , may benefit from restructuring and is considered a stronger candidate for a feasibility study . centrality of performance . an activity that is typically performed at a central location is considered a stronger candidate for a feasibility study . potential for process improvement . an activity with a greater potential for improvement through modernization , reorganization , or some other means is considered a stronger candidate for a feasibility study . impact on incident support . an activity that supports emergency situations , such as firefighting , is considered a weaker candidate for a feasibility study . however , after reviewing the forest service's proposed green plan , usda directed the forest service to revise its plan to include all 24,512 commercial ftes eligible for competition in either a feasibility study or an a - 76 competition . in response , the forest service issued a revised green plan in december 2005 , which omb subsequently approved . the revised plan included a single “catch - all” feasibility study — labeled “all other commercial b activities” — which had 15,000 ftes associated with it , nearly all of the commercial ftes not already identified in the draft green plan . according to a forest service official , the additional feasibility study was added to comply with the usda directive to include all commercial ftes in the green plan , not because it included activities that might benefit from an a - 76 competition . ocfo officials explained to us that usda agencies have an option to perform feasibility studies to identify good candidates for more targeted feasibility studies , and that this was the purpose of the 15,000 fte feasibility study . as of september 30 , 2007 , the forest service had not started this study . as table 2 shows , the forest service had completed only five of the nine feasibility studies scheduled to be completed by september 30 , 2007 . the completed studies account for only 2,580 ftes of the approximately 19,000 ftes that were scheduled to be studied by this date . in our previous work , we found that effective strategic plans take into account the resources required to implement the plan , such as human capital , technology , and information . while forest service officials could not provide us with any documents showing resources involved in conducting feasibility studies , the effort does not appear to be insignificant . according to ocfo guidance , 13 separate steps are involved in conducting feasibility studies , with many of the procedures involving several additional subtasks . table 3 shows ocfo's guidance for conducting feasibility studies . according to a senior forest service official , while the agency considered personnel requirements when selecting the original 13 activities for feasibility studies , it did not do so when it expanded the green plan to include all commercial ftes . according to this official , there would be no practical way to conduct the 15,000-fte study because it would include so many dissimilar activities .