caivrs . fha requires that lenders check all applicants against caivrs , hud's database of delinquent federal debtors , to identify federal debts . while it contains delinquent debt information from six agencies , such as the department of education and the small business administration , caivrs does not contain federal tax information from irs because statutory restrictions generally prohibit irs from disclosing taxpayer information without the taxpayer's consent . two of the three lenders we spoke with mistakenly believed caivrs could be used to identify federal tax debt . credit reports . lenders told us that credit reports , which contain public records such as federal tax liens , were a primary method of identifying liens to indicate certain tax debts . however , delinquent federal taxes do not always appear on credit reports because irs does not file liens on all tax debtors with property . in addition , many fha borrowers are first - time home buyers and may not have real property on which irs can place a lien . irs records indicated that only two of our eight selected borrowers had tax liens filed against them at the time they obtained fha mortgage insurance . lenders using only these fha - required methods for identifying tax debt are missing an opportunity to more accurately determine whether applicants are eligible for fha - insured mortgages , in part , because they do not have access to certain information . access to the federal tax information needed to obtain the tax payment status of applicants is restricted under section 6103 of the internal revenue code , which prohibits disclosure of taxpayer data to lenders in most instances . however , lenders may request information on federal tax debts directly from irs if the applicant provides consent . to verify the income of self - employed and commission - income applicants , fha requires that lenders obtain an applicant - signed consent form allowing the lender to verify the applicant's income directly with irs . the three lenders we spoke with indicated they use irs form 4506-t request for transcript of tax return to satisfy this requirement . fha could also compel lenders to use this form or otherwise obtain borrower consent to identify tax debts . files for four of our eight selected borrowers had a copy of the irs form 4506-t in their fha mortgage files . the lenders for these borrowers used the 4506-t only to validate income by requesting federal tax return transcripts and did not use the form to request account transcripts that would have disclosed tax debt information . none of the eight mortgage files contained irs tax account transcripts . officials from each of the lenders we interviewed said it is their policy to use the 4506-t only to validate the income of these applicants , as this is the requirement under fha policies . officials from in two of the lenders used the form to verify income for all borrowers.contrast , officials from the third lender stated that they executed this form for a random sample of additional applicants for income verification , but noted that doing so for every applicant would be too burdensome .