ii. ) purdue trained its sales force on the specifics of the revised label and provided sales representatives with updated information on the appropriate use of opioid analgesics , legal guidelines associated with promotion of its products , and their responsibility and role in reporting adverse events . purdue also reiterated to its sales representatives that failure to promote products according to the approved label , promotional materials , and applicable fda standards would result in disciplinary action by the company . according to purdue , from april 2001 through may 2003 at least 10 purdue employees were disciplined for using unapproved materials in promoting oxycontin . disciplinary actions included warning letters , suspension without pay , and termination . how has purdue marketed and promoted oxycontin ? what factors contributed to the abuse and diversion of oxycontin ? what actions have been taken to address oxycontin abuse and diversion ? to identify how purdue marketed and promoted oxycontin , we interviewed purdue officials and analyzed company documents and data . we also interviewed selected purdue sales representatives who were high and midrange sales performers during 2001 and physicians who were among the highest prescribers of oxycontin . to determine how purdue's marketing and promotion of oxycontin compared to that of other drugs , we examined the promotional materials and information related to fda actions and interviewed officials from companies that manufacture and market three other opioid drugs , avinza , kadian , and oramorph sr , that like oxycontin are classified as schedule ii controlled substances . because of their concern about the proprietary nature of the information , the three companies that market these drugs did not provide us with the same level of detail about the marketing and promotion of their drugs as did purdue . we also examined data from dea on promotional expenditures for oxycontin and two other schedule ii controlled substances . to examine what factors may have contributed to the abuse and diversion of oxycontin , we interviewed officials from dea , fda , and purdue and physicians who prescribe oxycontin . we also analyzed ims health data on sales of oxycontin nationwide and purdue's distribution of sales representatives , as part of an effort to compare the areas with large sales growth and more sales representatives per capita with the areas where abuse and diversion problems were identified . however , limitations on the abuse and diversion data prevented an assessment of the relationship between the availability of oxycontin and areas where the drug was abused or diverted . to determine what actions have been taken to address oxycontin abuse and diversion , we interviewed fda officials and examined fda information regarding the drug's approval and marketing and promotion . we also interviewed dea officials and examined how dea determined the prevalence of oxycontin abuse and diversion nationally . in addition , we examined state efforts to identify those involved in the abuse and diversion of oxycontin . we also reviewed actions taken by purdue to address this problem . ( see app . i for a detailed discussion of our methodology. ) we performed our work from august 2002 through october 2003 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .