deterring corruption . u.s. and international officials reported increased concerns about pervasive corruption in iraq . transparency international ranked iraq 137th of 159 countries in 2005 in terms of corruption . to combat corruption , u.s. and international officials reported that the iraqi government established the commission on public integrity , which is charged with the criminal investigation of corruption cases , and the independent inspectors general within individual iraqi ministries , and revived the existing board of supreme audit ( bsa ) . the u.s. government , including gao , is working directly with these institutions . the oil and electricity sectors remain particularly vulnerable to corruption . corruption in the oil sector presents a special problem , particularly because of the sector's importance to the economy . according to state officials and reporting , about 10 percent of refined fuels are diverted to the black market , and about 30 percent of imported fuels are smuggled out of iraq and sold for a profit . according to u.s. embassy documents , the insurgency has been partly funded by corrupt activities within iraq and from skimming profits from black marketers . moreover , according to one analysis , corruption diverted much of iraq's oil revenue from reconstruction to government officials and their accomplices in organized crime . corruption in the electricity sector is also a problem . according to state's iraq reconstruction management office ( irmo ) officials , the ministry of electricity contracts with tribal chiefs , paying them about $60 to $100 per kilometer , to protect transmission lines running through their areas . however , irmo officials reported that the protection system is flawed and encourages corruption . according to u.s. and un development program officials , some of these tribes are also selling materials from downed lines and extracting tariffs for access to repair the lines . the lack of metering facilitates opportunities for corruption in the oil and electricity sectors . despite a 2004 audit recommendation made by the international advisory and monitoring board for the development fund for iraq , and initial steps to install meters in accordance with standard oil industry practices , the iraqi government still lacks an effective system of metering to measure production and export levels . improving infrastructure security . the insurgency has destroyed key infrastructure , severely undermining progress . u.s. officials reported that major oil pipelines continue to be sabotaged , shutting down oil exports and resulting in lost revenues . major electrical transmission lines have been repeatedly sabotaged , cutting power to other parts of the country . current u.s. assistance is focused on strengthening the strategic infrastructure battalions , which are ministry of defense forces that protect oil fields and pipelines . security conditions in iraq have , in part , led to project delays and increased costs for security services . for questions regarding this testimony , please call joseph christoff at ( 202 ) 512-8979 . other key contributors to this statement were stephen lord , judith mccloskey , tetsuo miyabara , lynn cothern , tracey cross , b. patrick hickey , rhonda horried , kathleen monahan , amy sheller , and nanette barton .