freedom of movement . according to usaid , state , and dod officials , task force employees have greater freedom of movement than usaid employees because the task force employees operate outside of chief of mission authority and therefore are not required to follow the security protocols of the u.s. embassy in kabul's regional security officer . in addition , the task force maintains its own security detail and is a dod entity . as a result , task force employees have an increased ability to directly implement and oversee its projects , greater access to military assets , and flexibility to host potential investors . usaid employees operate under chief of mission authority and are subject to more restrictions on their movements . as gao has previously reported , movement restrictions affect the ability of usaid employees to directly implement and oversee usaid's projects . usaid headquarters officials noted that usaid uses implementing partners to carry out some of its projects and that they operate outside chief of mission authority . senior state headquarters and usaid and state embassy officials said that lessening restrictions on usaid movement would require an exemption from the regional security officer's policy by the ambassador and state's under secretary for management and would be challenging in the current security environment in afghanistan . furthermore , given the location and security requirements related to some of the task force's work , such as mining , a memorandum of understanding between usaid and dod might be necessary to provide usaid employees greater access to military security and transportation assets if task force activities are transitioned to usaid . usaid funding and staffing . usaid's fiscal year 2011 budget and fiscal year 2012 budget request did not take into account any needs to support task force activities . however , usaid headquarters officials noted that if a transition were to occur they have flexibility to reprogram funds to accommodate the task force projects selected for transition . to continue task force activities , senior - level embassy and usaid officials in afghanistan also identified potential staffing challenges . for example , the task force consists of individuals with private sector expertise and business contacts who have agreed to live and work under the task force's current security arrangement in afghanistan ( eg , outside chief of mission authority ) and are comfortable with the way the task force operates . according to usaid officials , many of its employees also have private sector experience and business contacts , but they live and work under a different security arrangement ( eg , under chief of mission authority ) . embassy personnel stated that because of differences in the way the two agencies approach their activities , it may prove challenging for usaid to attract employees with the same expertise to broker investment deals as currently exists within the task force . facilitating private investment in afghanistan . while both usaid and the task force facilitate private investment , the nature and focus of their interactions with investors differ . for example , the task force identifies and provides direct logistical and consultative support to u.s. and non - u.s. potential investors .