large partnerships can have very complex structures . since partnerships may be partners in other partnerships , their structures may include tiers or levels of partnerships . some have dozens of tiers with hundreds of thousands of direct and indirect partners ( partners in a lower - tier partnership are indirect partners in higher tiers ) . businesses may have legitimate reasons to set up such tiered networks , such as isolating one part of a business from liabilities or losses of another part . however , partnership networks can also be used to evade taxes . irs faces the daunting task of verifying that income is properly reported for tax purposes as it passes through the tiers and is ultimately distributed to the direct or indirect partners responsible for making tax payments . my testimony today builds on a body of work on large partnerships , including an interim report we issued in march 2014 as well as a recently issued report on all partnerships . we are doing broader , ongoing work on large partnerships and plan to issue a report in fall 2014 but will discuss some preliminary findings today . the fall report will provide a more in - depth analysis of irs data on large partnerships , irs's audit challenges , and the potential steps to mitigate them . there is no statutory , irs , or industry - accepted definition of a large partnership . throughout this statement , we define a large partnership as having 100 or more direct and indirect partners and $100 million or more in assets . this definition is consistent with how irs identifies certain partnerships based on the number of partners and asset size . in contrast , the audit days and hours spent on audits of large corporation are decreasing while obtaining audit results that are noticeably better than those of large partnership audits . irs does not track its audit results for large partnerships and therefore does not know what is causing the results in tables 1 , 2 , and 3 . consequently , it is not clear whether the results are due to irs selecting large partnerships that were tax compliant versus irs not being able to find noncompliance that did exist . the high no change rates and minimal adjustment amounts for irs audits of large partnerships may be due to a number of challenges that can cause irs to spend audit time on administrative tasks , or waiting on action by a large partnership or irs stakeholder rather than doing actual audit work . under the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act of 1982 ( tefra ) , the period for auditing partnerships does not expire before 3 years after the original due date of the return or date of return filing , whichever is later . irs on average takes approximately 18 months after a large partnership return is received until the audit is started , leaving on average another 18 months to conduct an audit , as illustrated in figure 4 . once a large partnership audit has been initiated , it falls under the tefra audit procedures . congress enacted the tefra audit procedures in response to concerns about irs's ability to audit partnership returns .