i would be happy to answer any questions at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact david g. wood at ( 202 ) 512-8678 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included alison gerry , john mcgrail , lisa moore , paul schmidt , and mijo vodopic . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . the first such report that hud submitted to congress was for fiscal year 2002 . based on data reported in hud's 2006 annual report , hope vi grantees have cumulatively leveraged , from the program's inception through the second quarter of fiscal year 2006 , $1.28 for every hope vi grant dollar expended . in our may 2003 report , which examined several issues concerning hud's management of the program , we found that the department's oversight had been inconsistent for several reasons , including limited numbers of grant managers and field office staff , and confusion about the role of field offices ; however , in response to our recommendations , hud has taken steps designed to address these problems . we found a number of instances of limited oversight ; for example , by the end of 2002 , hud field offices had not conducted any of the required annual reviews for 8 out of 20 grants awarded 6 years earlier . according to field office managers , the reviews had not been performed either because they lacked staff or because the offices did not understand their role in hope vi oversight . we also found that the status of work at hope vi sites varied , with construction completed at less than 10 percent of the 165 sites that had received revitalization grants through fiscal year 2001 ; that many grantees had missed deadlines specified in their grant agreements ; and that hud lacked clear enforcement policies to deal with such grantees . we made several recommendations designed to improve hud's management of the program . hud concurred with these recommendations and has taken actions in response , including publishing guidance on the oversight responsibility of field offices and notifying grantees that they would be in default of their grant agreement should key deadlines not be met . because we have not examined hud's oversight of the program since the 2003 report , we do not know the extent to which hud's actions have corrected the problems we identified . in our november 2003 report , which focused on resident issues and changes in the neighborhoods surrounding hope vi sites , we found that public housing residents at hope vi sites had been affected in varying ways by the program , and that the neighborhoods surrounding the hope vi sites we examined had generally experienced improvements in indicators such as education , income , and housing , although we could not determine the extent to which hope vi contributed to the changes .