states . we disagree . as discussed in this report , a core element of the csi program , specifically the extent to which u.s. - bound containers carrying high - risk cargo are examined at csi seaports , is not addressed through cbp's performance measures . alike . in the federal government , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , in the federal government , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , part of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is charged with part of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is charged with managing , securing , and controlling the nation's border and in its capacity as the frontline border security agency , plays a lead role in facing maritime threats . cbp launched the container security initiative ( csi ) in january 2002 , which through partnerships with its foreign counterparts , is designed to help protect global trade lanes by targeting and examining container cargo that poses a threat as early as possible in the global supply chain . to determine cbp's progress in achieving its csi program goals , we reviewed cbp's statistical data on container cargo and csi program activities . to learn about how cbp has strengthened its operations , we reviewed our previous assessments of the csi program , and examined cbp's efforts to implement our three prior recommendations . to assess cbp's progress , we met with cbp officials at the u.s. national targeting center - cargo ( ntcc ) in virginia and three domestic seaports in different geographical locations and representing varying volumes of container traffic . we also visited six csi seaports located overseas that were selected based on several factors , including geographic and strategic significance , volume of container traffic , and when csi operations began at the seaport . the results from our visits to seaports provided examples of cbp and host government operations but cannot be generalized beyond the seaports visited because we did not use statistical sampling techniques in selecting the seaports . to determine what progress cbp has made in strengthening its tools for monitoring and measuring the progress of the csi program , we reviewed the performance measures presented in the csi strategic plan against criteria developed by the office of management and budget and gao . we also reviewed a nonrepresentative sample of csi team evaluations . while these documents provided examples about program evaluation methods and csi program operations , and generally corroborated our seaport site visit observations , our findings cannot be generalized to the program as a whole . we conducted this performance audit from may 2006 through january 2008 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is contained in appendix i . seaports are critical gateways for the movement of commerce through the international supply chain .