in the remaining case , both justifications applied . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions regarding this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or john needham at ( 202 ) 512-5274 . other major contributors to this report are gary l. delaney , john d. heere , oscar mardis , marie p. ahearn , and gary middleton . some major users of commercial satellite bandwidth services are dissatisfied with the disa process . in particular , they view the process as being too lengthy and costly . they also believe that the process results in contracts that are often too inflexible . as a result , some users have bypassed the process , either by formally requesting a waiver or by procuring services without a waiver . for fiscal year 2002 , we determined that , at a minimum , nearly 20 percent of dod's reported spending on services occurred outside the process , and one dod official stated that the true percentage is probably much higher . there are options based on common commercial practices that are available to dod for doing so , such as requesting most favored customer status with providers or maximizing business volume discounts . table 7 discusses several of these options and their possible application to dod's current practices in more detail . while these options would position disa to achieve cost savings , they require disa to be able to project its future requirements and to be more proactive in dealing with its vendors . instead , bandwidth is usually purchased on the “spot market” on an as - needed basis — when it is most expensive compared to longer duration leases . with few exceptions , individual small requirements are not aggregated by disa to take advantage of dod's potential leverage in acquiring bandwidth in larger and less expensive quantities . according to disa , users often decline opportunities to aggregate their requirements with other users . two providers we interviewed indicated that they would be willing to develop creative solutions for consolidated requirements but would need to know in advance about future requirements to do so effectively . several dod and industry officials told us that dod could benefit if bandwidth were acquired through a program office with central funding authority for that bandwidth . in this situation , it would be necessary for users to submit their plans and forecasts of requirements to the central program office . currently , users have their own bandwidth funding and generally do not forward forecasts of requirements to disa . if all user requirements were submitted to this single program office , it would then be able to aggregate bandwidth requirements in order to leverage buying power . in addition , some of these officials indicated that such a program office could allow increased visibility and control over dod - wide bandwidth acquisitions .