other special pays were unique to each group . in the event of sustaining an injury while deployed , dod federal civilian and military personnel are eligible to receive two broad categories of government - provided disability benefits — disability compensation and disability retirement . however , the benefits applicable to each group vary by type and amount , depending on specific program provisions and individual circumstances . within these broad categories , there are three main types of disability: ( 1 ) temporary disability , ( 2 ) permanent partial disability , and ( 3 ) permanent total disability . in 2003 , we designated federal disability programs as a high - risk area because of continuing challenges with modernizing those programs . importantly , our work examining federal disability programs has found that the major disability programs are neither well aligned with the 21st century environment nor positioned to provide meaningful and timely support . both dod federal civilian and military personnel who are injured in the line of duty are eligible to receive continuation of their pay during the initial period of treatment and may be eligible to receive recurring payments for lost wages . however , the payments to dod federal civilian personnel are based on their salaries and whether the employee has any dependents , regardless of the number , which can vary significantly , whereas disability compensation payments made by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) to injured military personnel are based on the severity of the injury and their number of dependents , as shown in table 6 . dod federal civilian personnel are eligible to receive continuation of pay ( salary ) for up to 45 days , followed by a recurring payment for wage loss which is based on a percentage of salary and whether they have any dependents , up to a cap . in contrast , military personnel receive continuation of pay of their salary for generally no longer than a year , followed by a recurring va disability compensation payment for wage loss that is based on the degree of disability and their number of dependents , and temporary dod disability retirement for up to 5 years . when a partial disability is determined to be permanent , dod federal civilian and military personnel can to continue to receive recurring compensation payments , as shown in table 7 . for dod federal civilian personnel , these payments are provided for the remainder of life as long as the impairment persists , and can vary significantly depending upon the salary of the individual and the existence of dependents . military personnel are also eligible to receive recurring va disability compensation payments for the remainder of their lives , and these payments are based on the severity of the servicemember's injury and the number of dependents . in addition , both groups are eligible to receive additional compensation payments beyond the recurring payments just discussed , based on the type of impairment . dod federal civilians with permanent partial disabilities receive a schedule of payments based on the specific type of impairment ( sometimes referred to as a schedule award ) .