16 examination . dla is leveraging an ipa firm as audit readiness advisors , which supports its audit readiness efforts with cpas as well as audit and advisory professionals experienced in financial statement audit and information technology audit . gao status: we believe dod's actions have met the requirements of the recommendation . background: in its report , the panel recognized the importance of having personnel within dod's functional communities , other than financial management , with the skills to perform financial management - related tasks . according to the panel , functional communities , such as the logistics and acquisitions communities , generate and maintain financial information critical to reporting the financial results of dod operations accurately and reliably . for example , logistics personnel are responsible for entering asset information into inventory records , conducting inventories , and performing reconciliations . acquisition personnel enter obligations for contracts into the accounting system . the panel concluded that the department must ensure that these personnel receive financial management training as part of the department's fiar efforts . dod actions: according to dod human capital and resource management officials , fiar courses are available online for members of all dod functional communities , including members of the financial management community . specifically , dod officials stated that the department has developed over 50 web - based financial management courses , and these courses provide credit applicable to the department's financial management certification program requirements at the various levels . while one learning platform is restricted to members of the financial management community , the web - based courses on another platform are open to both members of the financial management community and members of other functional communities . course evaluations are required for each web - based course completed and these evaluations are reviewed monthly . according to dod officials , course evaluation averages are analyzed and tracked and used to evaluate training effectiveness . dod officials have stated that dod has consistently maintained an average course evaluation metric of 4.12 on a 5.0 scale for these courses . gao status: we believe dod's actions have met the requirements of the recommendation . background: in its report , the panel stated that implementing effective training programs will be especially important as dod transitions to increased use of erp systems . for example , the army testified that its general fund enterprise business system ( gfebs ) requires personnel to obtain proficiencies in skills that are not required in the legacy operating environment and that many of the more than 70,000 eventual users of gfebs will not reside in the army's financial management community . the army added that the majority of users operate among the acquisition , logistics , public works , and property management functions . the air force testified that its financial managers are learning about new erp systems , including what these systems are designed to do and how to work within them . the air force is experiencing a major cultural change for much of its workforce by moving from primarily a bookkeeping financial management system to erp systems that can produce auditable financial statements . officials added that the air force is working to get ahead of the erp deployments and is retooling its workforce .