however , it has not yet done so . fcc assesses this rate on various bases . make mandatory adjustments . fcc maintains and is required annually to revise a schedule of regulatory fees to reflect proportionate increases or decreases in the amount of the appropriation to be recovered as well as changes in the number of licensees or other units required to pay the fees assessed . make permitted amendments as necessary . fcc is required to amend the schedule if fcc determines that the schedule must be amended to comply with the statute's requirement that the fees be derived by determining ftes ( as outlined above ) , adjusted to take into account factors reasonably related to the benefits the fee payor receives from fcc regulation , among other things . in recent years , congress has included language in fcc's annual appropriation act setting specific percentages of the appropriation fcc is to offset with collected regulatory fees . this percentage has risen from 38 percent in 1994 , when section 9 first went into effect , to over 99 percent starting in 2004 , to 100 percent starting in 2009 . in fiscal year 2011 , fcc's appropriation , and hence the total in regulatory fees it was to use as offsets , was about $336 million . according to fcc officials , this appropriation funded about 1,556 ftes in fcc's 11 offices and 7 bureaus . the 7 bureaus include the ( 1 ) consumer and governmental affairs , ( 2 ) enforcement , ( 3 ) international , ( 4 ) media , ( 5 ) public safety and homeland security , ( 6 ) wireless telecommunications , and ( 7 ) wireline competition bureaus . the five industry sectors in which fcc has typically grouped regulatory fee payors include: ( 1 ) wireline services , ( 2 ) wireless services , ( 3 ) cable services , ( 4 ) broadcast services , and ( 5 ) international services . at times , fcc has combined cable and broadcast into an industry sector it calls media — aligning the four industry sectors with four fcc bureaus — wireline with the wireline competition bureau , wireless with the wireless telecommunications bureau , media with the media bureau , and international with the international bureau . as shown in table 1 , within most of these industry sectors are a number of fee categories . each year , fcc sets a rate for each fee category that is used to calculate how much each company within that category owes in regulatory fees . for example , the rate for wireline telephone companies is set per revenue dollar ( for those revenues subject to fees ) ; the rate for wireless telephone companies and cable television operators is based on the number of subscribers ; the rate for geostationary orbit space stations , including operators of direct - broadcast satellite television , is based on the number of satellites ; and broadcast television and radio licensees pay a flat fee that is set based on market reach characteristics , such as the size of the market area or population served .