( app . vi outlines the practices funded in fiscal year 2005 , including other practices to control pollution from animal feeding operations. ) more generally , other stakeholders said that , as the program develops , nrcs should give additional weight to factors related to the presence of environmental concerns in a state and place less emphasis on factors related to natural resources in a state . they believed this reassignment of weights would better ensure that states contending with the most significant environmental problems receive the most funding . currently , factors related to the presence of environmental concerns account for approximately half of the total funding , while factors relating to the availability of natural resources account for the remainder . factors related to the availability of natural resources provide states that have significant amounts of a particular type of land — such as grazing land or cropland — with more funds , regardless of whether that land is impaired . although nrcs has stated that it meets annually to review its allocation of funds to states , officials told us they had not conducted any statistical analysis to examine the influence of factors on funding outcomes . statistical analyses can provide information on how the factors in the allocation formula have affected the distribution of funds , thereby providing information to improve program implementation . to better understand the effect of the factors on the allocations to states , we used two types of statistical analysis to assess the effects of the eqip financial assistance formula on state funding: ( 1 ) regression analysis to show which factors are the most influential in determining funding levels and ( 2 ) factor analysis to understand how factors can be grouped and identified with program priorities . our regression analysis for the fiscal year 2006 funding allocation shows that the factors that were the most important in explaining the distribution of general financial assistance to states were acres of fair and poor rangeland , acres of nonfederal grazing lands , livestock animal units , acres of irrigated cropland , acres of american indian tribal lands , and wind erosion above t. this analysis suggests that regions of the country with these types of characteristics are more likely to benefit from the current formula . on the other hand , a few factors , such as acres of forestlands , potential for pesticide and nitrogen leaching , and air quality nonattainment areas were not significantly related to the allocation , indicating that they had little or no impact on the formula . our factor analysis , which groups the data into a smaller number of categories that actually drive the formula , found that the largest grouping with the greatest amount of correlation , included acres of nonfederal grazing land , acres of fair and poor rangeland , livestock animal units , and wind erosion above t — all indicative of dryland agriculture and livestock feeding and ranching . these results correspond with those of our regression analysis and help to show how the current national allocation formula prioritizes money to states . a complete explanation of both analyses is included in appendix iii . before running the regression analysis , we performed the principal components analysis .