ssa agreed with this recommendation . our review also found that ssa has not developed or communicated clear , consistent criteria for deciding which potential conditions will be included on the cal list . officials told us that they have informally considered criteria such as allowance rates — the percentage of claimants asserting a certain condition who are approved for benefits — when identifying potential cal conditions . however , we reviewed 31 assessments of potential cal conditions prepared by ssa medical consultants and found that they did not cite consistent criteria . there was no standard format used for these reports , and ssa does not have a template , checklist , or guidance — other than the medical listings — that its staff consult when preparing them . further , ssa officials have cited different reasons for not designating conditions as cal in communications with those who proposed conditions , which led to confusion regarding cal condition criteria for staff from some advocacy organizations we interviewed . federal internal control standards state that agencies should define objectives in specific and measurable terms so that they are understood at all levels of the agency and performance toward achieving these objectives can be assessed . to help achieve these objectives , the standards state that agencies should also communicate key information to their internal and external stakeholders . we concluded that absent clear criteria for designating cal conditions , advocates and other stakeholders may be confused as to why some conditions are not included on the cal list and ssa may miss conditions that could qualify for cal . in our august 2017 report , we recommended that ssa develop and communicate internally and externally criteria for selecting conditions for the cal list . ssa agreed with this recommendation . to identify disability claims for expedited cal processing , ssa primarily relies on software that searches for key words in claims . however , because text provided by claimants may be ambiguous , incomplete , inaccurate , or misspelled , the software is hindered in its ability to flag all claimants with cal conditions and may also flag claimants for cal processing that should not be flagged . for example , officials we interviewed at 5 of the 6 selected dds offices said that they have seen claims inaccurately flagged for cal when the claim text included words like “family history of ” though the cal condition was not asserted by the claimant . in addition , in our claim file review , we found a claimant asserting a leiomyosarcoma , a soft tissue cancerous tumor that may be found in organs including the liver , lungs , and uterus , who misspelled the term as “leiomysarcoma” on the disability claim , which resulted in the software not flagging the claim as cal , although liver and lung cancers are cal conditions . more details on our scope and methodology can be found in the issued report . in brief , although cal appears to be effectively expediting benefit processing for disability claims receiving this designation , we found several weaknesses in ssa's procedures for identifying conditions for the cal list and claims for cal processing .