our concern about this risk is not new . in several previous reports on the coast guard's planning for the deepwater project , we expressed concern about the coast guard overestimating the amount of funding that would be available in the future for the project . the coast guard agrees that funding for the deepwater project is high risk and that it provides limited funding flexibility but believes it should keep its current approach of developing the project around the planned funding stream . coast guard managers believe that a deepwater system funded at planned levels provides the optimum system to meet deepwater requirements . the agency also believes that omb budget targets could rise in the future and that the congress could appropriate more funds to meet the agency's capital needs . however , the potential risks are substantial and another strategy appears warranted . that strategy would be to develop a lower funding scenario around which the contractors can develop their proposals . if the project needs to be adjusted to a lower , more realistic funding stream , the time to do so is before the contract proposals are finished later this year . directing contractors to develop proposals around a lower funding scenario aligned with omb targets would have several advantages . first , the coast guard would have greater opportunity to evaluate which proposal will produce the best value to the government within likely budget constraints . second , the agency would be in a better position to hold the contractor accountable for delivering a system that meets original schedule and cost estimates if it selects the plan developed at the lower funding level . using realistic funding expectations will reduce the risk of schedule stretch - outs and cost increases with the contractor in a sole - source environment after the contract is awarded — a situation in which the government's leverage is reduced because it does not have the benefit of competition for obtaining a fair and reasonable price . any projection about likely funding levels for a project that lasts as long as the deepwater project will involve an element of uncertainty and risk . the coast guard's current funding scenario exacerbates that risk . because the coast guard has not yet issued its request for contractors to submit their best and final proposals , there is still time to mitigate the risk by identifying a lower funding stream that contractors should use in developing their proposals . the deepwater contracting approach that the coast guard adopted has never been tried on a contract this large extending over 20 or more years . at the time it was adopted , there was little evidence that the coast guard had analyzed whether the approach carried any inherent difficulties for ensuring best value to the government and , if so , what to do about them.we and others who are involved in reviewing this approach , such as omb and the office of federal procurement policy , have expressed concerns about the potential lack of competition during the project's later years and the reliance on a single contractor for procuring so much of the deepwater equipment .