we disagree . while our report points out that under the working capital fund concept fuel prices should cover gains and loses , it also acknowledges that there have been numerous transfers . our point is that to ensure fund accountability when such transfers occur , dod's fuel pricing practices should include providing congress a full disclosure of the rationale for the transfer and its impact on the price . otherwise , the ability of the working fund to effectively control and account for costs of goods and services is compromised . dod's comments are printed in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we performed our review in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we are sending copies of this report to the senate committee on governmental affairs ; house committee on government reform ; senate and house committees on the budget ; and other interested congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , defense logistics agency . copies will also be made available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no cost on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have questions concerning this report , please contact us on ( 202 ) 512-8412 . staff acknowledgements are listed in appendix iii . in assessing the accuracy of dod's stabilized annual fuel prices from fiscal years 1993-2003 , we reviewed each of the four components — crude oil cost estimates , cost to refine , adjustments , and surcharges — and identified the major offices , dod organizations , and other components involved in pricing . for the crude oil cost estimate component , we reviewed the office of management and budget's methodology for estimating crude oil prices . we discussed the office of management and budget's methodology with the analyst that prepares the forecasted crude oil prices . we also reviewed the office of management and budget's use of west texas intermediate crude oil futures prices and the historical relationships between those prices and domestic , imported , and composite crude oil prices in making crude oil price forecasts . we concluded that this approach was reasonable . for the cost to refine component , we reviewed the defense energy support center's methodology for calculating refined costs . in assessing the defense energy support center's methodology , we relied on our previous analysis of its regression equation and a suggested change that was adopted . this same methodology was being used as of may 2002 and remains reasonable . for the third component of fuel pricing — adjustments — we discussed and examined office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) documents related to stabilized annual fuel prices and applicable program budget decisions to determine what costs were included in the component . to determine criteria , we reviewed the applicable portions of dod's financial management regulation and the legislative history pertaining to the creation of revolving funds since 1949 .