we do not agree . in particular , our review of ssa provided documentation showed that it did not adequately describe the steps to be followed relative to development , maintenance , or validation . second , the agency stated that having the head of the agency approve the current version of the architecture is satisfied in ssa's case because the clinger - cohen act of 1996 vests its cio with enterprise architecture approval authority and the cio has approved the architecture . we do not agree . the core element in our framework concerning enterprise architecture approval by the agency head is derived from federal guidance and best practices upon which our framework is based . this guidance and related practices , and thus our framework , recognize that an enterprise architecture is a corporate asset that is to be owned and implemented by senior management across the enterprise , and that a key characteristic of a mature architecture program is having the architecture approved by the department or agency head . because the clinger - cohen act does not address approval of an enterprise architecture , our framework's core element for agency head approval of an enterprise architecture is not inconsistent with , and is not superseded by , that act . ssa's written comments , along with more detailed responses , are reproduced in appendix xix . the criteria for the stage 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 core elements are contained in tables 12 , 13 , 14 , and 15 respectively . to fully satisfy a core element , sufficient documentation had to be provided to permit us to verify that all aspects of the core element were met . to partially satisfy a core element , sufficient documentation had to be provided to permit us to verify that at least some aspects of the core element were met . core elements that were neither fully nor partially satisfied were judged to be not satisfied . our evaluation included first analyzing the extent to which each department and agency satisfied the core elements in our framework , and then meeting with department and agency representatives to discuss core elements that were not fully satisfied and why . as part of this interaction , we sought , and in some cases were provided , additional supporting documentation . we then considered this documentation in arriving at our final determinations about the degree to which each department and agency satisfied each core element in our framework . in applying our evaluation criteria , we analyzed the results of our analysis across different core elements to determine patterns and issues . our analysis made use of computer programs that were developed by an experienced staff ; these programs were independently verified . through our data collection instrument , we also solicited from each department and agency information on enterprise architecture challenges and benefits , including the extent to which they had been or were expected to be experienced . in addition , we solicited information on architecture costs , including costs to date and estimated costs to complete and maintain each architecture . we also solicited other information , such as use of and satisfaction with architecture tools and frameworks .