pub . 112-56 , title ii , 125 stat . after the vow act became law , the unemployment rate for post - 9 / 11 veterans improved — decreasing from 13.1 percent in december 2011 to 7.3 percent in december 2013 — but remained above the overall unemployment rate for non - veterans ( 6.4 percent ) , according to the bureau of labor statistics . according to the bureau of labor statistics , veterans between the ages of 18 to 24 maintain the highest rate of unemployment . in 2012 , the unemployment rate for male post - 9 / 11 veterans age 18 to 24 was 20.0 percent , higher than the rate for nonveterans of the same age group ( 16.4 percent ) . initiative task force ( vei task force ) with the help of other federal partners . the vow act also mandated that gao review tap . report addresses: 1. the status of efforts to implement changes to key components of tap , 2. the extent to which the agencies administering tap have addressed elements important for the effective implementation and evaluation of tap , and 3. remaining challenges , if any , that the agencies administering tap may need to resolve . pub . 112-56 , § 226 , 125 stat . on september 20 and 24 and november 12 and 20 , 2013 , we briefed the house and senate committees on armed services and the house and senate committees on veterans' affairs on our preliminary observations . this report formally conveys the information provided during those briefings . interviews with officials from the agencies and services to determine if these components were implemented at all tap locations . we found the data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of reporting on the status of implementation . to assess efforts to implement and evaluate the revamped tap , we identified five elements important for the effective implementation and evaluation of tap . the elements are: ( 1 ) systems to track attendance ; ( 2 ) processes for ensuring quality of instruction , content , and facilities ; ( 3 ) mechanisms to assess career readiness ; ( 4 ) mechanisms to ensure participation and completion ; and ( 5 ) measures of performance and processes to systematically evaluate the effectiveness or benefits of tap . we identified the elements based on a review of relevant federal laws , including the vow act , and vei task force recommendations for changing tap , as well as a gao assessment guide that identifies elements of effective training and development programs . we also provided the elements to dod and va officials — as co - leaders of the vei task force — for review and comment , and they were generally in agreement . additional information about these elements and relevant attributes is provided in appendix i . to determine the extent to which agencies have addressed the five elements , we reviewed program documentation from the agencies and discussed the policies and mechanisms with knowledgeable officials . we compared the elements with this documentation and results of our discussions with officials at these agencies .