credit counseling . to be a “debtor” ( that is , eligible to file for bankruptcy ) , an individual , except in limited circumstances , must receive from an approved provider , within 180 days preceding the date of filing a bankruptcy petition , ( 1 ) a briefing outlining the opportunities available for credit counseling and ( 2 ) assistance with performing a budget analysis . individuals may satisfy the counseling requirement post - petition if the individual certifies the existence of exigent circumstances that merit a waiver . § 501 ( q ) ) . for example , an organization is prohibited from making loans ( other than interest - free loans ) to debtors . the additional requirements will not apply to 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) and 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations existing before the enactment of the pension protection act until after august 17 , 2007 . an irs official noted that the revocations of credit counseling agencies' tax - exempt status were not related to changes made by the pension protection act . have an independent board of directors with the majority of members not directly or indirectly benefiting financially from the outcome of the counseling services ; charge a reasonable fee for counseling services ; provide full disclosure to a client on certain prescribed items ; provide for the safekeeping and payment of client funds , including auditing the trust accounts annually and bonding employees ; provide trained counselors with adequate experience ; and have adequate financial resources to provide continuing support services for budgeting plans over the life of any repayment plan . the act required the trustee program to undertake a thorough review of the qualifications of a credit counseling agency before approving it to provide prefiling counseling services . providers are initially approved for a probationary period not to exceed 6 months ; at the conclusion of this period , they must reapply and the trustee program can approve them for an additional 1-year period . in july 2006 , the trustee program adopted an interim final rule that set forth application procedures designed to ensure that only organizations that met the minimum qualification standards set forth in the bankruptcy act would be approved to provide services . the rule established criteria by which the trustee program will evaluate whether applicants have satisfied the statutory standards . for example , the rule specified factors that indicate whether an applicant will be providing counselors with adequate training and experience . the rule also established procedures permitting the trustee program to remove agencies from the approved list , including an administrative review process before removal . as with credit counseling providers , the bankruptcy act also established minimum qualification standards for debtor education providers . for example , the act stated that these entities must provide personnel with adequate experience and training and use appropriate learning materials and teaching methodologies . the act also required that the provider have adequate facilities in reasonably convenient locations or , alternatively , provide instruction by telephone or through the internet . debtor education providers also must keep records to permit evaluation of a course's effectiveness . the act does not require debtor education providers to be nonprofit entities .