mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . epa used an iterative process to develop its october 2000 plan . starting with its internal pra database as a baseline , office of environmental information personnel created a template of information collections that was sent to each program office for validation and for completion of additional gpea - related data . the agency's final plan contains a detailed inventory of its pra information collections . an epa official said that this inventory and its related attachments include all of the information regarding plans for electronic interagency reporting , information dissemination activities , and high - risk transactions , as required by omb . epa identified 279 data - collection activities applicable to gpea . epa expects the facility to be fully operational by the fall of 2002 . the third major initiative is to improve epa's information security . we have previously reported on significant weaknesses in epa's information security program . the electronic transmission of this type of data poses additional risks that epa does not plan to have fully addressed by october 2003 . the october 2000 plan states that the agency has made significant progress in improving its cyber defenses by implementing security confidentiality protocols and procedures . further , agency officials state that they are actively exploring the use of electronic signatures and public key infrastructure ( pki ) technology to ensure the security , confidentiality , and non - repudiation of sensitive data collections . through iterative reviews , it determined that 108 of these were not candidates for electronic reporting for reasons such as that they involved interaction with only a few members of the public or because filling out a paper form was deemed to not be a significant burden . according to the agency's plan , of the 171 data collections that were considered suitable for electronic reporting , 21 have already been converted , 3 are scheduled for 2001 , 13 are scheduled for 2002 , and 96 are scheduled for 2003 . the remaining 38 data collections that will not be ready for electronic reporting by the gpea deadline all involve the reporting of confidential business information . as we reported last september , federal agencies face additional information management challenges that are also fundamental to the success of gpea . specifically , agencies will need to use disciplined investment management practices to ensure that the full costs of providing electronic filing , recordkeeping , and transactions prompted by gpea are identified and examined within the context of expected benefits ; and ensure that it human capital needs are addressed so that staff can effectively operate and maintain new e - government systems , adequately oversee related contractor support , and deliver responsive service to the public . omb will also be challenged in its oversight role of ensuring that agencies comply with gpea . as i mentioned , omb's initial guidance issued in may 2000 prescribed policies and procedures for agencies to follow in implementing the act . for example , the guidance states that agencies should prioritize gpea implementation based on achievability and net benefit .