savings . we also found that nnsa excluded most of the budget estimates for a modernized plutonium capability , either for construction of a chemistry and metallurgy research replacement - nuclear facility or an alternative to this facility . doe officials told us that their plans were not yet developed enough to be included in the fiscal year 2014 budget justification materials or the fiscal year 2014 stockpile stewardship and management plan . moreover , the estimates were not included in the july 2013 joint report because doe officials told us that the department adopted guidance requiring that the estimates in the joint report be consistent with estimates in the budget justification and stockpile stewardship and management plan . key principles that we derived from federal budgeting and cost - estimating guidance indicate that long - term funding plans should include all relevant budget estimates of a program in order to assist decision makers on how to allocate resources . as we concluded in december 2013 , in cases where complete budget information is not yet known , funding plans could include a range of potential budget estimates , based on preliminary cost information . we further recommended in our december 2013 report that , to improve future budget estimates , nnsa should include a range of potential budget estimates for projects and programs that the agency knows are needed , even when available budget information is preliminary ; doe generally concurred with this recommendation . by not including preliminary estimates or ranges for these projects and programs , doe underestimated the total anticipated cost and limited the utility of the joint report . dod's estimates through fiscal year 2018 in the joint report for sustaining the minuteman iii icbm , heavy bombers , ohio - class submarine , and related delivery systems are generally consistent with dod's funding plans and budget - justification documents for most appropriations accounts , but the 10-year , $125.5 billion estimate does not include potential budget estimates for air force efforts to modernize icbms and bombers . dod's sustainment and modernization plans are described in the joint report , in dod's fiscal year 2014 budget - justification documents , and other planning documents . these plans are summarized in table 1 . navy — in military personnel and operation and maintenance ; $20.5 billion — $14 billion for the air force , and $6.5 billion for the — in research , development , test , and evaluation ; and $9.4 billion — $1.9 billion for the air force , and $7.5 billion for the navy — in procurement and ship construction . this estimate does not include approximately $0.8 billion in nnsa funding for nuclear reactor design for the navy's ohio - replacement submarine . required for the report to congress . as previously noted , key principles for preparing long - term funding plans that we derived from federal budgeting and cost - estimating guidance indicate that all relevant estimates should be included in the plan , even if they are preliminary , to help decision makers anticipate changes to the administration's planned requirements over the long term .