the army has not been consistent about reporting these miles . we found that in some years the army included these miles in its reporting on tank miles achieved and in some years it did not . appendix i describes our scope and methodology . to have trained and ready forces , army armor units conduct training at their home bases , called home station training ; at the national training center at fort irwin , california , and the combat maneuver training center in germany , which are the army's premier locations to conduct training ; and in kuwait as part of military exercises with the armed forces of kuwait . the army has determined that its armor units need to conduct 800 miles of training annually on their tanks at their home station in order to be adequately trained to carry out their wartime mission . in addition to conducting home station training , the army periodically sends its armor units to the national training center and other training exercises . there are no tank mile goals associated with this training away from the home station . the army tracks and reports the miles its tanks are driven on a monthly basis and aggregates them annually . the army has 10 active duty divisions , as listed in appendix ii . six of these divisions are called heavy divisions because they are equipped with large numbers of tanks , called armor . two other divisions are called light divisions because they have no armor . the remaining two divisions are an airborne division and an air assault division . heavy divisions accounted for the majority of the army's division training funds , about 70 percent ( $808 million ) in fiscal year 2000 , and these divisions are the focus of this report . the army uses a building block approach to train its armor forces — beginning with individual training and building up to brigade - sized unit training , as shown in figure 1 . this training approach is documented in the army's combined arms training strategy ( cats ) . the strategy identifies the critical tasks , called mission essential tasks , that units need to be capable of performing in time of war and the type of events or exercises and the frequency with which the units train to the task to produce a combat ready force . the strategy , in turn , guides the development of unit training plans . the army uses cats as the basis for determining its training budget . to do this , it uses models to convert training events into budgetary resources , as shown in figure 2 . for armor units , the battalion level training model translates the type of training events identified in cats and the frequency with which they should be conducted into the number of tank miles to be driven in conducting those training events . the army then uses another model , the training resource model , to compute the estimated training cost for units based on the previous 3 years' cost experience . the output from these models is the basis for the army's training budget .