( see app . i and ii for the full text of these comments. ) the department of the interior said that it appreciated the spirit of the report in examining issues that can help it improve the implementation of the convention . the department agreed that the complexity of work for port inspectors and law enforcement personnel has increased along with increases in the number and types of species , parts , and products protected under the convention . the department noted , however , that convention members , with strong u.s. support , have made a concerted effort over the last decade to mitigate the effects associated with the complexity of the convention by creating a streamlined set of resolutions and decision documents as well as developing practical processes for implementation . the member countries , in considering actions to be taken , have also been mindful of the need to reduce the administrative and implementation burden on the members . the department also agreed that new issues have brought new areas of controversy for consideration by the convention membership but noted that controversy has accompanied every phase of the convention's evolution . the department was concerned , however , that the report appears to highlight the negative and understate the positive effects of the convention . all seahorses came under convention protection in may 2004 . as noted previously , the national marine fisheries service also advises the fish and wildlife service on decisions about marine species . the national marine fisheries service sets aside about $100,000 per year from its appropriations for general activities to help implement the convention . the fish and wildlife service also expends funds and technical assistance for activities that are not intended to implement the convention but nevertheless help protect convention - protected species . for example , the service spent nearly $4 million and utilized 14 full - time - equivalent staff in 2003 for international conservation efforts . workload has increased along with increases in the convention membership . according to the food and agriculture organization , about 28 percent of the world's major fish stocks are reported as overexploited , depleted , or recovering from depletion . another 47 percent are fully exploited and are producing catches that have reached , or are very close to , their maximum sustainable limits . similarly , a secretariat official said that numerous species of commercial fish are being massively depleted by commercial fisheries and , in his opinion , should be protected under the convention , including european cod , bluefin tuna , and the spiny lobster . however , he said , fisheries organizations can be quite powerful in arguing against convention attempts to restrict commercial fisheries . nevertheless , the convention has the authority to examine and place under its protection any species that is threatened by trade , if a two - thirds majority of the member countries present at a conference agrees to do so . for example , the united states has chosen a precautionary approach in implementing its own endangered species act , as indicated in the act's legislative history .