portfolio review . agencies are to annually review it investment portfolios in order to , among other things , increase efficiency and effectiveness , and identify potential waste and duplication . in developing the associated process , the law requires omb to develop standardized performance metrics , to include cost savings , and to submit quarterly reports to congress on cost savings . federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) . agencies are required to provide omb with a data center inventory , a strategy for consolidating and optimizing the data centers ( to include planned cost savings ) , and quarterly updates on progress made . the law also requires omb to develop a goal of how much is to be saved through this initiative , and provide annual reports on cost savings achieved . expansion of training and use of it cadres . agencies are to update their acquisition human capital plans to address supporting the timely and effective acquisition of it . in doing so , the law calls for agencies to consider , among other things , establishing it acquisition cadres or developing agreements with other agencies that have such cadres . maximizing the benefit of the federal strategic sourcing initiative . federal agencies are required to compare their purchases of services and supplies to what is offered under the federal strategic sourcing initiative . omb is also required to issue related regulations . government - wide software purchasing program . the general services administration is to develop a strategic sourcing initiative to enhance government - wide acquisition and management of software . in doing so , the law requires that , to the maximum extent practicable , the general services administration should allow for the purchase of a software license agreement that is available for use by all executive branch agencies as a single user . most agencies generally agreed with our recommendations . to improve the efficiency , performance , and environmental footprint of federal data center activities , omb established the federal data center consolidation initiative in february 2010 . in a series of reports , we found that , while data center consolidation could potentially save the federal government billions of dollars , weaknesses existed in the execution and oversight of the initiative . most recently , we reported that , as of may 2014 , agencies collectively reported that they had a total of 9,658 data centers ; as of may 2015 , they had closed 1,684 data centers and were planning to close an additional 2,431 — for a total of 4,115 — by the end of september 2015 . we also noted that between fiscal years 2011 and 2017 , agencies reported planning a total of about $5.3 billion in cost savings and avoidances due to the consolidation of federal data centers . in correspondence subsequent to the publication of our report , dod's office of the cio identified an additional $2.1 billion in savings to be realized beyond fiscal year 2017 , which increased the total savings across the federal government to about $7.4 billion . further , since our may 2014 report we received additional information from other agencies about their actual 2014 cost savings and revised plans for future savings .