they are as follows: 1 . ensure mechanisms are of sufficient value . the value of the rewards and penalties — whether financial or nonfinancial — and the cost of improved performance are adequate to motivate desired behaviors and provide a meaningful return to both the grantor and the grantee . periodically renegotiate and revise mechanisms and measures . provide for and use the flexibility to reevaluate performance accountability mechanisms and associated performance measures at regular , scheduled intervals and allow time to learn from each cycle to improve performance . ensure appropriate measures are selected . measures should represent performance that is within the grantee's sphere of influence , and can reasonably be achieved and evaluated within the specified time frame , and should be tested over time to minimize the potential for unintended consequences and perverse incentives . additionally , performance data should be tested and validated to make sure they are credible , reliable , and valid . absent these attributes , organizations lack the basis for sound decisions about rewards and penalties . ensure grantor and grantee technical capacity . ( 2 ) what mechanisms exist for making federal transit programs more performance based , including their potential advantages and disadvantages , and what strategies exist for supporting their successful implementation ? ensure phased implementation . allow time to design , test , and revise measurement systems before linking them to accountability mechanisms . these five key strategies can help mitigate the disadvantages we have previously discussed related to using performance accountability mechanisms , as shown in table 4 . some of these strategies address multiple disadvantages . for example , table 4 shows that ensuring appropriate measures are selected could mitigate four of the six disadvantages . in addition , we found in our literature review that to ensure financial stability , many sources advocated for providing transit agencies with a baseline funding amount that would enable grantees to know the minimum ( or a baseline amount ) that they would receive each year , and then providing additional funds that would be based on performance . although not a key strategy , this more specific option would help address the following three disadvantages: the zero - sum nature of performance - based allocations , well - funded grant recipients being rewarded at the expense of poorly funded ones , and grant recipients being charged with meeting conflicting goals . although performance mechanisms can provide advantages , and the disadvantages can be mitigated , they are still not suitable for all programs . as previously discussed , the eight federal transit programs that we reviewed are designed to accomplish different goals , and the use of performance accountability mechanisms is better suited to some than to others . for example , discretionary grant programs such as new starts , which are designed to award funds to the best potential performers , may be better suited to the use of performance accountability mechanisms , while formula programs , such as the urbanized area formula grant program and fixed - guideway modernization program , which are intended to support the financial stability of transit agencies or distributional equity , may be less well suited .