see app . i for our analysis related to special stains. ) we limited the universe for this portion of our analysis to those anatomic pathology services performed in a provider's office or in an independent clinical laboratory . we focused on these settings because the financial incentive for providers to self - refer is most direct when the service is performed in a physician office . further , we limited our analysis to self - referral of the preparation of these services , because we could determine that the services were performed in a physician's office or independent laboratory.identify trends in the number and proportion of self - referred and non - self - referred anatomic pathology services performed from 2004 through 2010 , the expenditures for these services from 2004 through 2010 , and the proportion of self - referred and non - self - referred anatomic pathology services by provider specialty for 2004 and 2010 . to determine expenditures , we used the allowed charges variable from the medicare part b carrier file , which includes the amounts paid by medicare and the beneficiary . we used the claims to to determine how the provision of anatomic pathology services may differ for providers who self - refer when compared with other providers , we performed two separate analyses . first , we compared the provision — that is , the number of referrals made — of anatomic pathology services by self - referring providers and non - self - referring providers in 2010 , disaggregated by provider size ( i.e. , the number of medicare beneficiaries seen by the provider ) , provider specialty , geography ( i.e. , urban or rural ) second , we determined the extent to which and patient characteristics . the number of anatomic pathology referrals made by providers changed after the providers began to self - refer . specifically , we identified a group of providers who began to self - refer anatomic pathology services in 2009 and calculated the change in the number of anatomic pathology referrals the providers made from 2008 ( i.e. , the year before they began self - referring ) through 2010 ( i.e. , the year after they began self - referring ) .we then compared this change to the change made by ( 1 ) providers who self - referred anatomic pathology services over this time period and ( 2 ) providers who did not self - refer services over the time period . to determine the implications of self - referral for medicare spending on anatomic pathology services , we summed the number of and expenditures for all anatomic pathology services performed in 2010 across the three provider specialties — dermatology , gastroenterology , and urology — we reviewed . we then calculated the number of and expenditures for anatomic pathology services if self - referring providers performed biopsy procedures at the same rate as and referred the same number of services per biopsy procedure as non - self - referring providers of the same provider size and specialty . we repeated this analysis incorporating an approximation of the payment reduction for anatomic pathology services that became effective in 2013 .