2466 are being met . also , inaccurate data hinder defense managers in taking timely actions to meet the statutory requirements and leave the congress uncertain as to whether legislative requirements are being met . the future - years report is not accurate or reasonable and is not currently a useful tool for guiding dod actions or informing the congress about likely future compliance with section 2466 requirements . the management of the military services placed much less emphasis on ensuring the accuracy or reasonableness of the future - years data . accurate or reasonable projections are of particular importance for the air force , which has now issued two waivers of the limitation on the private sector and is likely to exceed the 50-percent ceiling in future years . the army also faces increasing management challenges in managing its depot maintenance work within the 50-percent ceiling , but problems with the reliability of the data and the lack of an effective review of the future - years data and process by the army audit agency concealed the impact of the results . admittedly , projecting the future public - private sector mix is much more difficult and much less precise than quantifying the results of what has already occurred . depot plans and strategies are still evolving with uncertain impacts on depot workloads . similarly , repair plans for new and upgraded systems and other logistics programs and initiatives impacting the amount and location of depot maintenance services are not fully known . yet future – year projections must use the best information available to make the most reasonable estimates . such information should include the latest budget estimates with reasonable adjustments made as needed . although dod and service guidance for both the prior and future - years reports has been improved over the years , we continue to identify errors , omissions , and inconsistencies in several reporting categories . these were caused in large part by insufficient direction and clarification in the reporting guidance and inadequate management attention . these problem areas include inactivation activities , contractor logistics support , depot maintenance at non - depot locations , government - furnished material , contract general and administrative expenses , incorporation of future repair costs for new systems , and adjustments for expected execution of programmed workload . in addition , record - keeping weaknesses hinder audit and management oversight efforts and do not provide a sound historical record for facilitating future data collection and reporting efforts . with improved management oversight and direction and the implementation of the required corrective actions , the 50-50 report could become a more useful management tool for dod and the congress in managing the department's depot maintenance program to attain future compliance with the 50-50 requirement .