gao - 12-592 . washington , d.c.: may 29 , 2012 . covered under the state's medicaid plan . after the claim is approved by the state , it pays the claim . federal reimbursement for medicaid generally begins after a medicaid beneficiary receives care from a health care provider such as a hospital , physician , or nursing home . the state pays the provider from a combination of state funds and federal funds , the latter of which have been advanced by cms each quarter . the state then files a quarterly expenditure report , in which it claims the federal share of the medicaid expenditure as reimbursement for its payment to providers and reconciles its total expenditures with the federal advance . in addition to reimbursement for medical services , the state may claim federal reimbursement for functions it performs to administer its medicaid program , such as enrolling new beneficiaries ; reviewing the appropriateness of providers' claims ; and collecting payments from third parties , which are payers other than medicaid , such as medicare , that may be liable for some or all of a particular health claim . federal law does not prohibit providers with unpaid federal taxes from enrolling in or receiving payments from medicaid . federal regulations and policies require the states , as part of their responsibilities for determining whether the providers meet medicaid requirements for enrollment , to verify basic information on potential providers , including whether the providers meet state licensure requirements and whether the providers are prohibited from participating in federal health care programs . however , federal regulations and policies do not require the states to screen these providers for federal tax delinquency nor do they explicitly authorize the states to reject the providers that have delinquent tax debt from participation in medicaid . further , federal law generally does not permit irs to disclose taxpayer information , including tax debts , unless the taxpayer consents . irs may levy a taxpayer's property to satisfy a tax debt . for instance , irs could seize and sell property that a taxpayer holds ( such as the taxpayer's car , boat , or house ) , or irs could seize property that belongs to the taxpayer but is held by someone else ( such as the taxpayer's wages , retirement accounts , dividends , bank accounts , licenses , rental income , accounts receivable , or commissions ) . currently , irs may issue a onetime notice of levy to a state medicaid agency to collect the receivable balance immediately due to a given provider . irs may then issue additional successive , onetime levies if the proceeds received from the initial levy are not sufficient to satisfy the government's claim . a provision of the taxpayer relief act of 1997 authorizes irs to continuously levy ( typically using an automated process ) certain federal payments made to delinquent taxpayers in order to collect tax debt , but medicaid reimbursements have never been collected using this provision of the law . this is because irs determined that medicaid disbursements do not qualify as federal payments and thus may not be subjected to the continuous levy .