since then , the judiciary has made the changes we recommended . gsa has historically been unable to generate sufficient revenue through fbf and has thus struggled to meet the requirements for repairs and alterations identified in its inventory of owned buildings . we conducted our work for this testimony in june 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . during our work , we reviewed past gao work on federal real property and courthouse construction issues , analyzed aousc and gsa documents , and interviewed aousc and gsa officials . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or the other members of the subcommittee may have . what impact would a permanent rent exemption have on fbf ? our work is still underway , but our past work on related issues shows that rent exemptions have been a principal reason why fbf has accumulated insufficient money for capital investment . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . it may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . for further information about this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or goldsteinm@gao.gov . keith cunningham , randy de leon , maria edelstein , bess eisenstadt , joe fradella , susan michal - smith , david sausville , and gary stofko also made key contributions to this statement . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . in 1993 , we reviewed the long - term planning process used by the judiciary to estimate its space requirements . we found that aousc's process for projecting long - term space requirements did not produce results that were sufficiently reliable to form the basis for congressional authorization and funding approval of new construction and renovation projects for court space . specifically , three key problems impaired the accuracy and reliability of the judiciary's projections . first , aousc did not treat all districts consistently . for example , the procedure used to convert caseload estimates to staffing requirements did not reflect differences among districts that affect space requirements . second , according to aousc's assumptions about the relationship between caseloads and staff needs , many district baseline estimates did not reflect the districts' current space requirements . for example , when a district occupied more space than the caseload warranted , future estimates of needs were overstated . third , aousc's process did not provide reliable estimates of future space requirements because the methodology used to project caseloads did not use standard acceptable statistical methods . we recommended that aousc revise the long - term planning process to increase consistency across regions , establish accurate caseload baselines for each district , and increase the reliability of the projected caseloads by applying an accepted statistical methodology and reducing subjectivity in the process . in may 1994 , we testified that the judiciary had implemented some of these recommendations .