grant award . eda officials said that they awarded the ctaa grants in accordance with the review panel and selection process outlined in the federal funding opportunity . merit review . according to eda regional staff and training documents , eda staff and other federal employees conducted a merit review of applications that passed the technical review and scored the applications on the basis of eda's award criteria ( see table 2 ) . according to eda documentation of the final rankings that we reviewed , eda used the scores to rank the applications within one of the following categories: below average , average , good , or excellent . the investment review committee at each regional office , consisting of the office's managers , reviewed and discussed the merit review panel's process and recommendations . our review of each regional office's committee meeting records showed that each committee approved the recommendations and forwarded the ranked list of applications to the selecting official — the regional director . the regional director in each office then reviewed applications and could select applicants outside of the ranked order , taking into consideration factors such as the availability of program funding , the geographic distribution of grants , and the diversity of applicants . after the regional director selected the grant award recipients , eda notified the recipients and issued grant award documents . eda officials cited several challenges that they faced in implementing the ctaa program . first , they highlighted difficulties associated with setting up the new program . eda headquarters staff noted that setting up a new program required considerable effort because they were required to develop entirely new regulations instead of integrating ctaa funding into an existing eda program . after the tgaaa established the program in february 2009 , eda issued program implementation regulations for comment in may 2009 and finalized the program regulations in august 2009 . eda then issued its federal funding opportunity for public comment in december 2009 and issued the final federal funding opportunity announcement in january 2010 . eda officials said that they had to incorporate the program's complex trade - impact eligibility criteria into the new program regulations and the federal funding opportunity , which required that they modify standard processes and award criteria appropriately . they noted that determining significant trade impact on communities was complex and time consuming . several eda regional officials also mentioned that there was an administrative burden in having to learn the requirements and procedures of a new program . in addition , four of the six regional offices hired a combined total of six new staff members to administer the program , and eda officials said existing staff were pulled away from working on other eda programs to respond to the demands of administering ctaa . a second challenge cited by eda officials was having to obligate all program funds by the end of fiscal year 2010 . eda officials said they had a relatively short amount of time — a little over 3 months — to conduct outreach to potential applicants in the period between the federal funding opportunity announcement in january 2010 and the application deadline of april 20 , 2010 .