solar energy . multiple technologies exist for utility - scale solar power , such as photovoltaic and concentrating solar power technologies . solar photovoltaic technologies convert energy from sunlight directly into electricity , using arrays of solar panels . ( see fig . concentrating solar technologies use two types of mirrors with tracking systems , either curved ( parabolic ) or flat , to focus the sun's energy onto a small area . the concentrated light is then used to heat water or other fluids that create the steam to power a conventional turbine generator and produce electricity . examples of concentrating solar power technologies include parabolic trough and power tower . parabolic trough technology collects energy from the sun using parabolic mirrors that concentrate heat onto solar thermal equipment , often a tube filled with fluid that runs the length of the trough at its focal point ; the heated transfer fluid then powers solar steam turbine generators . we found instances where a bond's status or amount had not been updated in one or both systems . in some cases , the data were several years out of date . examples include: in one case , lr2000 showed that a bond had been accepted for $40,000 in 1994 and an additional bond for the same right - of - way had been accepted for $160,000 in 2011 , for a total bond amount of $200,000 . for example , one wind development project's right - of - way had been incorrectly entered in both systems as a road right - of - way.the annual state bond certification . when blm reviewed the bond , the agency determined that the bond amount was approximately $90,000 less than the minimum set by blm's wind policy . as a result , the bond had not been included in information had not been updated . however , blm had not updated the bond and surety system to show that the $160,000 bond had been accepted , and the system contained no information on the $40,000 bond . in another case , the bond and surety system showed a bond in the amount of approximately $150,000 . however , lr2000 showed four additional payments totaling more than $500,000 , bringing the total bond amount posted for this project to more than $650,000 . in a third case , both the bond and surety system and lr2000 showed that a bond in the amount of $110,000 had been filed with blm in 2011 , but blm had not updated the bond status in either system to reflect that blm had accepted the bond . however , the bond acceptance letter showed that the bond was accepted in 2012 . the lr2000 data standards for blm's mining program state that all data must be routinely entered within 5 business days of each action taking place . however , there is no such standard for entering wind and solar project data into lr2000 . government standards for internal control call for control activities , such as ensuring accurate and timely recording of transactions and events , to be in place to help ensure that actions are taken to address risks . furthermore , blm has not issued data standards for the bond and surety system .