and these are only the reported attacks . the director , cert® centers , stated that he estimates that as much as 80 percent of actual security incidents goes unreported , in most cases because ( 1 ) the organization was unable to recognize that its systems had been penetrated or there were no indications of penetration or attack , or ( 2 ) the organization was reluctant to report . figure 1 shows the number of incidents reported to the cert coordination center from 1995 through the first 9 months of 2002 . the risks posed by this increasing and evolving threat are demonstrated in reports of actual attacks and disruptions , as well as by continuing government warnings . for example: just last week , news reports indicated that a british computer administrator was indicted on charges that he broke into 92 u.s. computer networks in 14 states belonging to the pentagon , private companies , and the national aeronautics and space administration during the past year , causing some $900,000 in damage to computers . it also reported that , according to a justice department official , these attacks were one of the biggest hacks ever against the u.s. military . this official also said that the attacker used his home computer and automated software available on the internet to scan tens of thousands of computers on u.s. military networks looking for ones that might suffer from flaws in microsoft corporation's windows nt operating system software . the fbi's national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) reported that on october 21 , 2002 , all of the 13 root - name servers that provide the primary roadmap for almost all internet communications were targeted in a massive “distributed denial of service” attack . seven of the servers failed to respond to legitimate network traffic , and two others failed intermittently during the attack . because of safeguards , most internet users experienced no slowdowns or outages . however , according to the media reports , a longer , more extensive attack could have seriously damaged worldwide electronic communications . in september 2002 , nipc issued a warning of cyber attacks against the international monetary fund and world bank meetings to be held during the week of september 23 . the warning stated that , in addition to physical protestors , cyber groups might view the meetings as a platform to display their hacking talent or to propagate a specific message . cyber protestors , referred to as “hacktivists,” can engage in web page defacements , denial - of - service attacks , and misinformation campaigns , among other attacks . in july 2002 , nipc reported that the potential for compound cyber and physical attacks , referred to as “swarming attacks,” is an emerging threat to the u.s. critical infrastructure . as nipc reports , the effects of a swarming attack include slowing or complicating the response to a physical attack . for example , cyber attacks can be used to delay the notification of emergency services and to deny the resources needed to manage the consequences of a physical attack . in addition , a swarming attack could be used to worsen the effects of a physical attack .