this work is now complete . casualty reports: according to officials with two of the program offices , ships should not be provided to the fleet with open category 3 or 4 casualty reports , and some officials stated there should be very few in the less severe categories by the end of the post - delivery period . while the fleet submits casualty reports starting at delivery , the program office is responsible for correcting construction - related problems prior to providing a ship to the fleet . fleet officials stated that casualty reports submitted within the first 3 months of fleet operations are generally indicative of the ship's quality , since the crew will begin more fully operating the ship's systems and equipment and submitting casualty reports when they identify problems . however , officials from several program offices disagreed with this assessment and stated that some deficiencies after the ship is provided to the fleet are due to operator error and are not related to construction quality . table 5 summarizes the open casualty reports at the time these six selected ships were provided to the fleet and after their initial 3 months of operation . two of the selected ships had open category 3 casualty reports when the program offices provided the ships to the fleet , and more than half of the ships had casualty reports within the first 3 months of fleet operations . for example , on lha 6 , the program office did not repair an electronic warfare system before the end of the post - delivery period , resulting in a casualty report when the ship was provided to the fleet . in addition , four ships had equipment that failed during the post - delivery period and failed again within 3 months — requiring the fleet to pay for at least a portion of the repair . furthermore , dot&e reports confirm that these same pieces of equipment were found to be unreliable during testing , except for the equipment on lha 6 because this ship has yet to be tested . examples of equipment that broke during the post - delivery period , after the ship was provided to the fleet , and had issues during testing include anchor system and air search radar ( lcs 3 ) ; water jet , radar and propulsion systems ( lcs 4 ) ; and steering system , including steering oil migration ( lpd 25 ) . fleet officials , including engineers , maintenance officials , managers , and crew , identified additional issues beyond the ship completeness and quality metrics discussed above that significantly degraded the quality of four of the six ships we reviewed . fleet officials told us they were generally satisfied with ddg 112 and ssn 782 , as these ships were largely complete and ready to deploy when provided to the fleet , did not require significant work , and could be maintained within the fleet's budget and schedule . for example , while ssn 782 and ddg 112 were provided to the fleet with incomplete certifications , fleet officials reported that the program offices paid for the work to complete these certifications and there were no other major outstanding construction deficiencies that affected the ships' ability to deploy .