provides contextual information . the fbi did not provide comments . i&a has increased the number of intelligence products it disseminates to its state and local partners and is taking steps to work with fusion centers to increase their dissemination . top leadership must play a critical role in setting results - oriented goals and quantifiable measures that are cascaded to lower organizational levels and used to develop and reinforce accountability for achieving results , maintain focus on the most pressing issues confronting the organization , and sustain improvement programs and performance , especially during times of leadership transition . one way to reinforce accountability is through the use of employee performance appraisals that reflect an organization's goals . the role of this office was to ensure coordination across all departmental components with the dual priorities of strengthening fusion centers and dhs intelligence products . according to dhs , the office was to have five primary responsibilities to make fusion centers more effective . specifically , the office was to survey state , local , and tribal law enforcement to get feedback on what information these “first preventers” need to do their job ; develop a mechanism to gather , analyze , and share national , regional , and local threat information up and down the intelligence network ; coordinate with fusion centers to continuously ensure they get the appropriate personnel and resources from dhs ; provide training and exercises to build relationships between fusion center personnel and promote a sense of common mission ; and train fusion center personnel to respect the civil liberties of american citizens . to what extent has i&a defined how it intends to meet its state and local information - sharing mission ? to determine the extent to which i&a has taken actions to enhance the usefulness of intelligence products for state and local partners , we reviewed documentation related to i&a's intelligence products and its efforts to gather the information needs of state and local partners and feedback on the products provided . these documents included fact sheets , briefing handouts , and federal register notices . we also reviewed i&a reports to congress on the dissemination of intelligence products and related feedback ; a 2008 contractor report on i&a's support to fusion centers , which led to i&a efforts to gather state and local information needs ; and a 2010 i&a - sponsored study on how intelligence products are disseminated to state and local agencies . in addition , we reviewed statutory provisions that address i&a's role in disseminating intelligence products and gathering feedback , and the october 2007 national strategy for information sharing , which provides criteria on the importance of gathering state and local information needs , among other things . further , we reviewed standards for program management and our previous reports to identify criteria regarding project management and stakeholder involvement in federal agency programs and decision making . we compared i&a's efforts against the relevant legislation and criteria to identify efforts to meet certain provisions and potential areas for improvement .