gao - 06-282 . washington , d.c.: february 8 , 2006 . ( see app . ii for information on use of non - contract , non - exempt and exempt infant formula by state. ) again , as with non - contract , non - exempt infant formula , it is not clear how infants' medical needs could vary so significantly among states . figure 6 shows the minimum , median , and maximum use of each type of infant formula in 2004 . most states reported that they require participants to obtain medical documentation for non - rebated infant formula , as required by fns . however , some local wic directors said there are instances in which doctors do not diagnose a medical condition but still write a prescription at the request of the participant . local wic agency staff told us that they identify these cases only by confirming diagnoses with each physician which not all agencies have the resources to do . as a result , some wic participants may be receiving non - rebated infant formula even though they do not have a medical condition requiring such infant formula . in its oversight capacity , fns has helped states increase their cost - containment savings by providing technical assistance to states as they develop their cost - containment contracts , and by implementing regulations that help states achieve cost savings . for example , fns requires manufactures to provide the same discount on all infant formulas after state costs rose with the introduction of a new infant formula . in 1993 , one company introduced a lactose - free infant formula to accommodate infants with intolerance for milk - based infant formula . when this company introduced its lactose - free infant formula , it provided a significantly lower rebate amount on this infant formula than it provided on its milk - based infant formula covered by the existing contract , even though the wholesale price of the new infant formula was higher per can . as a result , states received a much lower discount on the new infant formula than they received on the original contract infant formula . at the same time , prescriptions for the lactose - free infant formula increased because the company marketed the infant formula directly to doctors . the cost savings states achieved through rebates began to erode . to maintain competition by ensuring that all manufacturers could bid on contracts and to help preserve rebate savings , fns in 2000 established the requirement that infant formula manufacturers provide the same percent discount for all infant formulas , even those introduced when a contract is already in effect . the requirement that manufacturers provide the same percent discount for infant formulas introduced during a contract slows but does not completely stem increases in state spending on infant formula . even with the requirement , states must still pay more for each can of newly - introduced infant formula when the wholesale price of the infant formula is higher . as a result , manufacturers still have a financial incentive to introduce and market more expensive infant formula because they charge a higher price per can .