transparency . cms's transparency requirements are aimed at ensuring that demonstration proposals provide sufficient information to ensure meaningful public input . however , cms officials told us that they do not require the information states provide on the expected changes in demonstration expenditures in their applications to account for administrative costs . this information would likely have been of interest in our selected states , because public commenters in each state expressed concerns about the potential administrative costs of these demonstrations . in prior work , we reported on weaknesses in cms's policies for ensuring transparency in demonstration approvals . budget neutrality . beneficiary supports . states are expected to describe their strategies to assist beneficiaries in meeting work requirements and to link them to additional resources for job training , child care assistance , transportation , or other work supports . however , cms's guidance specifies that states are not authorized to use medicaid funds to finance these beneficiary supports . about one - third of states have either received cms approval or submitted applications to cms to test work requirements in their demonstrations . nine states have had work requirements approved as part of new demonstrations or extensions of or amendments to existing demonstrations as of may 2019 . also as of may 2019 , seven more states had submitted demonstration applications with work requirements , which were pending cms approval . ( see fig . states with approved work requirements were in various stages of implementation as of august 2019 , and three states faced legal challenges to implementation . the requirements were in effect in arkansas for 9 months before a federal district court vacated the approval in march 2019 . work requirements became effective in indiana in january 2019 and will be enforced beginning in january 2020 . cms's approval of work requirements in kentucky was vacated in march 2019 — several days before the work requirements were set to become effective on april 1 , 2019 . as of august 2019 , cms was appealing the court decisions vacating demonstration approvals in arkansas and kentucky . other states' requirements are approved to take effect in fiscal years 2020 and 2021 . ( see fig . implementing work requirements , as with other types of beneficiary requirements , can involve an array of administrative activities by states , including developing or adapting eligibility and enrollment systems , educating beneficiaries , and training staff . in general , cms provides federal funds for 50 percent ( referred to as a 50 percent matching rate ) of state medicaid administrative costs . these funds are for activities considered necessary for the proper and efficient administration of a state's medicaid program , including those parts operated under demonstrations . cms provides higher matching rates for certain administrative costs , including those related to it systems . for example , expenditures to design , develop , and install medicaid eligibility and enrollment systems are matched at 90 percent , and maintenance and operations of these systems are matched at 75 percent . ( see text box. ) however , cms's 2018 guidance states that medicaid funding is not available to finance beneficiary supports , such as job training or other employment services .