pub . 110-53 , § 2401 ( a ) , 121 stat . 266 , 543-45 ( 2007 ) ( codified at 6 u.s.c . inspecting cargo at ports of entry , and its organizational structure to the missions and goals identified in the qhsr . my statement is based on a report we issued in september 2011 assessing dhs's programs and operations . as requested , the report and my statement address the progress made by dhs in implementing its homeland security missions since it began operations , remaining work , and crosscutting and management issues that have affected dhs's implementation efforts . the report is based on our work on dhs since it began operations , supplemented with work completed by the dhs office of inspector general ( ig ) , with an emphasis on work completed since 2008 to reflect recent work , and updated information and documentation provided by the department in july and august 2011 . it is also based on our ongoing work on some dhs programs for various congressional committees , as noted throughout the report . for this ongoing work , as well as updated information provided by dhs , we examined program documentation and interviewed agency officials , among other things . this statement highlights key , recent work at dhs , but does not address all products we and dhs ig issued related to the department , nor does it address all of dhs's homeland security - related activities and efforts . to determine what progress dhs has made in implementing its mission functions and what work , if any , remains , we identified 10 dhs functional areas , which we define as categories or areas of dhs's homeland security responsibilities . these functional areas are based on those areas we identified for dhs in our august 2007 report on dhs's progress in implementing its mission and management functions , and our analysis of dhs's qhsr and budget documents , such as its congressional budget justifications . these areas include: ( 1 ) aviation security ; ( 2 ) chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) threats ; ( 3 ) critical infrastructure protection — physical assets ; ( 4 ) surface transportation security ; ( 5 ) border security ; ( 6 ) maritime security ; ( 7 ) immigration enforcement ; ( 8 ) immigration services ; ( 9 ) ; critical infrastructure protection — cyber assets ; and ( 10 ) emergency preparedness and response . to identify sub - areas within these functional areas , we identified performance expectations , which we define as composites of the responsibilities or functions that the department is to achieve or satisfy based on our analysis of requirements , responsibilities , and goals set for the department by congress , the administration , and dhs itself and its components . in particular , we used expectations identified in our august 2007 report as a baseline , and updated , or added to , these expectations by analyzing requirements and plans set forth in homeland security - related laws , presidential directives and executive orders , national strategies , and dhs's and components' strategic plans and documents .