brooks , robin . these empirical studies are inherently retrospective . therefore , care must be taken in drawing conclusions about a future relationship between demographics and asset performance , especially given that the historical data do not feature an increase in the retired population of the magnitude that will occur when the u.s. baby boomers retire . “asset - market effects of the baby boom and social - security reform.” american economic review , vol . brooks , robin . “the equity premium and the baby boom.” working paper , international monetary fund , 2003 . bütler , monika , and philipp harms . : national bureau of economic research , 2004 . yoo , peter s. “age distributions and returns of financial assets.” working paper 1994-002a . st. louis: federal reserve bank of st. louis , 1994 . yoo , peter s. “population growth and asset prices.” working paper 1997- 016a . st. louis: federal reserve bank of st. louis , 1997 . young , garry . “the implications of an aging population for the uk economy.” bank of england working paper no . bank of england , london: 2002 . demographic variable ( s ) asset variable ( s ) demographic changes predicted future changes in the equity premium in the international data but only weakly in the u.s. data . in the united states , increases in the average age of persons older than age 20 predicted a higher risk premium . demographic variable ( s ) asset variable ( s ) in the united states , the increase in the demand for stocks and bonds based on demographic changes increased stock and bond prices but had no effect on the equity premium . the increase in people age 40 to 64 relative to the rest of the population increased stock and bond prices , particularly in the united states . also , the increase in people 40 to 64 relative to people over 65 increased the equity premium . the relative increase in people age 40 to 64 increased stock prices and decreased long - term bond yields in the united states and other countries . in the united states , the relative increase in the population age 40 to 49 increased stock returns . the results for the other countries included in the study were mixed . percentage change and level of population age 25 to 44 , age 45 to 64 , and age 65 and over . in the united states , the relative increase in persons age 45 to 64 increased the equity premium . average age of person over age 25 demographic variable ( s ) asset variable ( s ) in the united states , the increase in people age 45 and 66 decreased stock returns . in the united states , the relative increase in people age 40 to 64 decreased short - term government bond returns but had no effect on long - term government bond or stock returns . in the united states , the relative increase in people age 45 to 54 decreased annual returns of short and intermediate - term government bonds but had no effect on the annual returns of stock and long - term government or corporate bonds .