we are making five recommendations to sba and two to omb . this will help ensure that the estimates are reviewed and prepared with the proper information . further , as previously discussed , sba implemented the balances approach for reestimates . this approach will help ensure that sba's account balances are in line with expected future cash flows . these practices and the other practices discussed above will help ensure that anomalies such as those we identified during our last review do not go undetected or uncorrected . for example , sba maintains a reconciliation that tracks loans in monster with its general ledger at a cohort level . while sba resolved its accounting anomalies related to the disaster loan program and made important improvements to its policies and procedures , we found that additional enhancements to internal controls would help ensure the long - term reliability of future cost estimates . approximately 86 percent of the amount sold was disaster assistance loans . our january 2003 report on sba's first five loan sales identified significant anomalies in sba's disaster loan accounts and raised serious concerns about its ability to properly account for its loan sales and to estimate the costs associated with its remaining disaster loan portfolio for budget and accounting purposes . sba , in coordination with omb , found that the tools provided to agencies to calculate interest for the financing account did not adjust the amount of interest paid by the financing account while the loans were disbursing . the discount rate used to estimate the subsidy cost is not final until the loans in a cohort are substantially disbursed ( at least 90 percent ) , which , for the disaster program , generally may take at least 2 years . when the loans are substantially disbursed , and the final discount rate is fixed , the reestimate process retroactively adjusts the subsidy costs to reflect the final discount rate . sba and other agencies must make annual interest payments to treasury while the loans are disbursing , although the final interest rate has not yet been determined . thus in the early years of a cohort , before the loans are substantially disbursed , an interim interest rate is used to calculate interest payments . sba also makes loans directly to businesses and individuals trying to rebuild in the aftermath of a disaster , and it primarily services these loans directly . substantially all of the disaster assistance loans have below - market interest rates and repayment terms of up to 30 years . interest rates on disaster loans vary , depending on the borrower's ability to obtain credit in the private sector . the president's fiscal year 1998 budget proposed that sba begin selling disaster and business loans that the agency was servicing and transition from servicing loans directly to overseeing private - sector servicers . before its loan asset sales program began , sba was servicing approximately 300,000 loans , with a principal balance of over $9 billion . about 286,000 of these loans , with a principal balance of $7 billion , were disaster assistance loans .