rapid deployment of resources . a second key element of the 2012- 2016 strategic plan is to increase mobility and rapid deployment of personnel and resources to quickly counter and interdict threats based on shifts in smuggling routes and tactical intelligence . as we testified in may 2012 , cbp reported expanding the training and response capabilities of the border patrol's specialized response teams to support domestic and international intelligence - driven and antiterrorism efforts as well as other special operations . additionally , border patrol officials stated that in fiscal year 2011 , border patrol allocated 500 agent positions to provide a national group of organized , trained , and equipped border patrol agents who are capable of rapid movement to regional and national incidents in support of high - priority cbp missions . however , we testified in may 2012 that border patrol officials had not fully assessed to what extent the redeployment of existing resources would be sufficient to meet security needs , or when additional resources would need to be requested . we chose this time period because fiscal year 2006 was the first full year for which data were available following border patrol's implementation of its 2004 national border patrol strategy ( 2004 strategy ) . to assess the reliability of these data , we spoke with border patrol headquarters officials who oversee the maintenance and analyses of the data and with select sector and station officials regarding guidance and processes for collecting and reporting data in regard to apprehensions of illegal entrants , seizures of drugs and other contraband , and scheduling the deployment of agents tracked in a border patrol database . we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . we conducted visits to five of the nine border patrol sectors on the southwest border — san diego sector , california ; yuma sector , arizona ; tucson sector , arizona ; el paso sector , texas ; and rio grande valley sector , texas . we selected these sectors based on differences in ( 1 ) the level of threat as defined by border patrol data , ( 2 ) agency priorities for resource deployment , ( 3 ) the level of operational control achieved in fiscal year 2010 , ( 4 ) the use of enforcement strategies deemed successful by the border patrol in reducing cross - border illegal activity , and ( 5 ) varied terrain . within these sectors we selected 21 border patrol stations to visit based on factors such as the level of cross - border illegal activity as defined by border patrol data and unique characteristics such as terrain and topography . we visited both “border stations” — those having international border miles — and “interior stations” — those without international border miles . because border patrol officials identified the tucson sector as the highest - priority sector for resource deployment in fiscal year 2011 and it had the highest level of cross - border illegal activity , we conducted site visits to each of the eight stations . ( see table 1 for the border patrol sectors and stations we visited and the location of each station relative to the border. )