these are costly and difficult undertakings . according to nnsa's fiscal year 2007 budget request , over the next 5 years , the agency will need $118.4 million for the b61 life extension , $669.9 million for the w76 , and $581.5 million for the w80 . these efforts place considerable demands on the computational and experimental facilities of the weapons laboratories , as well as the production facilities . finally , some of the life extensions have experienced significant cost and schedule overruns . for example , the total cost of the w80 life extension has increased by almost $600 million , while the first production unit date has slipped from february 2006 to the current date of january 2009 . in its 2001 nuclear posture review , dod described the need to substantially reduce operationally deployed strategic warheads through 2012 . these reductions were subsequently reflected in the moscow treaty between the united states and russia , which was signed in may 2002 . as part of this strategy , dod has stated its support for the development of an rrw , which could enable reductions in the number of older , nondeployed warheads maintained as a hedge against reliability problems in deployed systems and assist in the evolution to a smaller and more responsive nuclear weapons infrastructure . currently , lanl and llnl are developing competing designs for an rrw deployed on a submarine - launched ballistic missile , with the first production unit planned for fiscal year 2012 . however , since the rrw design competition will not be completed until november 2006 , more information on the viability of the rrw program will be necessary before any firm plans can be drawn up , budgeted , and implemented . in particular , it is not clear at this point whether the rrw can achieve the military characteristics , such as yield , provided by the current stockpile . some nnsa officials have indicated that the military characteristics may need to be relaxed in order to design a warhead that is safer , easier to build , and easier to maintain . producing an rrw warhead , while at the same time refurbishing a significant portion of the stockpile and continuing to dismantle retired weapons , will be a difficult and costly undertaking . given nnsa's performance to date with the life extension programs and the current unresolved questions about the rrw , in our view , dod will need to establish clear , long - term requirements for the nuclear stockpile before nnsa can make any final decisions about transforming the weapons complex . specifically , dod , working with nnsa through the nuclear weapons council , needs to determine the types and quantities of nuclear weapons that will provide for our nation's nuclear deterrent over the long term . to facilitate this process , and to provide a foundation for transforming the weapons complex , the congress may wish to consider setting firm deadlines for dod , nnsa , and the nuclear weapons council to determine the future composition of the nuclear stockpile . once a decision about the size and composition of the stockpile is made , nnsa will need accurate estimates of the costs of proposals for transforming the weapons complex .