the purpose of the order . to issue an order under a contract , the purpose of the order must be within the scope of the underlying base contract . the four contracts we reviewed all had one naics code . the contracting officers we interviewed at all four agencies stated that if an order did not relate to the base award's statement of work or naics code , they would award the order through another existing contract or award a new contract . we reviewed 10 orders from each of the four selected contracts and found that all 40 of the orders appeared to reflect the purpose of the base award and appeared to relate to the assigned naics code . however , the contracting officers we interviewed at two of the four agencies noted some challenges in assigning naics codes . they stated that because naics code definitions are broad , sometimes more than one code could be assigned to a solicitation . in reviewing the 40 orders associated with the four contracts we selected , we noted that in some instances more than one code could appear to apply to a contract . for example , the purpose of one order was to provide recommendations on design , testing , and evaluation in support of engineering activities . we found that this order could relate to the research and development in the physical , engineering , and life sciences ( except biotechnology ) code that was assigned as well as to the engineering services code because both include studies and development using engineering sciences . one contracting officer also noted that assigning the naics code is subjective and two different contracting officers could review the same contract and find different codes to be appropriate . we also noted this in reviewing our sample of orders . we found that some orders had similar purposes but were assigned different naics codes with different corresponding size standards . for example , as shown in table 1 , we found two orders related to the installation of closed - circuit tv systems that had different naics codes . three of the four contracting officers we interviewed stated that there are no unique challenges associated with assigning naics codes to id / iq contracts compared to other contracts . however , one small business specialist noted that assigning naics codes to id / iq contracts may be challenging for contracting officers because the statements of work may cover more than one code . one contracting officer we interviewed also stated that it can be challenging to assign naics codes to id / iq contracts because it is difficult to predict the nature of future orders associated with the base award , especially for research and development contracts . in 2013 , sba issued a rule on assigning naics codes to multiple - award contracts that may further clarify code assignment for contracting officers . presolicitation phase . the program office identifies a need and contacts the contracting officer for guidance on developing and preparing key acquisition documents , such as the market research report and acquisition plan . the contracting officer and program office may also seek advice from the small business specialist and assigned pcr .