i would be pleased to respond to any questions . if you or your staff have any questions about this statement , please contact marie a. mak , ( 202 ) 512-4841 or makm@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include jennifer grover , director ; richard a. cederholm , assistant director ; dawn hoff , assistant director ; peter w. anderson ; jason berman ; erin butkowski ; john crawford ; laurier fish ; camille henley ; hugh paquette ; and roxanna t. sun . gao has made several recommendations in recent years related to the coast guard's efforts to conduct long - term planning . this is an issue we will pursue in our ongoing work on the acquisition of the polar icebreaker . as noted , the coast guard currently has only one operational heavy icebreaker , the polar star . we reported in june 2016 that , following its reactivation in 2013 , the polar star's end of service life is projected to be between fiscal years 2020 and 2023 . as the new heavy polar icebreaker is not expected to be delivered until at least 2023 , there could be a gap in the coast guard's heavy icebreaking capability . to ensure that the coast guard retains a heavy icebreaking capability until a new heavy icebreaker is operational , the coast guard completed a study in january 2017 to determine the cost of reactivating polar sea and extending the life of the polar star for 7 to 10 years as potential “bridging” strategies . table 1 shows the results of the study , reported in january 2017 . this would be an unusual relationship and it is unclear how potential conflicts would be resolved . the coast guard is not currently planning to pursue any of these four options identified in the january 2017 study as they were deemed too expensive , among other reasons . instead , coast guard officials stated they are planning to conduct a limited service life extension of the polar star to address key components and keep it operational until fiscal year 2025 , when a second new heavy polar icebreaker is expected to be delivered . according to officials , the coast guard is currently conducting an assessment of the polar star to determine what systems would need to be overhauled and replaced to meet this goal . an official cost estimate for this effort has not been completed yet , but the fiscal year 2017 cip includes a total of roughly $75 million towards this effort in fiscal years 2019 through 2021 . we believe the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since 2012 , the coast guard has been legislatively required to submit a cip annually to certain congressional committees , alongside its budget proposal , that includes , among other things , projected funding for capital assets in such areas as acquisition , construction , and improvements needed for the upcoming 5 fiscal years .