these reports are the focus of this review . we previously reported on agency compliance under ipera for fiscal years 2013 and 2014 , as reported by the igs . two of these agencies ( gsa and hhs ) were reported as noncompliant because the agencies did not publish required estimates ( i.e. , compliance based on pass / fail determinations ) , and the remaining 3 agencies ( usda , doi , and opm ) were reported as noncompliant because of identified issues with their estimates ( i.e. , noncompliance based on evaluative procedures ) . the extent to which the igs' fiscal years 2011 through 2015 ipera compliance reports included recommendations and the status of these recommendations as of december 31 , 2016 , and for the open recommendations associated with noncompliant agencies , the extent to which the recommendations were designed to address agencies' noncompliance with one or more of the six ipera criteria . although the responsibility for complying with provisions of improper payment - related statutes rests with the head of each executive agency , we focused on those agencies designated as cfo act agencies because these agencies represented over 99 percent of the total government - wide improper payments reported in fiscal year 2015 . our work did not include validating or retesting the data or methodologies used by the igs to determine and report compliance . we corroborated our findings with omb and all 24 cfo act agencies and igs . to address our first objective , we identified the requirements that agencies must meet by reviewing the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia ) , ipera , the improper payments elimination and recovery improvement act of 2012 ( iperia ) , and omb guidance . we analyzed cfo act agency igs' fiscal year 2015 ipera reports , which were the most current reports available at the time of our review ; summarized information related to agency compliance under ipera criteria ; and identified common findings and related causes for improper payments , as reported by the igs . we also relied on and reviewed prior year supporting documentation and analyses of cfo act agencies' ig ipera reports for fiscal years 2011 through 2014 , as reported in our june 2016 report on ipera compliance reporting , and compared agencies' compliance with each ipera criterion over fiscal years 2011 through 2015 , as reported by the igs . in addition , we identified the programs responsible for noncompliance over this period by analyzing and summarizing the determinations made in the ig reports . further , we reviewed the fiscal years 2015 and 2016 improper payments information , which omb provided to gao during the audit of the fiscal years 2016 and 2015 consolidated financial statements of the u.s. government , and compared such information to the agency financial reports or performance and accountability reports to determine the total improper payment estimate reported for the 24 agencies ( see apps . iv and vii , respectively ) .