no change made . the comment does not provide additional clarity to the report . see comment 1 . since the renovation is likely to continue for a number of years , ensuring that the board has the necessary resources to conduct oversight throughout the project will be critical . what should be the loan's terms and conditions ? would the united states provide a loan that fully funds the renovation project ? if there are cost increases during the renovation , would the united states provide additional financing and , if so , under what terms and conditions ? does the united nations have internal controls in place to effectively manage changes in costs , scope , and schedule throughout the design and construction of the project ? to what extent are u.n. officials coordinating the renovation design and construction with that of the proposed new visitors center ? since the design phase provides the greatest opportunity to make decisions that could minimize future building maintenance and operating costs , to what extent are these future costs being considered during the design phase ? what types of incentives will the united nations include in its contracts with design and construction firms to ensure that their work meets u.n. expectations ? how will u.n. officials ensure that value - engineering principles — a formal technique used by contractors or independent teams to identify methods of constructing projects more economically — are applied during the design and construction phases ? the department's position on each of these issues and the level of monitoring it will undertake will drive its resource and expertise needs . the united nations has used a reasonable process thus far to develop its renovation plans , but it is still early in the project and changes in the schedule and cost estimates are to be expected . while the general assembly has funded the project's design , a commitment to finance the renovation will be needed by october 2003 for the united nations to remain on its current schedule and sign a lease for the swing space . if the planned swing space is not available , the united nations will have to reconsider its renovation approach , potentially leading to delays in the renovation process . the united states , however , has not yet taken a position on whether or how to finance the renovation . in addition , careful management and oversight of a project of this magnitude and complexity will be necessary to minimize schedule and scope changes . we further recommend that the secretary determine the expertise the task force needs to fulfill its role and ensure that it has the resources necessary to monitor the project over its duration . in commenting on a draft of this report , the united nations and department of state agreed with our findings and recommendations . however , the board of auditors disagreed with our recommendation calling for resources for the board to conduct oversight . a board official stated in april 2003 that the united nations approved $35,000 for the board to conduct oversight of the $1.2 billion renovation project .