the military services are the primary executors of mobilization . at the direction of the secretary of defense , the services prepare detailed mobilization plans to support the operation plans and provide forces and logistical support to the combatant commanders . the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs , who reports to the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , is to provide policy , programs , and guidance for the mobilization and demobilization of the reserve components . the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , after coordination with the assistant secretary of defense for reserve affairs , the secretaries of the military departments , and the commanders of the unified combatant commands , is to advise the secretary of defense on the need to augment the active forces with members of the reserve components . the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff also has responsibility for recommending the period of service for units and members of the reserve components ordered to active duty . the service secretaries are to prepare plans for mobilization and demobilization and to periodically review and test the plans to ensure the services' capabilities to mobilize reserve forces and to assimilate them effectively into the active forces . figure 1 shows reserve component usage on a per capita basis since fiscal year 1989 and demonstrates the dramatic increase in usage that occurred after september 11 , 2001 . it shows that the ongoing usage — which includes support for operations noble eagle , enduring freedom , and iraqi freedom — exceeds the usage rates during the 1991 persian gulf war in both length and magnitude . while reserve component usage increased significantly after september 11 , 2001 , an equally important shift occurred at the end of 2002 . § 12302 would not exceed 12 months . however , the guidance allowed the service secretaries to extend orders for an additional 12 months or to remobilize reserve component members under the partial mobilization authority as long as an individual member's cumulative service did not exceed 24 months under 10 u.s.c . the guidance further specified that “no member of the ready reserve called to involuntary active duty under 10 u.s.c . on january 19 , 2005 , more than 192,000 national guard and reserve members were mobilized . about 85 percent of these mobilized personnel were members of the army national guard or army reserve . under the current partial mobilization authority , dod increased not only the numbers of reserve component members that it mobilized , but also the length of the members' mobilizations . the average mobilization for operations desert shield and desert storm in 1990-1991 was 156 days . however , on march 31 , 2004 , the average mobilization for the three ongoing operations had increased to 342 days , and that figure was expected to continue to rise . dod does not have the strategic framework and associated policies necessary to maximize reserve component force availability for a long - term global war on terrorism . the availability of reserve component forces to meet future requirements is greatly influenced by dod's implementation of the partial mobilization authority and by the department's personnel policies .