the renovation is being done in phases . for example , all of the asbestos was removed and electrical work completed before the kitchens and bathrooms were renovated . as of march 2003 , 79 percent of the interior modernization work at arverne and 85 percent of the interior modernization work at edgemere was complete . the housing authority estimates that all of the apartment modernization work will be completed by june 2003 . under the revised revitalization plan , the community center will now be combined with the new recreational facility to reduce the overall costs of the plan . this work is under design and is expected to bid fall 2003 . also , the day - care center will be upgraded and expanded to create a state of the art facility with expanded capacity . the day - care center expansion design documents are completed . community and supportive services are being offered to residents and other community residents . in november 1999 , the housing authority opened a family resource center where it administers various training and self - sufficiency programs for the residents . already operating are the computer lab ( see fig . 10 ) , after - school program , and job training classes . a popular project has been the computer incentive program that provides a personal computer system to residents who either work 96 hours volunteering on hope vi recruiting and other hope vi activities or who participate in a hope vi training program . the authority also has contracted with goodwill industries to provide case management , counseling , and job preparation , placement , and retention services . to sustain community and supportive services after the expiration of the hope vi grant , the authority has created the ocean bay community development corporation . resident opposition to demolition was one of the issues that led to the impasse at beach 41st street houses . after hud transferred the hope vi funds from beach 41st street to edgemere in december 1996 , the housing authority again included demolition in the plans for edgemere's redevelopment . the housing authority determined that the best way to meet the demolition requirement would be to remove some top floors from each of three , nine - story buildings , thereby eliminating about 100 units . subsequently , the housing authority withdrew this plan and proposed to convert dwelling units on the first floor to space for commercial and community services . this approach would also have removed about 100 units . the issue became moot when congress , in the fiscal year 1998 appropriations act for the departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies , gave the new york city housing authority the option of not following any hope vi demolition requirements , and the housing authority abandoned the plans for demolishing the 100 units . it took almost 18 months to get the revitalization plan for arverne / edgemere houses approved . the housing authority first submitted a revitalization plan to hud in june 1997 . after hud returned the plan with comments for the housing authority to address , the housing authority submitted a revised plan in february 1998 .