this is inconsistent with executive branch requirements we indentified . gsa has not articulated a basis — specifically , a source of authority or rationale — that would allow it to deviate from collecting what it has been directed to collect by the president and omb . this could undermine the purposes of these requirements , which include aiding in the oversight of the use of government aircraft and helping to ensure that government aircraft are not used for nongovernmental purposes . further , gsa officials stated that it is the agency's practice to implement regulations that do not introduce real or potential conflicts with other authorities . according to gsa senior officials , the agency is unable to identify the specific historical analysis for inclusion of the intelligence agencies' reporting exemption in the fmr . ( 2 ) to what extent does gsa ensure the accuracy of its reporting on senior federal official use of government aircraft ? gao , department of justice: executives' use of aircraft for nonmission purposes , gao - 13-235 ( washington , d.c.: feb. 26 , 2013 ) . senior federal officials are persons employed at the senior executive service level or above , and include presidential appointees , but for purposes of omb circular a - 126 , do not include active duty military officers . circular a - 126 , and we reviewed gsa regulations . we also reviewed gsa regulations and associated federal register notices from 1992 — when the definition of “intelligence agencies” was first added to gsa regulations — to 2012 to determine whether gsa provided a rationale for the exemption for intelligence agencies to report information about government aircraft . we reviewed information from our february 2013 report including information provided to us by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , and gsa , as well as data submitted by doj to gsa on trips taken by senior federal officials on doj aircraft for fiscal years 2007 through 2011 . to obtain gsa's views on the authority for the exemption , its scope , rationale , and applicability to nonmission senior federal travel , as well as steps gsa takes to help ensure the accuracy of its reporting of such travel data , we reviewed information provided by the acting gsa administrator and interviewed senior gsa officials responsible for collecting data about senior federal official travel . we compared the information gsa officials provided to us and gsa regulations with executive branch requirements and standards for internal control in the federal government . we conducted this performance audit from june 2013 to february 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . omb circular a - 126 sets forth executive branch policy with respect to the management and use of government aviation assets . the purpose of the circular is to minimize cost and improve the management of government aircraft .