4 for details. ) san mateo respondents indicating that they would likely seek other employment in the bay area were skeptical about finding such employment . according to postal officials , finding other postal employment is unlikely because of servicewide downsizing . some respondents thought they might qualify for other postal management or administrative positions , but they were not optimistic about the availability of such positions . the oig has also reviewed the dar . ( see fig . 2 for an overview of the service's investment review and approval process. ) prior to our review , postal management asked the oig to evaluate the potential benefits , costs , and operational issues surrounding the it department's proposal to close the san mateo it center and transfer its it functions to other postal it centers . the oig did this evaluation between may and late november 2000 . the oig agreed with the it department that consolidating the san mateo it center's it functions into the eagan and other postal it centers would produce savings in staffing , utilities , maintenance , and contractor systems software support . however , among other things , the oig noted that the it department's projected savings in the san mateo dar might be overstated by $4 to $8 million because the cost of leasing space for the accounting service center in the bay area may have been underestimated . also , the oig questioned the service's support for $6.3 million in capital expenditures for hardware and software upgrades associated with the consolidation . the service subsequently provided justification for the capital expenditures , which the oig found to be generally responsive to its concerns . according to the oig's november 24 , 2000 , report , postal management revised its lease cost estimates for the accounting service center . this revision reduced estimated savings from $78 million to the current estimate of $74 million . the oig concluded that this and other actions the postal service was planning were responsive to the oig's concerns and concurred with the it department's analyses that consolidating the san mateo it center's it functions into other postal it centers would result in savings . in 2000 , when the service's it department prepared the dar to support its proposal to close the san mateo it center , general economic conditions were noticeably better than they are currently ; and the service had not yet made plans to automate and reengineer its field accounting activity , which involves closing its 85 district accounting offices and consolidating residual activity into its 3 accounting service centers . the it department's proposal to close the san mateo it center was based on several major economic assumptions that have since changed . first , when the it department prepared the san mateo dar , it noted that the job market in the bay area was very good and that employees with it skills were in great demand , thereby making it difficult to recruit and retain it employees at the san mateo it center . since then , however , the general job market has declined significantly . for example , in the bay area , from 2000 to 2002 , the unemployment rate increased from 2.2 percent to 5.4 percent .