this exhibit is provided to omb . table 1 describes the types of budget information provided in these three reports . the types of information in these budget justification reports are interrelated . for example , according to an official from the dod comptroller's office , the life cycle phase in which a cost is to be incurred is key to determining the proper appropriation type for funding that cost , as well as to determining the proper budget category ( development / modernization or current services ) . similarly , circular a - 11 states that funding for all activities that occur during the planning or acquisition phases should be placed in the development / modernization budget category . the dod chief information officer ( cio ) , who is also the assistant secretary of defense for networks and information integration , is responsible for compiling and submitting the department's it budget reports to omb and the congress . the cios and comptrollers for dod's component organizations are responsible for the reliability of the information about their respective initiatives in the submission . because of the importance of the budget submission , these officials are required to certify in writing as to their reliability . according to a dod cio official , the information in the submission is initially prepared by component program offices and processed through the cio and comptroller chains of command for the components . the information is then forwarded to the dod cio office , where it is consolidated before being sent to omb and the congress . “in the past , the has received information technology documents that describe the various information technology initiatives and provide budget data on these initiatives . these documents , however , are too often inaccurate , misleading , and incomplete . the department must provide the committee accurate and precise information and data on information technology systems . the committee will rely on the documents , submitted pursuant to this provision , when making recommendations.” federal agencies also need reliable it budget information to comply with the requirements of the clinger - cohen act , which specifies that agencies should design capital planning and investment control processes for selecting , controlling , and evaluating it investments and should integrate those processes with the agencies' processes for making budget - related decisions . it investment management best practices , as well as omb guidance , recognize the importance of reliable information , including the correct use of budget categories and the consistent use of appropriation types , to support these processes and decisions . dod's fiscal year 2004 it budget submission includes inconsistent , inaccurate , and incomplete information , as follows: the exhibit 300 capital investment reports and the it - 1 spreadsheet contain different numbers of major initiatives , and the reports' funding amounts for major initiatives also differ significantly . the exhibit 300s contain omissions and errors , such as missing life cycle phase information and errors in calculations . the exhibit 300s contain funding amounts for planning and acquisition activities that do not use the correct budget category — development / modernization . the exhibit 300s do not consistently use the same appropriation types to fund the same it development and modernization activities .