reg . key privacy protection principles . for example , these notices describe the information that will be collected from passengers and air carriers , as well as the purpose and planned uses of the data to be collected . tsa also developed a program privacy architecture describing key aspects of tsa's plans to protect private passenger information , such as embedding privacy experts into program teams , developing privacy requirements documentation , and implementing technical controls to protect privacy such as network security controls . we will continue to monitor their efforts as part of our ongoing work to ensure that privacy protections continue to be appropriately considered . although tsa has developed a life - cycle cost estimate and maintains an integrated master schedule for secure flight , the program has not fully followed best practices for developing reliable and valid cost and schedule estimates , and several program milestones have been missed or have slipped . the office of management and budget ( omb ) endorsed the useof gao's cost assessment guide in the development of life - cycle cost and program schedule estimates . the ability to generate reliable cost and schedule estimates is a critical function necessary to support omb's capital programming process . without adhering to these best practices in the development of its cost and schedule estimates , tsa is at risk of the secure flight program experiencing cost overruns , missed deadlines , and performance shortfalls . life - cycle cost estimate . we found that tsa has not fully followed best practices for developing a reliable and valid life - cycle cost estimate . using our cost assessment guide's 12-step process for creating cost estimates , we assessed the secure flight cost estimate against these best practices . the guide outlines a 12-step process , which if followed correctly , should result in high quality , reliable , and valid cost estimates . dhs's cost - benefit analysis guidebook , which tsa program officials stated that tsa used to develop the life - cycle cost estimate for secure flight , contains most of the best practices outlined in our guide . tsa followed some of these practices in developing its cost estimate , including defining the purpose of the program and estimate purpose ; identifying many program cost elements , including expenditures for facilities , hardware , and software ; and identifying the numbers of staff , their pay , and associated travel and training costs , among other elements . however , it is unclear whether tsa followed other best practices or did not address the practices in developing its estimate . for example , it is unclear whether the cost estimate had been updated to reflect the current program because the detailed support for the estimate was produced between 2004 and 2006 , and does not reflect the current program plan . in addition , the cost estimate does not capture all key costs . for example , the estimate does not capture costs beyond 2012 even though the system is expected to be operational beyond that date . secure flight's acquisition program baseline states that life - cycle costs will run from fy 2002 through fy 2020 and assumes operations of the program through 2020 .