gao - 05-796sp . washington , d.c.: july 2005 . paperwork reduction act: new approach may be needed to reduce government burden on public . gao - 05-424 . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2005 . federal regulation is a basic tool of government . ” closely related are other requirements that encourage agencies to identify and consider alternatives when developing regulations . agencies issue thousands of rules and regulations each year to implement statutes enacted by congress . initiatives such as rfa and umra ask agencies to identify regulatory alternatives that will be less burdensome to regulated parties . third , some of the reform initiatives have encouraged and facilitated greater public participation and consultation in rule making . initiatives such as the e - government act and the government paperwork elimination act encourage agencies to allow the public to communicate with them by electronic means . other initiatives require additional consultation by agencies with the parties that might be affected by rules under development . these initiatives ask that agencies seek input earlier in the process , rather than waiting for the public to comment on proposals published in the federal register . a final shared strength of many of these initiatives , and one closely connected to the three previous items , is that they help to improve the transparency of the regulatory process . in prior work , we have cited transparency as a regulatory best practice . by providing more information about potential effects and alternatives , requiring more documentation and justification of agencies' decisions , and facilitating public access to and queries about such information , regulatory reform initiatives can help make the process more open . we recommended that more could be done to increase transparency , and we have also highlighted the value of transparency when agencies had particularly clear and complete documentation supporting their rule making . as the administrator of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) pointed out , openness can help to “transform the public debate about regulation to one of substance … rather than process. despite these strengths , the overall results and effectiveness of regulatory reform initiatives have often been mixed . this may be particularly true when results of the initiatives are compared to the goals and purposes originally established for them . for example , despite the goals set for the reduction of paperwork burdens under pra , we have repeatedly testified about the growth in burden hours imposed by federal information collections . we similarly reported that initiatives such as umra , the executive order on federalism , and requirements imposed under section 610 of rfa for reviews of existing rules , have had little impact on agencies' rule making . our reviews have identified at least four general reasons that might explain why reform initiatives have not been more effective: ( 1 ) the limited scope and coverage of various requirements , ( 2 ) lack of clarity regarding key terms and definitions , ( 3 ) uneven implementation of the initiatives' requirements , and ( 4 ) a predominant focus on just one part of the regulatory process , agencies' development of rules .