ii. ) in addition to primary care services — medical , mental health , and dental care services — pcasg fund recipients could use grant funds to provide specialty care , such as cardiology and podiatry services , and ancillary services , including supporting services such as translation , health education , transportation , and outreach . after being awarded pcasg funding , outpatient provider organizations had to meet several cms requirements , including creating referral relationships with local specialists and hospitals , establishing a quality assurance or improvement program , and providing a long - term sustainability plan . lphi is responsible for distributing funds to pcasg fund recipients , including an initial disbursement and five supplemental disbursements . these are lump sum payments and are not reimbursement for individual services provided . the 25 recipients received initial disbursements totaling $17 million . the supplemental disbursements are to be made over the grant period . cms requires that more of the funds be disbursed during the early part of the grant period and that funding decline over the 3 years to ensure that recipients do not rely primarily on pcasg funds for their continued operation and sustainability . ldhh and cms provide oversight of the pcasg program . ldhh oversees the work performed by lphi , conducts site visits at pcasg fund recipients , reviews budgets for lphi and recipients , reviews and approves payments to recipients , and determines whether to approve recipients' requests to renovate sites . cms visits recipients to observe their operations and reviews reports from ldhh and lphi in collaboration with officials from other hhs agencies . although the pcasg does not include a requirement for a program evaluation , a private foundation is scheduled to evaluate the pcasg program , and cms officials plan to review and approve this evaluation before it is published . pcasg fund recipients reported that they used pcasg funds to hire or retain health care providers and other staff , add primary care services , and open new sites . recipients also said that the pcasg funds have helped them improve service delivery and access to care . most of the pcasg fund recipients that responded to our survey reported they used pcasg funds to hire health care providers or other staff . twenty of the 23 responding recipients reported using pcasg funds to hire health care providers . ( see fig . sixteen recipients hired mental health care providers , including mental health counselors and psychiatrists . one recipient reported that by hiring one psychiatrist , it could significantly increase clients' access to services by cutting down a clinic's waiting list and by providing clients with a “same - day” psychiatric consultation or evaluation . fourteen of the recipients responded they used pcasg funds to hire medical care providers . one recipient reported that it hired 23 medical care providers , some of whom were staffed at its new sites . eighteen of the 23 pcasg fund recipients that responded to our survey reported they used pcasg funds to hire other staff , such as a medical director and a medical office assistant , in addition to hiring health care providers .