( see app . we conducted our work from may 2004 through november 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the process of implementing programs established by federal law often begins with the issuance of rules to guide those who are subject to the law's requirements . the requirements for promulgating rules , set out in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , usually include the publication of a proposed rule , an opportunity for public comment , and the publication of a final rule after taking into consideration the comments received . final rules , also referred to as regulations , have the force and effect of law . to explain and clarify the statutory law and implementing regulations , the apa also permits agencies to issue orders , which are the result of an adjudication that resolves a dispute or controversy between the agency and one or more parties . while orders are typically binding only on the parties directly involved , agency officials and program participants often use them for guidance . because agencies rarely issue regulations or orders that explain every element of the programs they administer , they also produce a wide variety of written guidance , which may include advisory opinions . although the apa prescribes the process agencies generally must follow to issue rules and orders , it does not prescribe a process for producing advisory opinions . cms's regulations provide for it to issue opinions within 90 days or , for requests that it determines involve complex legal issues or complicated fact patterns , within a reasonable time . irs does not have any statutory time frame requirements and has its own deadlines . according to irs officials , the agency's goal is to complete more than half of the requests received within 4 months , and about 90 percent of the requests received within 6 months . ebsa officials estimate that they typically provide advisory opinions within 7 to 9 months after receiving requests . however , ebsa has not established any time frames . in contrast , irs provided about 3,000 advisory opinions and used about 69 full - time equivalent ( fte ) staff to respond to requests . in light of this , agencies generally have discretion in how they can structure their advisory opinion processes , subject to constraints , if any , in other applicable statutes . hhs produces written guidance about medicare in a variety of forms . for example , it issues “rulings” that , according to the agency , provide clarification and interpretation of complex or ambiguous provisions of law or regulations and promote consistency in the interpretation of policy and adjudication of disputes . although rulings are not issued in response to specific requests , they are binding on cms and medicare contractors , among others . in addition , hhs's medicare appeals council ( mac ) issues written decisions in disputes over medicare eligibility and specific medicare claims . although mac is a component of hhs , it functions independently and is not bound by guidance , such as medicare program instructions or memoranda , issued by cms . mac decisions are binding precedent in subsequent disputes and serve as another significant source of medicare guidance .