gao - 05-844t . washington , d.c.: june 29 , 2005 . military and veterans' benefits: enhanced services could improve transition assistance for reserves and national guard . gao - 05-544 . washington , d.c.: may 20 , 2005 . mou for the sharing of individually identifiable health information . the mou constitutes an agreement on the circumstances under which dod and va will exchange individually identifiable health information and includes references to provisions of the hipaa privacy rule and applicable laws that permit sharing . the mou does not specify particular types of individually identifiable heath information that will be exchanged and when the information will be shared . the absence of specific data sharing procedures continues to hinder va's efforts to obtain needed health information from dod . for example , dod does not have specific procedures to routinely provide va with health information on servicemembers who have injuries or illnesses that preclude them from continuing on active duty and , as a result , are being evaluated by a dod physical evaluation board ( peb ) for separation from the military . according to va officials , if a list of these individuals were transmitted routinely to va , it would enable va to contact the individuals to make the appropriate transfer of health care to a va medical facility before the individuals are discharged from the military . such information could reduce the potential for interruption to these individuals' health care treatment plans . dod officials told us that they are in the process of developing a policy directive that would establish procedures for sharing information with va on servicemembers who are entering the peb process , but they could not determine when this policy directive would become effective . recent progress in va and dod data sharing involves a health assessment questionnaire that dod requires servicemembers to complete following deployment . this document contains , among other things , self - reported information about a servicemember's potential exposure to toxic substances and includes four questions that can be used to identify individuals at risk of developing post - traumatic stress disorder . the seamless transition office uses the taskforce in an advisory capacity . to help ensure that va staff assisting oif and oef servicemembers can be responsive to their health care needs , the agency created an internal web site to provide a single source of access to va policies , procedures , and directives for wounded , ill , and seriously injured servicemembers and veterans . according to va , the internal web site also includes a list of the points of contact at medical facilities and articles about transition - related activities . va has instituted several outreach strategies to provide information about the health care services available to oif and oef servicemembers who have been discharged . these include the use of newsletters , personal letters , an external web site , counseling services , and briefings on va benefits and services . using dod rosters of oif and oef servicemembers who have separated from active duty , va sends newsletters and personal letters with pertinent information to these new veterans .