wastewater treatment . projects that build sewage treatment plants , wastewater collection systems , and facilities that purify treated wastewater for irrigation and other purposes . stormwater management . projects that help improve the management of storm sewers , eliminate or control sewer overflows , and address flooding . according to corps data , of the 310 originally authorized section 219 projects , 58 have been deauthorized and were no longer active , as of november 2018 . the secretary of the army publishes a list of deauthorized projects in the federal register . based on this process , the corps considered deauthorizing 197 additional section 219 projects in its fiscal year 2017 report to congress . however , the 2018 wrda provided that the projects identified for deauthorization in the corps' fiscal year 2017 report were generally not to be deauthorized unless they met certain additional requirements . the corps allocates funding for section 219 projects and other environmental infrastructure programs from the construction account . that account generally receives no - year appropriations through the energy and water development appropriations act — meaning the appropriation remains available for obligation for an indefinite period of time . prior to fiscal year 2012 , the conference reports accompanying the annual energy and water development appropriations acts generally listed individual section 219 projects and specific allocations of funding for each project . however , since fiscal year 2012 , congress has not provided allocation direction for individual projects , but instead generally has designated an amount in reports and joint explanatory statements for environmental infrastructure overall , ranging from about $30 million to $55 million annually . according to corps data , from fiscal years 1992 through 2017 , the corps expended over $440 million on section 219 projects . similar to other civil works projects , the corps generally becomes involved in section 219 projects when a nonfederal sponsor contacts the corps for assistance on an authorized project . corps districts gather additional information on the project from the nonfederal sponsor and determine if it is ready to be initiated . once the corps receives an appropriation from congress , the agency decides whether to allocate funding to the project . if the project is selected to receive funding , it enters the preconstruction engineering and design phase . the purpose of this phase is to complete any additional planning studies and all of the detailed technical studies and designs — such as environmental impact studies — needed to begin construction . during this phase , the corps also completes an environmental assessment of the proposed project . to initiate construction , the corps and the nonfederal sponsor sign a project partnership agreement that specifies how the parties will collaborate , their respective roles and responsibilities , and the terms and conditions under which they will execute their responsibilities .