we agree with these concerns . although the six un internal audit offices we reviewed have made progress in implementing international auditing standards , they have not fully implemented key components of the standards . in addition , while the six un evaluation offices we reviewed are working toward implementing un evaluation standards , they have not fully implemented them . moreover , the governing bodies responsible for oversight of the six un organizations we reviewed lack full access to internal audit reports and most lack direct information from the audit offices about the sufficiency of their resources and capacity to conduct their work . in addition , most un organizations do not have an independent audit committee , as suggested by international best practices . most of the six un organizations we examined are in various stages of adopting ethics policies , such as requiring conflict of interest and financial disclosure statements and adopting whistleblower policies to protect those who reveal wrongdoing . ethics policies could strengthen oversight by helping to ensure more accountability and transparency within the organizations . some internal oversight units rely on their staff to comply with a general declaration that all un employees sign when they are employed by the organization . we earlier reported that undp and wfp rely on their oversight staff to self - report any conflicts of interest , though wfp's investigative unit was developing a conflict of interest policy to cover investigations staff in fall 2006 , and none of the six organizations we examined require their internal oversight staff to disclose their financial interests , a practice that could help to ensure that employees are free from conflicts of interest . five of the six of the organizations we studied have established whistleblower protection policies to protect those who reveal wrongdoing within their respective organizations . unicef , fao , wfp , who , and ilo have whistleblower protection policies in place , and undp was developing such a policy . we reported that all six audit offices are developing and implementing risk - based work plans and five of the six internal audit offices have contributed to their respective organizations' development of a risk management framework . however , the organizations' senior management has not completed an organizationwide risk management framework that would assist in guiding the audit offices' work plans . moreover , only three of the six audit offices told us that they had sufficient resources to achieve their audit work plans , which could include high - risk areas . for example , wfp's audit chief informed us that the audit office did not have sufficient resources to conduct its planned work for 2007 and as a result , it has had to defer audits to future years . we also reported that a number of internal oversight units do not have professional investigators and rely on other parties who may not be qualified , such as auditors , to determine whether wrongdoing has occurred . as a result of the limited capacity of organizations to conduct investigations , many internal oversight units have backlogs of investigative cases and are unable to complete their planned audits .