gao - 09-479t . washington , d.c. march 18 , 2009 . next generation air transportation system: status of systems acquisition and the transition to the next generation air transportation system . gao - 08-1078 . washington , d.c.: september 11 , 2008 . responses to questions for the record ; hearing on the future of air traffic control modernization . gao - 07-928r . washington , d.c.: may 30 , 2007 . this is a collaborative effort whose success will depend on contributions from all parties . delays in aligning agency requirements , as well as the lack of meteorological knowledge , could lead to delays in implementing nextgen systems . beyond these research efforts , faa has continued to move forward in planning and conducting demonstrations of some key nextgen technologies . for example , a recently announced demonstration with us airways and aviation communications and surveillance systems at the philadelphia international airport will test ads - b technology that allows an aircraft with the necessary avionics to transmit its own position as well as to receive information from other similarly equipped aircraft . faa is providing $6 million to purchase the necessary avionics equipment for the aircraft involved in the demonstration . faa has also initiated projects to demonstrate the benefits of integrating nextgen capabilities . for example , in december 2008 , faa signed a memorandum of agreement with netjets — an ohio - based air service provider with a fleet of 600 aircraft . in this demonstration , faa will test a number of nextgen technologies and procedures including ads - b . the company will provide real - time data , allowing faa to validate performance requirements . this demonstration will help faa identify the costs and benefits associated with nextgen implementation . to fully realize nextgen's capabilities , a new configuration of atc facilities will be required . faa has not developed a comprehensive reconfiguration plan , but says that preliminary efforts are underway to plan concepts for future faa facilities . going forward , it will also be critical for faa to ensure the safety and efficiency of its existing atc system , since it will be the core of the national airspace system for a number of years and some of its components will become part of nextgen . faa faces an immediate task to maintain and repair existing facilities so that the current atc system continues to operate safely and reliably . faa has estimated a one - time cost of $268 million to repair 400 existing terminal facilities . once faa develops and implements a facility reconfiguration plan , the costs of facility repairs and maintenance may be reduced . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 provides $200 million to be made available within the next 2 years for improvements in power systems , air route traffic control centers , air traffic control towers , terminal radar approach control facilities , and navigation and landing equipment and indicates that projects that can be completed in 2 years should be given priority . the credits would provide a competitive advantage for early equippers . airlines that continue to delay equipage will become more and more disadvantaged , thus providing an incentive for these airlines to equip .