defense business operations fund . history is a good teacher . to solve the problems of today , it is important to avoid repeating past mistakes . over the past 12 years , the department has initiated several broad - based departmentwide reform efforts intended to fundamentally reform its financial operations as well as other key business areas , including the defense reform initiative , the defense business operations fund , and the corporate information management initiative . these efforts , which are highlighted below , have proven to be unsuccessful despite good intentions and significant effort . the conditions that led to these previous attempts at reform remain largely unchanged today . defense reform initiative ( dri ) . in announcing the dri program in november 1997 , the then secretary of defense stated that his goal was “to ignite a revolution in business affairs.” dri represented a set of proposed actions aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of dod's business operations , particularly in areas that had been long - standing problems — including financial management . in july 2000 , we reported that while dri got off to a good start and made progress in implementing many of the component initiatives , it did not meet expected time frames and goals , and the extent to which savings from these initiatives would be realized was yet to be determined . we noted that a number of barriers had kept the department from meeting its specific time frames and goals . the most notable barrier was institutional resistance to change in an organization as large and complex as dod , particularly in such areas as acquisition , financial management , and logistics , which transcend most of the department's functional organizations and have been long - standing management concerns . we also pointed out that dod did not have a clear road map to ensure that the interrelationships between its major reform initiatives were understood and addressed and that it was investing in its highest priority requirements . we are currently examining the extent to which dri efforts begun under the previous administration are continuing . in october 1991 , dod established a new entity , the defense business operations fund by consolidating nine existing industrial and stock funds and five other activities operated throughout dod . through this consolidation , the fund was intended to bring greater visibility and management to the overall cost of carrying out certain critical dod business operations . however , from its inception , we reported that the fund did not have the policies , procedures , and financial systems to operate in a businesslike manner . in 1996 , dod announced the fund's elimination . in its place , dod established four working capital funds . dod estimated that for fiscal year 2003 these funds would account for and control about $75 billion . these new working capital funds inherited their predecessor's operational and financial reporting problems . our reviews of these funds have found that they still are not in a position to provide accurate and timely information on the results of operations . as a result , working capital fund customers cannot be assured that the prices they are charged for goods and services represent actual costs .