however , our report does not make that link . ( see table 10. ) the amendments also established deadlines for many of these requirements . the 1977 amendments were passed primarily to set new goals and dates for attaining the standards because many areas of the country had failed to meet the deadlines set previously . the act was amended again in 1990 when several new themes were incorporated into it , including encouraging the use of market - based approaches to reduce emissions , such as cap - and - trade programs . the major provisions of the 1990 amendments are contained in the first six titles . as requested , this report addresses epa's actions related to titles i , iii , and iv: title i establishes a detailed and graduated program for the attainment and maintenance of the national ambient air quality standards ; title iii expands and modifies regulations of hazardous air pollutant emissions and establishes a list of 189 hazardous air pollutants to be regulated ; title iv establishes the acid deposition control program to reduce the adverse effects of acid rain by reducing the annual emissions of pollutants that contribute to it . although the clean air act is a federal law , states and local governments are responsible for carrying out certain portions of the statute . for example , states are responsible for developing implementation plans that describe how they will come into compliance with national standards set by epa . epa must approve each state's plan , and if an implementation plan is not acceptable , epa may assume enforcement of the clean air act in that state . once epa sets a national standard , it is generally up to state and local air pollution control agencies to enforce the standard , with oversight from epa . for example , state air pollution control agencies may hold hearings on permit applications by power or chemical plants . states may also fine companies for violating air pollution limits . according to epa , by many measures , the quality of the nation's air has improved in recent years . each year epa estimates emissions that impact the ambient concentrations of the six major air pollutants for which epa sets national ambient air quality standards . epa uses these annual emissions estimates as one indicator of the effectiveness of its air programs . as figure 1 shows , according to epa , between 1970 and 2004 , gross domestic product , vehicle miles traveled , energy consumption , and u.s. population all grew ; during the same time period , however , total emissions of the six principal air pollutants dropped by 54 percent . despite this progress , large numbers of americans continue to live in communities where pollution sometimes exceeds federal air quality standards for one or more of the six principal air pollutants . for example , epa reported in april 2004 that 159 million people lived in areas of the united states where air pollution sometimes exceeds federal air quality standards for ground - level ozone .