as such , we did not verify these numbers . we are not making recommendations in this report . the commissioner of internal revenue provided written comments on a draft of this report in an october 28 , 2003 , letter , which is reprinted in appendix iii . the preparer was sent to jail . in addition to those named above , vince balloon , larry dandridge , katherine davis , michele fejfar , evan gilman , tre forlano , brittni milam , libby mixon , cheryl peterson , and peter rumble made key contributions to this report . the general accounting office , the audit , evaluation and investigative arm of congress , exists to support congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the american people . gao examines the use of public funds ; evaluates federal programs and policies ; and provides analyses , recommendations , and other assistance to help congress make informed oversight , policy , and funding decisions . gao's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability , integrity , and reliability . the fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of gao documents at no cost is through the internet . gao's web site ( www.gao.gov ) contains abstracts and full - text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products . each day , gao issues a list of newly released reports , testimony , and correspondence . the web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases . you can print these documents in their entirety , including charts and other graphics . gao posts this list , known as “today's reports,” on its web site daily . the list contains links to the full - text document files . to have gao e - mail this list to you every afternoon , go to www.gao.gov and select “subscribe to e - mail alerts” under the “order gao products” heading . * percents do not add to 100 due to rounding . “next , we ask about some of the practices that paid preparers sometimes follow . for each one , please tell me whether you know if it is something your paid preparer did do or did not do or whether you do not know.” “first , did your paid preparer give you a copy of your completed tax return , not give you a copy or do you not know ? ” __95__ yes , gave copy ___1__ no , didn't give copy ( skip to 4c ) ___4_ don't know ( skip to 4c ) “did your paid preparer sign your copy of your completed tax return as the preparer , not sign your copy , or do you not know ? ” __87_ yes , use a preparer again ___7_ no , not use a preparer ( stop ) ___6_ don't know ( stop ) “the u. s. general accounting office is doing research on peoples' opinions and experiences with their paid preparers . would it be okay with you if someone from the general accounting office telephoned you in the next month for a research interview ?