, flexibility in the schedule ) . rely on complete and accurate data to review performance against expectations . ensure that corrective actions are identified and tracked until the desired outcomes are achieved . to assess the extent that tsa and dhs had addressed these key practices , we reviewed the most current program management and governance documentation as of april 2017 . specifically , we analyzed documentation on program management processes , such as tim's systems engineering life cycle tailoring plan , tim agile and technical strategy , tim agile software development contract , and draft dhs agile acquisition program delivery metrics playbook ; and artifacts from tim's program execution and review , such as agile release artifacts , program status reports , contractor status reports , program schedules , life - cycle cost estimates , risk registers , tsa executive steering committee reviews , dhs program health assessments , dhs agile pilot integrated product team meetings , dhs office of the chief technology officer agile pilot reviews , and dhs acquisition review board reviews . additionally , we interviewed tsa officials , including the tim director and deputy director , on their efforts to oversee tim's development . further , we interviewed dhs officials , including the chief technology officer , on their efforts to oversee the program's agile software development activities . we compared this evidence against leading practices to determine the extent to which tsa and dhs met the practices . to assess the reliability of the data that we used to support the findings in this report , we reviewed relevant program documentation to substantiate evidence obtained through interviews with agency officials . we determined that the data used in this report were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our reporting objectives . we made appropriate attribution indicating the sources of the data . additionally , for recommendation 14 , the department stated that dhs intends to ensure that oversight bodies review key agile performance and cost metrics for the tim program by june 30 , 2018 . if implemented effectively , these actions should address the weaknesses we identified . the department also described recent actions that it and tsa had taken to address three of the recommendations , and requested that we consider these recommendations resolved . specifically , in response to recommendation 9 , calling for tsa to ensure that the tim program management office begins collecting and reporting on agile - related cost metrics , the department stated that the program is now reporting these metrics on a monthly basis . in response to recommendation 10 , calling for tsa to ensure that the program's velocity is measured and reported consistently , the department stated that velocity is now being reported consistently and in accordance with dhs guidelines . further , in response to recommendation 13 , which calls for dhs to complete guidance for agile programs to use for collecting and reporting on performance metrics , the department stated that the guidance had recently been published and provided to us . however , to date , we have received only draft versions of the guidance . we will work with the department to obtain finalized documentation related to the three recommendations , to determine if the recent actions fully address the recommendations .