fnih had not funded the study of any of these drugs . nih has estimated that the cost of studying the drugs that were referred to fnih for study would exceed $43 million ( see table 1 ) . ( see app . i for a detailed description of our methodology. ) first , if a drug sponsor declines to conduct the pediatric drug studies requested by fda for an on - patent drug , bpca provides for fda to refer the study of that drug to fnih , which might then agree to fund the studies . second , if a drug sponsor declines a request to study an off - patent drug , bpca provides for referral of the study to nih for funding . fda cannot extend pediatric exclusivity in response to written requests for any drugs for which the drug sponsor declined to conduct the requested pediatric drug studies . when drug sponsors decline written requests for studies of on - patent drugs , bpca provides for fda to refer the study of those drugs to fnih for funding , when fda believes that the pediatric drug studies are still warranted . fnih , which was authorized by congress to be established in 1990 , is guided by a board of directors and began formal operations in 1996 to support the mission of nih and advance research by linking private sector donors and partners to nih programs . although fnih is a nonprofit corporation that is independent of nih , fnih and nih collaborate to fund certain projects . fnih has raised approximately $300 million from the private sector over the past 10 years to support four general types of projects: ( 1 ) research partnerships ; ( 2 ) educational programs and projects for fellows , interns , and postdoctoral students ; ( 3 ) events , lectures , conferences , and communication initiatives ; and ( 4 ) special projects . included in these funds is $4.13 million that fnih raised as of december 2005 to fund pediatric drug studies under bpca . the majority of fnih's funds are restricted by donors for specific projects and cannot be reallocated . in recent years , appropriations of $500,000 were authorized to fnih annually . to further the study of off - patent drugs , nih — in consultation with fda and other experts — develops a list of drugs , including off - patent drugs , which the agency believes are in need of study in children . nih lists these drugs annually in the federal register . fda may issue written requests for those drugs on the list that it determines to be most in need of study . we also examined notices published in the federal register , identifying the drugs designated by hhs's national institutes of health ( nih ) as most in need of study in children . we reviewed data provided to us by the foundation for the national institutes of health ( fnih ) — a nonprofit corporation independent of nih — about funding for pediatric drug studies of on - patent drugs .