● effective it management . leading organizations execute their information technology management responsibilities reliably and efficiently . a little over 80 percent of the cios reported that they faced one or more challenges related to implementing effective it management practices at their agencies . this is not surprising given that , as we have previously reported , the government has not always successfully executed the it management areas that were most frequently cited as challenges by the cios — information security , enterprise architecture , investment management , and e - gov . ● sufficient and relevant resources . one key element in ensuring an agency's information and technology success is having adequate resources . accordingly , in order to effectively implement change , it is important that cios build understanding , commitment , and support among those who will be affected by the change . effectively tackling these reported challenges can improve the likelihood of a cio's success . until these challenges are overcome , federal agencies are unlikely to optimize their use of information and technology , which can affect an organization's ability to effectively and efficiently implement its programs and missions . virtually all agency cios cited resources , both in dollars and staff , as major challenges . the funding issues cited generally concerned the development and implementation of agency it budgets and whether certain it projects , programs , or operations were being adequately funded . we have previously reported that the way agency initiatives are originated can create funding challenges that are not found in the private sector . for example , certain information systems may be mandated or legislated , so the agency does not have the flexibility to decide whether to pursue them . additionally , there is a great deal of uncertainty about the funding levels that may be available from year to year . the government also faces long - standing and widely recognized challenges in maintaining a high - quality it workforce . since enactment of the clinger - cohen act in 1996 , the roles and responsibilities of va's chief information officer have evolved . from lacking a cio entirely , the department has taken steps to address the challenges posed by its multiple widespread components and its decentralized information technology and services . in june 1998 , va assigned cio responsibility to a top manager . however , we reported in july 1998 that the person holding the cio position at va had multiple additional major responsibilities , as this person also served as assistant secretary for management , chief financial officer , and deputy assistant secretary for budget . according to the act , the cio's primary responsibility should be information and technology management . noting that va's structure was decentralized , its it budget was large , and its cio faced serious information and technology management issues , we recommended that the secretary appoint a cio with full - time responsibilities for irm . concurring with the recommendation , va established the position of assistant secretary for information and technology to serve as its cio .