4546 ) was in conference . mr. chairman , members of the subcommittee , and senator grassley , this concludes my prepared statement . we conducted our audit work from january 2002 through september 2002 in accordance with u.s. generally accepted government auditing standards , and we performed our investigative work in accordance with standards prescribed by the president's council on integrity and efficiency . following this testimony , we plan to issue a report , which will include recommendations to dod and the navy for improving internal controls over travel card activity . tables 7 , 8 , and 9 show the grade , rank ( where relevant ) , and the associated basic pay rates for fiscal year 2001 for the navy's and marine corp's military personnel and civilian personnel . table 12 shows cases of travel card use for personal expenses where the cardholder paid the bill . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you may have . this pattern was continued over several account cycles . navy officials were unaware of these transactions until we brought them to their attention and are currently considering what , if any , action should be taken against the cardholder . we did not always find documented evidence of disciplinary actions taken by navy commanders and supervisors against cardholders who wrote nsf checks or had their accounts charged off or placed in salary offset . of the 57 cardholders fitting these categories that we selected through data mining , we did not find any documented evidence that 37 had been disciplined . for example , a lieutenant commander ( o - 4 ) with the naval air reserve used his travel card for personal purchases in california and frequent personal trips to mexico . the individual did not pay his account when due and was placed in salary offset in october 2001 . although the agency program coordinator ( apc ) responsible for program oversight had apprised management of this officer's abuse of the travel card , and had initiated actions to take away the cardholder's security clearance , management had not taken any administrative action against this cardholder . in addition , of the 10 individuals who abused the card but paid their bills , only 1 was disciplined . appendixes iii , iv , and v provide further details of the extent of disciplinary actions taken against some of the cardholders we examined . in addition , we found that 27 of these same 57 travel cardholders we examined whose accounts were charged off or placed in salary offset as of march 31 , 2002 , still had active secret or top - secret security clearances in august 2002 . some of the navy personnel holding security clearances who have had difficulty paying their travel card bills may present security risks to the navy . dod rules provide that an individual's finances are one of the factors to be considered in whether an individual should be entrusted with a security clearance . we also assessed actions taken to reduce the severity of travel card delinquencies and charge - offs .