testing . while the department had established an incremental testing approach , the quality of unit and functional testing performed during release 2 was inadequate in 10 of the 20 segments of system functionality we reviewed . program officials stated that they placed higher priority on user acceptance testing at the end of a release and relied on users to identify defects that were not detected during unit and functional testing . without improved testing quality , the department risks deploying future releases that contain defects that may require rework . to reduce defects and rework to fix them , we recommended that va improve the adequacy of the unit and functional testing processes . oversight . in order for projects to be effectively inspected and adapted , management must have tools to provide effective oversight . for agile development , progress and the amount of work remaining can be reflected in a burn - down chart , which depicts how factors such as the rate at which work is completed ( velocity ) and changes in overall product scope affect the project over time . while va had an oversight tool that showed the percentage of work completed to reflect project status at the end of each iteration , it did not depict the velocity of the work completed and the changes to scope over time . we therefore recommended that va implement an oversight tool to clearly communicate velocity and the changes to project scope over time . va concurred with three of our five recommendations . it did not concur with our recommendation that it implement an oversight tool to clearly communicate velocity . however , without this level of visibility in its reporting , management and the development teams may not have all the information they need to fully understand project status . va also did not concur with our recommendation to improve the adequacy of the unit and functional testing processes to reduce the amount of system rework . however , without increased focus on the quality of testing early in the development process , va risks delaying functionality and / or deploying functionality with unknown defects that could require future rework that may be costly and ultimately impede the claims examiners' ability to process claims efficiently . in early may 2011 , we reported that the implementation of remaining capabilities is behind schedule and additional modifications are needed . according to va officials , system enhancements such as automatic verification of the length of service were delayed because of complexities with systems integration and converting data from the interim system . additionally , recent legislative changes to the program required va to modify the system and its deployment schedule . for instance , va will need to modify its system to reflect changes to the way tuition and fees are calculated — an enhancement that officials described as difficult to implement . because of these delays , final deployment of the system is now scheduled for the end of 2011 — a year later than planned . effective information security controls are essential to securing the information systems and information on which va depends to carry out its mission .