the victim did not respond . the staff member told police he interpreted the victim's silence as an unwillingness to talk due to anger about the restraint . he said he waited for a minute while the victim lay silently on the ground . when the victim did not respond to his question a second time , he tapped the victim on the shoulder and rolled him over . the staff member observed that the victim was pale and could not detect a pulse . all efforts to revive the victim failed , and he was declared dead at a nearby hospital . when the staff member demonstrated his restraint technique for the police , they found that his technique violated the restraint policies of the program . these policies prohibited staff from placing any pressure on the back of a person being restrained . the report added that this staff member was reprimanded for injuring a youth in 2002 as a result of improper restraint . after this incident , program administrators banned the staff member from participating in restraints for 1 month . the reprimand issued by program administrators over this incident noted that the staff member had actually trained other staff members in performing restraints , making the matter more serious . the police reports also cite one of the staff member's performance evaluations that noted that he had problems with his temper . according to the reports , one of the youth in the program said the staff member could become agitated when putting youth in restraint . although the texas department of family and protective services alleged that the victim's death was due to physical abuse , the official certificate of death stated that it was an accident and a grand jury declined to press charges against the staff member performing the restraint . however , the victim's siblings obtained a civil settlement against the program and the staff member for an undisclosed amount . the program remained open until may 2006 , when a 12-year - old boy drowned on a bike outing with the program . on one occasion , while he was staying with a host family and other patients , he attempted to escape from the program . the victim claims that they restrained him by wrapping him in a blanket and tying him up . according to the victim , when he turned 18 , he submitted a request to leave the program but his request was denied because he had not followed the proper procedure and was a danger to himself . for expressing his desire to leave the program , he was stripped of all progress he had made to that point , and was prevented from further advancing until the program director decided he was be eligible . incident reports filed by program staff document that after he had turned 18 , the victim was restrained on 26 separate days , with at least two restraints lasting more than 12 hours . according to program rules , failure of the parents to follow program rules and fully support and participate in the program would jeopardize their son's treatment and progress and put him at risk of expulsion .