it began the study at that time too . in march 2009 , irs released its study , which concluded that irs was more cost effective than collection agencies in collecting tax debts when working similar cases . as a result , irs announced that it would not renew expiring contracts with the private collection agencies . the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act in 2015 mandated that irs assign inactive tax debt cases to private collection agencies . inactive cases are those that irs includes in its potentially collectible inventory but is not actively pursuing . congress defined three types of inactive tax debt cases that must be assigned to the collection agencies , which are those: removed from active inventory due to a lack of irs resources or inability to contact a taxpayer ; not assigned for collection to an irs employee and more than one - third of the period of applicable statute of limitation has lapsed ; and assigned for collection and more than 365 days have passed without any interaction with the taxpayer or a third party for purposes of furthering collection . the act also excluded certain taxpayer accounts from being assigned to a collection agency . specifically , accounts are to be excluded if the taxpayer is deceased ; under the age of 18 ; in designated combat zones ; a victim of tax - related identity theft ; under examination , litigation , criminal investigation or levy ; subject to pending or active offers in compromise , an installment agreement , or a right of appeal ; or involved in an innocent spouse case . the american jobs creation act and the fast act together created two funds which allow irs to retain up to 50 percent of the amounts collected by private collection agencies . specifically , irs can retain up to 25 percent of the amounts that collection agencies collect in each of these funds: cost of services fund to pay collection agencies' commissions . special compliance personnel program fund to pay costs of administering the collection agency contracts and costs of adding collection staff . according to irs officials , irs's approach for implementing the pdc program is to roll out cases over time in three major phases , moving from simpler to more complex cases . the first phase ( april 2017 ) included the simplest types of cases in which individual taxpayers had agreed to the debt owed . the second phase ( march 2018 ) added individual tax debts from irs compliance activities — such as auditing the accuracy of filed tax returns — where taxpayers have not agreed with the debt owed and unfiled tax returns ( i.e. , from individuals who did not file tax returns as required ) . the third phase ( planned for march 2019 ) is to add business tax debt cases and unfiled business tax returns . as shown in figure 1 , since first assigning cases to collection agencies in april 2017 , irs has increased the number and types of tax debt cases . by the end of fiscal year 2019 , irs plans to have assigned about 2.4 million cases that it expects to be eligible for the pdc program .