gao - 04-116 . washington , d.c.: october 16 , 2003 federal home loan bank system: key loan pricing terms can differ significantly . gao - 03-973 . washington , d.c.: september 8 , 2003 . financial regulation: review of selected operations of the federal housing finance board . this raises questions as to the independence of that board . in the area of compensation , there are indications that the structure of executive compensation arrangements and the process of determining compensation levels at the gses are not in line with best practices for corporate governance . as examples , according to the ofheo report , approximately 54 percent of the total cash compensation ( salaries , bonuses , and other compensation ) paid by freddie mac to executive officers for performance in 2001 was based on corporate performance for that year . the study found that the compensation of senior executives , in particular , the size of the bonus pool , was tied , in part , to meeting or exceeding annual specified earnings per share targets . ofheo concluded that the importance of achieving such targets contributed , in part , to the improper accounting and management practices of the gse . as such , ofheo recommended that freddie mac should develop financial incentives for executives and employees based on long - term goals . our study at farmer mac also identified an aggressive stock option vesting plan whereby stock options for employees and directors were fully vested within 2 years . by comparison , companies have average vesting periods of 4 to 5 years . farmer mac has since changed its vesting program to be more aligned with those of other companies . finally , in my view , adequate transparency is important because the housing gses engage in complex transactions , such as securitizations , guarantees , and hedging of risk which introduce many financial reporting complexities . with the exception of farmer mac , gses are exempt from the securities laws , and are not required to file disclosure documents with the securities exchange commission ( sec ) with respect to their securities issuances . nevertheless , in october 2000 , fannie mae and freddie mac adopted six voluntary commitments aimed at increasing their financial disclosures . more recently , fannie mae has registered its stock with sec on a voluntary basis and freddie mac has stated its intention to do the same . although financial disclosure may improve transparency , its impact on the gses and their customers or funding parties may be limited if the gses are perceived to have implicit government backing . for this reason , while market discipline can play a role in curbing risky behavior by gses , it also has its limitations . effective oversight thus takes on more importance as a means for limiting inappropriate risk - taking behavior by the gses . now let me move on to the last line of defense , that is , oversight by regulators . unfortunately , the current housing gse regulatory structure is fragmented , which limits the federal government's ability to oversee the gse's activities .