( app . i discusses our scope and methodology in more detail. ) since 1872 , congress has set aside natural , cultural , and recreational park sites to leave them unimpaired for future generations . in accordance with its charter , the foundation raises private donations from individuals , other foundations , and corporations to support the park service and has broad discretion in how it raises and distributes these donations . friends groups are another type of nonprofit partner that supports the parks . the park service describes friends groups as any nonprofit organization established primarily to assist or benefit a specific park area , a series of park areas , a program , or the entire national park system . they are generally formed under state law and must comply with state and federal requirements for charitable fund - raising as well as standards of professional conduct . these include specific standards and philosophies of operation , best practices , codes of professional conduct , fiduciary guidelines and financial accountability requirements , independent audit procedures , and public disclosure requirements , among others . the park service does not require friends groups to operate as tax - exempt entities or to have formal partnership agreements with the agency unless they raise funds for the parks . guidelines for park fund - raising activities are the primary source of park policy covering friends groups' activities . the park service estimated that in 2006 , there were 186 friends groups contributing time , expertise , and privately raised funds to support the national parks . the groups vary in size , organizational structure , and nonprofit governance and fund - raising expertise . some , like the frederick vanderbilt garden association and eugene o'neill tao house foundation , are small volunteer organizations , while others , such as the cuyahoga national park association and golden gate national parks conservancy , are large - scale fund - raising partners that also provide research , interpretive and conservation programming , and park tours . cooperating associations — another type of nonprofit partner — support primarily interpretation , education , and research in the parks . the park service's relationship with cooperating associations began in 1923 with the founding of the yosemite association , and by 2009 , the number of cooperating associations had grown to about 70 . led by boards of directors and executive directors responsible for day - to - day management , cooperating associations provide program and financial assistance to national parks by producing and selling educational and interpretive materials in bookstores , providing information to visitors , and managing educational programs and field institutes ; they return some portion of their profits from these activities to the parks to support the parks' interpretive and educational mission . many cooperating associations support multiple parks and other public land management units . for example , eastern national and western national parks association — two of the largest cooperating associations — partner , respectively , with more than 130 and about 65 parks and other units . others , such as black hills parks and forests association and great smoky mountains association , partner with a few parks or a single park .