reputational ) . for example , clearly defined lease terms may help agencies manage risks of costs for unexpected building repairs . further considerations we noted in our 2014 report include the availability of an appropriate partner — and that partners should bring complementary resources , skills , and financial capacities to the relationship — and management of the relationship with that partner . while different funding mechanisms have been used as an alternative to obtaining upfront funding for federal real property projects , changes to the budgetary structure itself — within the bounds of the unified budget that encompasses the full scope of federal programs and transactions — may also help agencies meet their real property needs . such alternatives may include changing existing or introducing new account structures to fund real property projects . our previous work identified options for changes within the current discretionary budget structure and options on the mandatory side of the budget . alternative budgetary structures may change budgetary incentives for agencies and therefore help congress and agencies make more prudent long - term fiscal decisions . chairman barrasso , ranking member carper , and members of the committee , this concludes my prepared statement . i am happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . if you or your staff members have any questions concerning this testimony , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or wised@gao.gov . in addition , contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this statement . individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are mike armes ( assistant director ) , colin ashwood , matt cook , joseph cruz , keith cunningham , alexandra edwards , carol henn , susan irving , hannah laufe , diana maurer , john mortin , monique nasrallah , matt voit , michelle weathers , and elizabeth wood . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . gsa agreed with the recommendation and has since updated its guidance to include these criteria . in january 2017 , gsa agreed to a swap exchange for the u.s. department of transportation volpe center in cambridge , massachusetts . after a competitive process , gsa selected the massachusetts institute of technology ( mit ) as its exchange partner for the existing department of transportation ( dot ) facility . per the agreement , mit will construct a new dot facility on a portion of a 14 acre site to which dot has title and , in exchange , will receive title to the remaining portion of the site that will not be used by dot , which is located near its main campus . gsa indicated that , once completed , the project will provide $750 million in value to the federal government in the form of the design and construction services and value - equalization funds from mit .