the department of education did not have any comments . we also sought comments on our characterization of the textbook industry from the national association of college stores and the association of american publishers , the trade groups representing the companies we interviewed for this study . nacs generally agreed with our findings , stating that the report accurately portrayed the textbook industry . nacs also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . ( 2 ) what factors have contributed to changes in textbook prices ? aap agreed with some findings in the report but expressed concern with respect to the data sources we used in our analyses and the tone and objectivity of the report . and ( 3 ) what factors explain why a given u.s. textbook may retail outside the united states for a different price ? aap also suggested alternative data sources for addressing these issues , but we found that they were not sufficiently reliable for our purposes . while aap disagreed with our use of cpi data from bls , these are the most complete and reliable data on textbook prices available . to quantify the change in college textbook prices , the department of labor's bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) constructed for gao's use a consumer price index ( cpi ) data series that shows how the price of textbooks for consumers has changed since december 1986 , the earliest date for which college textbook prices are available as part of bls's research index . in drawing samples to compute price indices , bls defines a textbook as any book required for a course , including books intended for general readership and packages containing the textbook and related supplements when the textbook alone has not been ordered . in order to put the price of a textbook into context , we examined the cost of tuition and fees to students and their families as tracked by the cpi since 1980 . we also examined data from the department of education's ( education ) integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) to gain an understanding of the cost of textbooks and supplies ( ipeds does not disaggregate textbooks and supplies ) for first - time , full - time , degree - seeking students during the course of an entire academic year , as estimated by postsecondary institutions , and the portion of the total estimated cost of tuition and fees that books and supplies represent . to determine what factors have contributed to the change in college textbook prices , we interviewed executives from five textbook publishers that account for more than 80 percent of new textbook sales ; the three major national used textbook wholesalers ; three companies that operate over 1,300 college textbook retail stores , or 29 percent of stores nationwide ; the national association of college stores ; the association of american publishers ; the california and state public interest research groups ; and various other industry experts . to determine what factors have led to differences in the price of some textbooks in u.s. and non - u.s. markets , we reviewed relevant economic theory and interviewed major industry players .