procurement . pharmacies use a procurement process to order medications for pharmacy inventory , which includes activities such as medication selection , cost analysis , purchasing procedures , and record keeping . as part of medication selection , pharmacies may use a formulary , which is a list of medications that have been approved for prescription within a hospital or health care system . a prime vendor or wholesaler is one of the most commonly used sources to obtain medications for the pharmacy . prime vendors order large quantities of medications from manufacturers , allowing pharmacies to purchase various products from many drug manufacturers at once . orders for products that are not carried by the prime vendor may need to be ordered through another source , such as directly from the manufacturer . receipt and storage . when medications are delivered to the pharmacy , staff are to take several steps to properly receive and store the shipment . for example , to ensure there is segregation of duties , the person responsible for ordering and purchasing the medications is supposed to be different than the person receiving and stocking pharmacy inventory . additionally , any delivered products that require special storage conditions , such as freezing or refrigeration , are to be checked in first to maintain the stability of the medication . tracking . once in storage , pharmacies use a variety of tools to account for the filling , dispensing , and removal of medications in both inpatient and outpatient settings . some pharmacies have software that allows them to track inventory in real time , an ability known as maintaining perpetual inventory . a perpetual inventory system is a method of recording the quantity of a particular medication continuously as prescriptions are filled and dispensed . after each prescription is filled and dispensed to the patient , the amount of medication used for the prescription is removed from the inventory to ensure the quantity on hand recorded by the software is always current . many medications have barcodes on their packaging to allow for easy identification of the medication in a computer system . the barcode generally includes the product's national drug code , which indicates the name and package size of the medication . in the hospital setting , medications can be scanned out of the pharmacy and into machines for storage on hospital wards . dispensing . in both inpatient wards and outpatient pharmacies , automated dispensing machines and barcode technology can assist staff in maintaining and dispensing medications to patients . automated dispensing machines generally include several drawers and cabinets that have pockets or trays that hold preset levels of a variety of common medications . they may also be used to hold controlled substances , generally in locked boxes or cubes within the machine . on hospital wards medication in automated dispensing machines is often packaged in unit doses — individually packaged medications for patient use . barcodes can help verify a prescription before nurses give medication to a patient . hospitals that do not have automatic dispensing machines use carts with drawers filled with each patient's medication . outpatient pharmacies use automated dispensing machines to assist with filling prescriptions .