investigative phase . although case processing time for the full sample is generalizable , it is not generalizable for any subset . additionally , the case processing time data reported for the two investigative phase subsets are based on 89 of the 91 cases we analyzed . for the investigative phase subsets , we excluded 2 additional cases because we could not identify the investigative phase in which they were closed based on the evidence in the case file . for the subset of inquiries closed before full investigation , the median days to close a case was 249 , with a range from 14 to 2,215 days . for full investigations , the median days to close a case was 349 , with a range from 51 to 1,181 days . our random sample of 91 cases ( out of a total of 871 cases closed during this time period ) included 61 inquiries closed before full investigation and 28 cases closed after a full investigation . we were unable to determine the investigative phase in which 2 cases were closed . although data from the full sample are representative within the given parameters , any subset of these data cannot be assumed to be representative . that is , data specific to the cases closed before full investigation and the data specific to full investigation are not generalizable and apply only to the actual cases reviewed . in addition to not completing investigations in 180 days in most cases , dod has not complied with the statutory reporting requirement to provide notification in those instances where the investigations go beyond 180 days , although it is taking steps to do so . the military whistleblower protection act requires the ig investigating an allegation of reprisal to submit to the secretary of defense and the complainant a notice if it cannot provide a report on the completed investigation within 180 days of the date the allegation was made to an ig in dod . the notice should include the reason for the delay and an expected completion date for the investigation . dodig officials acknowledged that they and the services had not been making the required notifications . the officials stated they used to submit these reports to the secretary of defense , but stopped doing so at some point because they were told by officials at the office receiving the notifications that they did not know what to do with the information . based on our review of whistleblower reprisal policies and procedures , we created a data collection instrument to identify the key characteristics of whistleblower reprisal cases , check the data reliability of the database information , and assess the completeness of files . we also developed a standard approach to reviewing files to ensure we reviewed all cases consistently . we refined this data collection instrument and our approach by first reviewing 12 case files that were not part of the 97 identified . our methodology for reviewing the random sample required two analysts to review each case file , enter the information for each field in the data collection instrument , and transfer their information for each case to a central spreadsheet .