it also does not yet have a strategic plan . agencies can use strategic plans to set goals and identify performance measures for gauging progress towards those goals . strategic plans can also outline how agencies plan to collaborate with each other to help achieve goals and objectives . the program began taking steps to develop a joint strategic plan during the course of our review and , in august 2017 , began soliciting bids from contractors for the plan's development . the statement of work for the contract stipulates that the contractor shall develop guiding principles for the select agent program along with a mission statement and strategic goals and objectives , among other requirements . however , it does not have any requirements related to development of a joint workforce plan . we have found in the past that agencies' strategic workforce planning should be clearly linked to the agency's mission and long - term goals developed during the strategic planning process . developing a joint workforce plan that assesses workforce and training needs for the program as a whole would help the program to better manage fragmentation by improving how it leverages resources to ensure all workforce and training needs are met . leveraging resources is especially important given fiscal constraints . in our report , we recommended that cdc and aphis take several steps to address these findings . first , we made five recommendations to improve independence , including that cdc and aphis regularly assess the potential risks posed by the program's structure and the effectiveness of its mechanisms to address those risks , and take actions as necessary to ensure any identified risks are addressed so that impairments to independence do not affect its ability to achieve its objectives . second , to improve the ability to perform reviews , we recommended that the directors of the select agent program work together to develop and implement a plan to identify which laboratory activities carry the highest biological safety and security risks and to respond to those risks by aligning inspections and other oversight efforts to target those activities . we also made several other recommendations , including recommending that the directors of the select agent program develop a joint workforce plan that assesses workforce and training needs for the program as a whole . selected countries and regulatory sectors employ approaches to promote effective oversight that sometimes differ from those of the select agent program by , for example , having regulatory bodies that are structurally independent from the entities they oversee or taking a risk - based approach to performing reviews . to illustrate , with regard to independence , great britain's health and safety executive , whose mission is to protect worker and public health and safety and which oversees laboratories that work with pathogens , is an independent government agency . according to officials from the health and safety executive and laboratory representatives , one strength of this approach is that it avoids potential organizational conflicts of interest because none of the laboratories it oversees are part of the same agency . some other regulatory sectors in the united states , including the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , are also structurally independent from regulated facilities as a mechanism to ensure independence .