offshore leases . offshore leases showed less variation between ogor data and others' estimates of natural gas venting and flaring than onshore leases , but the volumes that operators reported to mrm's ogor were still much lower than the volumes they reported to boemre's goads system and estimates from epa . operators reported to ogor that between 0.3 and 0.5 percent of the natural gas produced on offshore leases was vented and flared each year from 2006 to 2008 ; however , they reported to goads that they vented and flared about 1.4 percent — about 32 bcf – – of the natural gas produced on federal leases in the gulf of mexico in 2008 . although regulations require offshore operators to report all sources of lost gas to ogor , boemre officials said that that this did not include fugitive emissions . furthermore , these officials also said that operators likely reported volumes from some operational sources as “lease - use” gas instead of including it in the venting and flaring data , thus contributing to the differences between ogor and goads . goads data included sources similar to those included in epa's and wrap's data for onshore production , including the same operational sources . further , guidance to operators for reporting to goads explicitly outlines the sources to be reported and how they should be estimated , while guidance for ogor does not . table 3 outlines the emission sources for volumes operators reported to the goads system for 2008 . in addition , epa's offshore estimates showed that around 2.3 percent of gas produced on offshore federal leases – – as much as 50 bcf – – was vented and flared every year from 2006 to 2008 . according to our analysis of epa's work , additional venting from natural gas compressors , used to maintain proper pressure in production equipment , accounted for the majority of the difference between the offshore epa and goads volumes . on several occasions boemre has made comparisons between data on vented and flared volumes in the ogor and goads systems , according to boemre officials . in 2004 , boemre compared data from the 2000 goads study with data from ogor for a subset of offshore leases and found reported vented and flared volumes were not always in agreement — attributing this difference to different operator interpretations of goads and ogor reporting requirements . boemre officials said they revised reporting procedures for the 2005 goads study . more recently , boemre made similar comparisons between data from the 2008 goads study and ogor data for a subset of leases and found they were in closer agreement . boemre officials told us they will continue to make such comparisons to try to ensure the accuracy of the data in each system . in reporting volumes of vented and flared gas to both systems , operators can choose from a broad array of software packages , models , and equations to estimate emissions , and these techniques can yield widely varied results . for example , one study found that various estimation techniques to determine emissions from oil storage tanks either consistently underestimated or overestimated vented volumes .