this needs to be done quickly . our review of the integrated baseline review , which agencies are required by omb to complete to ensure that the evm program baseline is accurate , showed that it did not address key baseline considerations , such as cost and schedule risks . moreover , other us - visit contractors have not been required to use evm , although program officials told us that this was to change effective october 1 , 2006 . to ensure that programs manage their performance effectively , it is important that they define and measure progress against program commitments and hold themselves accountable for results . measurements of the operational performance , progress , and results are important to reasonably ensure that problems and shortfalls can be addressed and resolved in a timely fashion and so that responsible parties can be held accountable . thus far , effective performance and accountability mechanisms have yet to be fully established for us - visit . as we reported , cbp officials at 12 of 21 land poe sites that we visited told us about us - visit - related computer slowdowns and freezes that adversely affected visitor processing and inspection times at 9 of the 12 sites , but noted that these problems were not always reported to cbp's computer help desk , as required by cbp guidelines . although various controls are in place to alert us - visit and cbp officials to problems as they occur , these controls did not alert officials to all problems ( they had been unaware of the problems we identified before we brought them to their attention ) . these computer processing problems have the potential to not only inconvenience travelers because of the increased time needed to complete the inspection process , but to compromise security , particularly if cbp officers are unable to perform biometric checks — one of the critical reasons us - visit was installed at poes . in addition , to permit meaningful program oversight , it is important that expenditure plans describe how well dhs is progressing against the commitments made in prior expenditure plans . however , us - visit's expenditure plan for fiscal year 2006 ( the fifth expenditure plan ) continued a longstanding pattern of not describing progress against commitments made in previous plans . for example , according to the fiscal year 2005 expenditure plan , the prime contractor was to begin integrating the long - term increment 4 strategy into the interim us - visit system's environment and the overall dhs enterprise architecture , and that us - visit and the prime contractor would work with the stakeholder community to identify opportunities for delivery of long - term capabilities under increment 4 . however , the fiscal year 2006 plan does not discuss progress or accomplishments relative to these commitments . additionally , the expenditure plan committed to begin deploying the most effective exit alternative for capturing biometrics at air and sea poes during fiscal year 2005 . in contrast , the 2006 expenditure plan states that the exit pilots will continue throughout fiscal year 2006 and does not address whether the fiscal year 2005 schedule deployment commitment was met .