we agree . however , the fact remains that there are insufficient data to determine the validity of this explanation versus other possible explanations . in the meantime , the sst program — a targeting program intended to identify high - hazard worksites — continues to direct inspection resources to large numbers of sites that have no serious violations . finally , osha made several comments on our examination of the agency's ability to demonstrate impact on workplace safety and health . for example , it reaffirmed its use of 1993 through 1995 data as a reasonable baseline from which to measure its strategic plan's accomplishments , noting , among other things , that a baseline is by definition arbitrary . we continue to believe that , by selecting the baseline it did , osha took credit for declines that occurred before 1997 , the year when the strategic plan was implemented . labor's comments in their entirety as well as our responses to their comments are shown in appendix ii . additionally , both osha and bls offered technical comments , which we incorporated throughout the report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of labor and the assistant secretary for occupational safety and health . we will also make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-7215 . major contributors are listed in appendix iii . table 3 identifies the various databases and paper files that track work - related training taken by the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) inspectors that were maintained by the regional and area offices we contacted . the following are gao's comments on the osha letter dated november 14 , 2002 . we clarified the language in the report to better highlight recent improvements in work - related fatality and injury rates . our draft report acknowledged there are no definitive data showing that smaller worksites are more hazardous than larger worksites . however , knowledgeable experts — including some at osha — believe that the smaller sites are indeed more dangerous than the larger ones . furthermore , osha's current construction targeting efforts do not include these smaller sites . accordingly , we continue to believe that supplementing inspections of larger worksites with inspections of smaller ones is a prudent approach to take until osha completes its study of factors that will help it better identify the most hazardous construction worksites . while osha provided data to show that medium - sized employers may be more hazardous than smaller ones , employer size and construction worksite size are two different measures . as a result , these statistics may not reflect the level of hazards at small construction sites . we believe that using the rate of serious violations cited is a valid measure of a worksite's hazardousness , although we acknowledge it is not the only one . this approach has been used by researchers and osha itself to identify whether osha is focusing its inspection resources in the right places .