sexual harassment . as defined in the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( nasem ) 2018 report , sexual harassment encompasses three types of behavior: sexual coercion: favorable treatment conditioned on sexual activity . unwanted sexual attention: verbal or physical unwelcome sexual advances , which can include assault . gender harassment: sexist hostility and crude behavior . the most common form of sexual harassment is gender harassment , which generally involves hostility , exclusion , or other discrimination based on a person's gender . the 2018 report found that sexual harassment in academia is significantly more common among female students in engineering and medical majors than in non - stem fields . according to the report , at least five factors create the conditions under which sexual harassment is likely to occur in stem programs and departments in academia: perceived tolerance for sexual harassment environments where men outnumber women and leadership is male environments in which the power structure of an organization is hierarchical with strong dependencies on those at higher levels or in which people are geographically isolated increased focus on symbolic compliance with title ix uninformed leadership on campus title ix of the education amendments of 1972 . title ix of the education amendments of 1972 is the primary federal law that addresses sex discrimination in all federally funded grant programs at educational institutions . under title ix , federal agencies that award grants to educational institutions have enforcement responsibilities to ensure such institutions do not discriminate based on sex . enforcement responsibilities include issuing regulations , conducting periodic compliance reviews of funding recipients , and investigating timely written complaints of sex discrimination against recipients . doj and the department of education have other responsibilities for administering title ix . in contrast , cabinet agencies doe and usda - nifa provide fewer forms of guidance , either through their website or agency director and secretary - level policy statements and documents , which focus more generally on the broader category of sex discrimination or provide different levels of information on sexual harassment prevention policies for grantees . see table 4 for more information . regarding the content of the policies , our preliminary analysis shows that doe , nih , nsf , and usda - nifa updated their definitions of behaviors or actions that qualify as sexual harassment in their grantee policies and procedures , and nasa is in the process of doing so . the definitions are more specific than previous definitions ; for example , they include descriptions of gender harassment , the most common form of sexual harassment . the increased specificity may make clear the behaviors or actions grantees are expected to address in their efforts to prevent sexual harassment . the agencies continue to develop and revise policies and communication mechanisms for grantees . also , nsf and nasa have modified , or are taking steps to modify their grant terms and conditions to strengthen requirements for university grantees to report on findings of sexual harassment to the funding agency .