construction . the construction stage begins when nsf makes awards to external recipients for acquisition or construction of research infrastructure . such awards generally take the form of cooperative agreements , although nsf occasionally uses contracts , according to agency officials . the policies and procedures in nsf's major facilities guide apply to research infrastructure projects regardless of the award instrument employed . according to nsf's major facilities guide , the transition from construction to operations could be a single acceptance event or multiple events depending on the nature of the project , and many projects require an integration and testing phase , followed by a commissioning phase to bring the facility up to the design level of operational readiness . the construction stage ends after final delivery and acceptance of the defined scope of work and facility performance per terms of the award instrument . operations . for projects under construction , we identify total project costs based on the amounts awarded in the cooperative support agreements for construction and the not - to - exceed amounts authorized by the national science board . only at the end of the projects — when construction is complete and the awards have been closed out — will the final total project costs be known . in addition to the performance measurement baseline and budget contingency , a project's not - to - exceed cost that the national science board authorized may include the following: fee . nsf may provide recipients the opportunity to earn a fee ( formerly referred to by nsf as a management fee ) for major facilities projects . according to nsf's standard operating guidance on negotiation , award , and payment of a fee , such a fee can stimulate efficient performance . management reserve . nsf , not the award recipient , holds management reserve to manage budget uncertainties , unforeseeable events , and risks that the recipient is not able to manage , according to nsf officials . according to agency officials and the major facilities guide , nsf does not hold a management reserve except in rare circumstances . since february 2008 , nsf has had a policy to manage cost overruns on major facilities projects . under this policy , the cost estimate developed at the preliminary design review should have adequate contingency to cover all foreseeable risks . any cost increases not covered by contingency are generally to be accommodated by reductions in scope . figure 2 provides a breakdown of the total project cost components in relation to the not - to - exceed award amount . nsf officials said that under this policy , they will only request an increase to the not - to - exceed cost that the national science board authorized if the recipient cannot address the increase through use of the project's budget contingency or acceptable reductions to the project's scope . accordingly , at the preliminary design review , projects must have a prioritized , time - phased list of options for reducing scope during construction , known as scope contingency , and the potential cost savings associated with those options is to total at least 10 percent of the project's baseline .