we disagree . fms is in a unique position to identify and help correct many of the issues we identified in the program , some of which are relatively simple and could be quickly addressed . for example , it took the department of state ( state ) about a month to correct the problem we identified with respect to missing names in the payment file it had been submitting to fms for payment once we brought the matter to the department's attention . a programming error appears to have resulted in the names not being in the disbursement files sent to fms . according to a state official , the department has likely had names of its payment files since the 1980s , and it did not know that the names were not getting to fms . because of state's responsiveness to our finding , fms is now levying payments from state's contractors with unpaid taxes . had fms provided effective oversight and management of the debt collection program , it could have detected the problem years ago and worked with the state department to correct it long before our audit . while we agree that agencies should be responsible for the completeness and accuracy of the payment files they send to fms , we believe fms should take a more proactive role in identifying issues that impede the program's ability to maximize collections and work with agencies to resolve such issues . in responding to our report , fms disagreed with our conclusion that it had not implemented the provision of the american jobs creation act of 2004 authorizing an increase in the maximum amount of contractor payments subject to levy of up to 100 percent . fms noted that it had made the changes necessary in the levy program to allow for levying at 100 percent , but that it was unable to implement the provision because civilian agencies' payment records do not separately identify real estate transactions — which are not subject to the 100 percent levy — from other contractor payments . our report clearly indicates that the 100 percent levy provision had not yet been fully implemented because of a number of challenges , including the determination by irs that real estate transactions are not subject to the 100 percent levy provision , and that agency pay systems are presently unable to identify real estate transactions from other contractor payments . we also acknowledged in our report that a legislative change is being sought to subject real estate payments to the 100 percent levy provision . our report describes this issue not as a weakness in the program but , rather , as another challenge that fms faces in maximizing collections under the levy program . our report also acknowledges that certain dod payments are already being levied at the 100 percent maximum . fms also did not concur with our recommendation to withhold payments that do not include a valid name in the payment record . however , fms said it would improve monitoring and ensure agencies' compliance with the requirement to include names , tins , and payment types on certified vouchers .