gao - 08-884r . washington , d.c.: july 15 , 2008 . airline deregulation: reregulating the airline industry would likely reverse consumer benefits and not save airline pension . gao - 06-630 . washington , d.c.: june 9 , 2006 . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . while dod disagreed with our recommendation to conduct risk assessments , dod agreed with the value of conducting a risk assessment on the declining u.s. charter passenger charter capability , stating that this has already been evaluated by the craf viability study conducted by ida dod also stated that , based on the recommendations of the ida study , dod is already examining the declining passenger charter fleet and potential mitigation strategies . however , as we stated in our report , ida's report included data that stopped at 2007 and did not include data regarding the 2008 business termination of a carrier that provided nearly 50 percent of the charter passenger capability available to dod . also , while the ida report stated that the charter passenger industry may become marginal , data analysis that supported this statement did not establish the maximum and minimum acceptable risk for the craf program . therefore , we continue to believe that our recommendation to establish acceptable risk levels is still viable and important . dod also disagreed with the second part of our recommendation concerning the need to conduct a risk assessment on the lack of a craf outsized cargo capability , stating that the craf program is not intended to provide outsized cargo capability . in their comments , dod stated that its use of foreign carriers to transport outsized cargo is a strategy to reduce costs , save military flying hours and flight crews for higher priority missions , reduce military footprint , or provide flexible contract length / timing . dod also stated that it is not an indication of a shortfall in the dod outsize cargo capability or the craf program . however , as we reported , dod used foreign - owned carriers flying an - 124 aircraft to move high priority outsized cargo ( mraps ) into iraq instead of the organic fleet of c - 5s and c - 17s . we did not state that there was a shortfall in either the craf program or dod outsized capability . rather , we point out that , if dod is to know whether there is a shortfall , gap , or redundancy in that capability , particularly given the addition of over 15,000 mraps , they would need to do a risk assessment . we continue to believe that a risk assessment of this issue would give dod specific information that would help it shape future strategic transportation requirements . dod partially agreed with the third part of our recommendation pertaining to the need to develop appropriate policies and procedures for mitigating any identified risks regarding the decline of charter passenger capability and lack of outsized cargo capability . dod stated that u.s. transportation command is examining potential mitigation strategies for the declining u.s. passenger charter segment .