irs agreed with our recommendations . in september 2019 , the deputy commissioner for operations support reported that irs is working to address our recommendations , including a plan to reduce the hiring backlog , increase hiring capacity , and improve monitoring and reporting capabilities . in november 2019 , we determined irs had addressed two of our recommendations by developing a strategy to address current and future hiring requirements and issuing guidance to business units' executives on streamlining the hiring approval process . as noted above , the deputy commissioner for operations support reported that irs is working to address our remaining recommendations . taxpayers cannot file their tax returns on irs.gov and irs officials told us they have no plans to develop such a capability . as noted above , the absence of electronic filing services on irs.gov is a notable difference between the services irs provides and those provided in the three countries and two of the three states we reviewed . we found that irs's free file agreement benefits a small proportion of taxpayers , but that the full benefits and costs of this agreement are uncertain . irs has renewed the nearly 20-year old agreement eight times since its inception in 2002 without sufficient consideration of how this agreement relates to its growing portfolio of online services , such as the development of the capability for taxpayers to file amended returns electronically . irs officials do not regard the absence of electronic filing capabilities on irs.gov to be a shortcoming . rather , they believe that the free file agreement has served both taxpayers and irs well . officials noted that eligible taxpayers can receive free access to electronic tax preparation and filing services provided by the companies which make up the free file , inc. consortium . additional benefits accrue to irs , according to officials , by encouraging electronic filing which reduces the costs of processing returns . further , irs officials noted that having industry assist taxpayers with electronic filing allows them to focus on providing other online services , such as the informational and payment services described above . officials representing free file , inc. expressed similar views on what they consider to be the benefits of the agreement . however , irs data show that less than 2 percent of all individual tax returns were filed using free file in fiscal year 2018 ( see figure 5 ) . about their overall satisfaction with irs.gov . whether this experience increased their confidence in irs . whether they could find what they needed easily and quickly . irs's summary of the results of the “view your account information” taxpayer experience survey identifies potential limitations . irs states that users who have experienced challenges logging into protected services , such as “view your account information,” provide negative feedback on the survey administered to users of static pages . however , the “view your account information” experience survey is not designed to capture such negative feedback because a taxpayer must log into his or her account to be selected to participate in this survey . irs officials agreed that our analysis is accurate , but had a different view on the implications .