investment rationale . four of the six pi firms ( firms a , b , c , and d ) acquired nursing home chains , and officials at all four described increased demand for long - term care due to an aging population as their attraction to those investments . to help meet demographic demand , officials at firms a and d said they sought high - quality chains that focused on providing post - acute care to high - acuity patients ( those with clinically complex problems ) and indicated that these chains had top notch management already in place . an official at firm c said the firm was attracted by the improvements it could make to the nursing home chain . officials at all four pi firms characterized their investments as “long term,” but the number of years they planned to hold the investments differed . officials at firm a said they planned to hold their investment 3 to 9 years , during which time the firm intended to expand the number of patients the chain served to meet the long - term growth potential of the industry . an official at firm c indicated that it was likely the firm would maintain its investment in the chain for at least 20 years . officials at firms b and d did not specify a range or number of years . structural changes . officials at firms a and c said they divided the operations and the real estate into separate companies for tax or financing purposes but kept those companies under common ownership . an official at firm c explained that the creation of separate operating and real estate companies was designed to attract investors who wanted exposure to only one side of the nursing home company . in hindsight , however , the official said that the separate entities created for the acquisition were not worth the legal costs and reporting requirements and that the firm planned on collapsing the operating and real estate companies to simplify the organizational structure . officials at firms b and d did not mention any changes to the organizational structure of the chains they acquired . officials at firms a and c explained the benefits from having operations and real estate under the same chain ownership . an official at firm a stated that it was unlikely that the real estate could be converted to another use and that therefore it made sense for the nursing home operator , who is licensed to run the home , to own the real estate . an official noted that an operating company that does not own its real estate is unable to use the property as collateral for a loan . finally , officials at this pi firm told us that the chain's common ownership structure should reassure patients that the chain would take responsibility for any problems that occur . an official at firm c said that the chain leases some of its nursing homes from unaffiliated real estate owners but that it planned to cease operations at those locations if it was unable to purchase the real estate .