we found exceptions during each test . we also found control deficiencies through testing of a nonprobability sample of 30 accounting adjustment transactions for fiscal year 2013 , including ( 1 ) lack of timely supervisory review and therefore delayed recording of adjustments and ( 2 ) inadequate documentation to support the adjustments . figure 2 summarizes the estimated percentages of control deficiencies found in our nonpayroll expenditures testing . on the basis of our testing of controls for the random probability sample of 100 nonpayroll mining law program expenditure transactions , an estimated 13 percent of the 15,829 fiscal year 2013 mining law program nonpayroll expenditure transactions were either not recorded accurately or did not have sufficient documentation for determining whether each expenditure was accurately recorded to the correct fund , subactivity , fiscal year , or budget category.consideration whether ( 1 ) supporting documentation or blm officials' explanations clearly showed another subactivity should have been charged or ( 2 ) blm did not provide any documentation or the documentation provided was insufficient . specifically , in the instances where evidence or documentation was provided by blm , the information showed that the transaction was intended to be recorded to another subactivity outside of the mining law program . the majority of these were charge card transactions in which recording errors may have occurred because the mining law program code was assigned as the default code to the charge card account , and blm did not reallocate or adjust the for these exceptions , we took into charge to the correct benefitting subactivity . the following examples illustrate the problems we found . blm - provided electronic travel data showed that an employee's travel was conducted under the subactivity code for oil and gas management activities . however , travel costs of $1,069 were erroneously recorded to the mining law program . an expenditure for $348 under a contract for mail services was recorded to the mining law program . however , the contract order did not contain the mining law program as the chargeable subactivity . an expenditure for $460 was recorded as office supplies and materials to the mining law program . blm provided screenshots from its financial management system but was unable to provide any supporting documentation , such as invoices or receipts for the items purchased . blm's policy is that procurement items , including travel , and equipment purchases should be charged to the benefiting subactivity . in addition , for charge card transactions , the cardholder is required to reconcile charge card statements , annotate the correct accounting code on the charge card statement , and include supporting documentation . this inconsistency can create further confusion . standards for further , issues in communicating blm policies and procedures on properly coding mining law program funds also contributed to employees not following such procedures . for example , while instruction memorandums clarifying the proper coding of blm activities can be accessed through blm's intranet , blm officials said that these memorandums , which are over 10 years old , may be difficult to locate because they are stored in reverse chronological order by issuance date , and blm's online repository does not include an effective search function .