lack of transparency . another challenge reported by fema regional and state emergency management officials was the lack of transparency in how fema evaluates and provides a recommendation to the president on whether a declaration is warranted . for example , officials we interviewed in 4 of 10 regions indicated the lack of transparency as a challenge . a fema official in one region stated that the region would like more transparency regarding what fema headquarters recommends to the president and whether the president's decision aligns with fema's recommendation . state emergency management officials we interviewed in 10 of 11 states also reported that lack of transparency with the ia process is a challenge . for example , an emergency management official in one state said it is not clear how or if fema considers all of the factors . also , an emergency management official in another state reported that it was unclear to him why his state's declaration request was denied while the requests of other states with similar incidents were declared . difficulty gathering information on ia regulatory factors . officials in 4 of 10 fema regions reported difficulty gathering information , such as income or insurance coverage , as a challenge . an official in one region stated that it is difficult to obtain information related to ia factors from states . for example , the official said that calculating the concentration of damages is difficult absent technical guidance from fema headquarters , as the current guidance only accounts for the number of structure damage but not the impact of damage . further , officials in two fema regions stated that states lack a dedicated ia official , making it difficult for state officials , who play multiple roles , to provide the necessary information related to the ia factors in their ia declaration request . additionally , a state emergency management official in one state also reported that lack of staff resources in her state makes it difficult to verify all the local damage assessments prior to making a declaration request . pursuant to the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 , in november 2015 , fema issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to revise the six current ia regulatory factors to the following proposed factors: state fiscal capacity and resource availability ; uninsured home and personal property losses ; disaster - impacted population profile ; impact to community infrastructure ; casualties ; and disaster - related unemployment . according to fema headquarters officials , the revisions aim to provide more objective criteria , clarify the threshold for eligibility , and speed the declaration . the officials said the proposed rule also seeks to provide additional clarity and guidance for all the established factors . table 8 shows fema's description of current and proposed ia factors . fema received public comments from 14 states in the federal register during the comment period for the proposed rule and proposed guidance . the 14 states expressed concern about the proposed factor for state fiscal capacity and resource availability , including the reliability and relevance of data sources such as total taxable resources .