overseeing contract deliverables . aaa found that amrg did not effectively oversee deliverables in its marketing and advertising contracts and recommended that amrg develop procedures to ensure that contracts or task orders do not contain deliverables already provided in other contracts . as of september 2019 , aaa reported that this recommendation had not been fully implemented . amrg has revised its strategic marketing goals from tracking changes in individuals' attitudes toward the army , such as support for the army among the general population , to tracking the behaviors of these individuals , such as the number of visits to goarmy.com . for fiscal year 2018 , amrg had seven strategic marketing goals that tracked the attitudes of the general population and prospects toward the army . for fiscal year 2019 , amrg revised the goals to four that track attitudes , two that track behaviors , one that tracks effectiveness , and one that tracks efficiency . goals that track attitudes are aligned with the awareness phase of the consumer journey , whereas goals that track behaviors are more aligned with the engagement and activation phases . figure 3 shows how the fiscal year 2018 and 2019 strategic marketing goals align with the three phases of the consumer journey . looking ahead , amrg officials told us that , consistent with feedback they received from marketing industry experts , the strategic goals in the fiscal year 2020 marketing plan will all be behavioral and will target the different stages of what amrg refers to as a lead nurturing funnel . amrg officials stated that their goal is to use information so they can quickly shift attention and funding to different stages of the funnel that are not meeting their goals , so as to ensure that those stages get the attention needed to reach mission success . amrg's recent and ongoing steps to revise its marketing goals are consistent with the commercial best practice to develop an evaluation framework that identifies the target audience and includes measurable goals . to institutionalize amrg's updated processes , aaa recommended that amrg update army regulation 601-208 to reflect the new goals and processes it would implement to improve its program effectiveness . as of september 2019 , aaa reported that this recommendation had not been fully implemented . the army is in the process of revising its marketing and advertising regulation to reflect the updated strategic marketing goals and process . amrg had drafted a revision to the regulation ; however , amrg officials had put this process on hold while senior army leaders were making the decision about amrg's placement within the army . now that amrg has been redesignated as aemo and reassigned within the army , as of august 2019 amrg officials stated that the army was revising the regulation to reflect the new organization's relationship to other entities within the accessions enterprise . amrg expects the army to publish the updated regulation in 2020 . updating and documenting its assessment process .