dod had no comments . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the director , defense logistics agency ; appropriate congressional committees ; and other interested parties . this report will also be available at no charge on gao's website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 or by e - mail at makm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . key contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . in addition to the contact named above , penny berrier , assistant director ; brandon booth , alexandra dew silva , stephanie gustafson , victoria klepacz , jean mcsween , ralph roffo , roxanna sun , anne louise taylor , and alyssa weir made key contributions to this report . hardware and abrasives . for example , screws , nuts , washers , and keys . vehicular equipment components . for example , floor mats , vehicle door hinges , and tailgates . electrical and electronic equipment components . for example , pressure switches , electrical assemblies , and antennae . electric wire , and power and distribution equipment . for example , batteries , wiring harnesses , and special purpose cable assemblies . aerospace craft components and accessories . for example , insulation blankets , filters , and door handles . figure 2 shows examples of items in these categories . some of dla's projects resulted in lower prices for the reverse engineered parts in subsequent procurements . according to dla data , the agency saved at least $22 million from reverse engineering projects initiated from fiscal years 2015 through 2018 as a result of lower prices paid . for example , in one project we reviewed , a small business successfully reverse engineered a retaining ring , which assists in securing parts in an aircraft engine , purchased by troop support and became a new approved source of supply . a subsequent purchase of this part resulted in a unit price that was almost $70 lower per unit compared to the most recent purchase before reverse engineering . we found that troop support saved over $11,000 through this project . we found that 141 — or less than 10 percent — of all projects initiated from fiscal years 2015 through 2018 were successfully completed . table 2 describes the number of projects that were completed , in - process , and canceled as of december 2018 , according to dla . dla officials told us that less than 10 percent of projects have been completed for several reasons . dla officials stated that the engineering support activities at the military services sometimes take a long time to respond to requests for approval , which adds time to reverse engineering projects . for contractor - funded projects under the replenishment parts purchase or borrow program , reasons include the following: dla officials explained that contractors sometimes decide not to complete reverse engineering because the contractors determine the effort would be more labor intensive than originally anticipated or their priorities shift .