gao - 13-464t . washington d.c.: march 13 , 2013 . drug control: initial review of the national strategy and drug abuse prevention and treatment programs . gao - 12-744r . washington d.c.: july 6 , 2012 . table 2 provides the obligations by each state project . the national guard's state plans include 15 support activities , which are grouped into five broad mission categories , as shown in table 3 . the national guard counterdrug program collects information on the activities and supported organizations and uses staff days to measure its resource investment . our analysis of this information found that from fiscal years 2011 through 2014 the state plans invested most of their staff days in the mission categories of technical support and reconnaissance . during this period , the number of staff days invested in civil operations decreased , as shown in figure 3 . appendix v provides details on each of the 26 measures . our review of the counterdrug program's fiscal year 2015 performance measures against key attributes of successful performance measures identified by gao found that the set of measures provided information across the program's broad goals , measured three of the program's five core activities , and had limited overlap with each other . we also found that the individual performance measures were linked to the overall objectives of the program and were focused on measurable goals . some key attributes , such as a clarity , reliability , and objectivity , were reflected to varying degrees , but we found that the national guard had actions underway to better define and document the program's individual performance measures to improve the clarity and reliability of those individual measures . in february 2015 the national guard officials completed the fiscal year 2015-2016 counterdrug analyst performance metrics guide and stated that they were drafting guides for other program activities . we found that the ngb does not use the performance information it collects to help evaluate and inform funding for state - level programs and oversee the type of training offered by counterdrug schools . we have previously reported that setting useful performance measures can assist oversight ; with them , program managers can monitor and evaluate the performance of the program's activities , track how the activities contribute to attaining the program's goals , or identify potential problems and the need for corrective measures.according to leading practices for results - oriented management , to ensure that performance information will be both useful and used in decision making throughout the organization , agencies need to consider users' differing policy and management information needs . performance measures should be selected specifically on the basis of their ability to inform the decisions made at each organizational level , and they should be appropriate to the responsibilities and control at each level . ngb officials stated that they are using performance information to report on the program's aggregate performance to dod and to respond to other requests for information , such as regarding whom the program supports .