we provided a draft of this report to nara . some variations from this process may exist . each library is operated by a director who is a nara employee , and other library staff who are also nara employees . each presidential library also has a trust fund that receives revenue from the sale of publications , museum shop sales , document reproductions , audio - visual reproductions , library admissions , public space rentals , educational conferences , and interest income . trust - fund money helps the library cover the cost of museum shop inventory , personnel , operational and financial systems , equipment , and supplies . these funds may also support exhibit - related and public - programming expenses . in fiscal year 2009 , the trust funds for presidential libraries had a total end - of - year balance of approximately $15 million . in addition to trust funds , presidential libraries also maintain funds from gifts donated to a library for general library support or for specific projects or programs . the staffs typically include an administrative officer , facility manager , education and exhibits specialists , archivists , archives technicians , and clerks , among other staff . the director of a presidential library is appointed by the archivist of the united states , the head of nara , who consults with the former president in selecting a candidate . the office of presidential libraries is headed by the assistant archivist for presidential libraries . the office of presidential libraries is responsible for overseeing the management of records at the libraries , the development of policies and procedures for the management and operation of presidential libraries , and the development and coordination of plans , programs , and resource allocations at presidential libraries . the office of presidential libraries is also involved in the creation of new presidential libraries . funds appropriated by congress support nara's staffing , administration , security , maintenance , and renovation projects at the library . in fiscal year 2009 , nara spent more than $68 million in appropriations to operate the presidential libraries . in addition , for fiscal year 2009 nara received $41.5 million in special appropriations for repairs and restoration to the john f. kennedy presidential library and museum ( $22 million ) , the franklin d. roosevelt presidential library and museum ( $17.5 million ) , and the lyndon baines johnson library & museum ( $2 million ) . each private foundation is operated by a director , president , or ceo and other staff that may include a chief financial officer and director of communications , among other positions . foundation support enables the libraries to expand their research and archival functions , as well as undertake additional projects such as public outreach efforts . the foundations' level of involvement in the activities at their associated library , such as collaboration on public and educational programs , varies from library to library . foundations may also sponsor their own programs and activities , such as hosting a lecture series or academic discussion or producing a newsletter . nara officials told us that , in most cases , these kinds of programs and activities are offered in conjunction with and supported by library staff .