their responses are nongeneralizable . to address our first objective on u.s. assistance in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras addressing agency - identified causes of uac migration , we reviewed agency responses to a set of questions we developed concerning what agencies identified as causes of the rapid increase in uac migration , and agency actions taken in response . in addition , we asked officials we interviewed in washington and in central america to discuss the causes of the rapid increase in uac migration , particularly seeking their perspective on what factors may have changed or emerged in recent years to cause the rapid increase . we reviewed all agency responses to determine the causes agency officials identified . we also asked these officials to discuss agency responses to uac migration , including programs developed , modified , or planned in response , or programs that predated the increase in migration but that agencies identified as seeking to address underlying causes of migration . we also reviewed agency documents concerning these programs , including project concept papers and appraisal documents , progress - reporting documents including weekly and quarterly reports , and embassy reporting cables , among others . in addition , we obtained funding data from state , usaid , dhs , and iaf on agency funding to el salvador , guatemala , and honduras from fiscal years 2012 through 2014 and funding for specific programs agencies identified as developed or modified in response to the rapid increase in uac migration . we asked agencies a series of questions on how the funding data were produced , selected , and checked for accuracy , among other things . we determined these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to address our second objective , on how agencies have determined where to locate programs that seek to address underlying causes of migration , we reviewed agency strategy documents , including those described earlier such as usaid and state country strategies , to determine agency strategic development objectives and , where applicable , priority geographic locations for these objectives . we also reviewed agency strategy and project documents to determine the locations of certain programs developed or modified in response to the rapid increase in uac migration , including whether such programs were located in areas affected by high levels of uac migration . we asked agency officials to discuss the factors they considered and prioritized in determining where to locate programs , including programs predating the rapid increase in uac migration and programs developed in response to the rapid increase in migration , and the extent to which agencies considered communities identified as having high levels of uac migration in locating such programs . in addition , we asked agency officials how they identified locations with high levels of uac migration and their perspectives on the accuracy of available information on uac locations of origin . we also obtained information , for each country , on the location of uac communities of origin , of usaid and state / inl programs , and of iaf grantees .