however , the chinese government did not agree to do so . appendix i provides more information on our scope and methodology . we conducted our evaluation in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . foreign science students and scholars generally begin the visa process by scheduling a visa interview . on the day of the appointment , a consular officer reviews the application , checks the applicant's name in the consular lookout and support system ( class ) , takes the applicant's digital fingerprints and photograph , and interviews the applicant . based on the interview and a review of pertinent documents , the consular officer determines if the applicant is eligible for nonimmigrant status under the 1952 immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . if the consular officer determines that the applicant is eligible to receive a visa , the applicant is notified right away and he or she usually receives the visa within 24 hours . in some cases , the consular officer decides that the applicant will need a security advisory opinion ( sao ) , a response from washington on whether to issue a visa to the applicant . saos are required for a number of reasons , including concerns that a visa applicant may engage in illegal transfer of sensitive technology . an sao based on sensitive technology transfer concerns is known as visas mantis and , according to state officials , is the most common type of sao applied to science applicants . it is also the most common type of sao sent from the posts we visited in china , as well as in kiev , ukraine . the visas mantis process is designed to further four important national security objectives: prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their restrain the development of destabilizing conventional military capabilities in certain regions of the world ; prevent the transfer of arms and sensitive dual - use items to terrorists and states that sponsor terrorism ; and maintain u.s. advantages in certain militarily critical technologies . the visas mantis process has several steps and involves multiple u.s. agencies ( see fig . in deciding if a visas mantis check is needed , the consular officer determines whether the applicant's background or proposed activity in the united states could involve exposure to technologies on the technology alert list ( tal ) . the list , published by the state department in coordination with the interagency community and based on u.s. export control laws , includes science and technology - related fields where , if knowledge gained from research or work in these fields were used against the united states , it could potentially be harmful . if a visas mantis is needed , the consular officer generally informs the applicant that his or her visa is being temporarily refused under section 221 ( g ) of the ina , pending further administrative processing . after a consular officer decides that a visas mantis is necessary for an applicant , several steps are taken to complete the process . the officer or a foreign service national drafts a visas mantis sao request , which contains information from the applicant's application package and interview .