ocd has a deputy director . the commission said a corporate penalty risks hurting shareholders who have committed no violation but may bear the burden of the penalty . thus , the ability to use a penalty to compensate injured shareholders supports a corporate penalty , but if the penalty will unfairly injure investors , the corporation , or others , that weighs against the penalty . in announcing the policy , the commission emphasized what it said was a need to provide “clarity , consistency , and predictability” when exercising its penalty authority . the commission acknowledged differing views among commissioners on when a corporate penalty was appropriate , but said that the commissioners had approved the policy unanimously , in particular the two primary factors . the first of the two primary factors — direct benefit to the corporation — focuses attention on economic analysis to determine what benefit , if any , a company may have obtained from its conduct . according to management of sec's office of economic analysis ( oea ) , the facts and circumstances of a particular situation generally dictate the analytical approach used to consider corporate benefit . one widely used technique that oea employs is an “event study,” which considers changes in stock price upon disclosure of violations and subsequent corrective events . the event study method , which addresses both materiality and magnitude of the potential inflation in securities prices , is generally accepted and considered to be robust because it uses marketplace reaction to gauge the significance of information . overall , the officials told us that estimating benefit is not a precise process . therefore , for a given case , oea communicates any additional factors that should be considered in calculating an issuer benefit . sometimes , oea considers submissions from defendants as part of its analyses when defendants provide analysis of issuer benefit . the nature of a corporate benefit can vary . for example , a company can benefit if a fraud , such as overstatement of earnings , results in an inflated stock price , and the company then either issues stock or makes an acquisition using stock . in such cases , the corporation realizes a benefit because it realizes a higher price in issuing the stock , or it makes the acquisition using stock with a fraudulently inflated value . the second of the two primary factors — additional harm to shareholders — addresses whether shareholders who were harmed by a drop in stock price after initial disclosure of a violation effectively would be penalized again through a corporate penalty , according to some former commissioners . one key element of analysis of this issue involves shareholder turnover over time . according to enforcement management , turnover and impact of penalties can be considered in different ways . they explained that ordinary turnover means that a company's collection of shareholders at the time a violation is committed or disclosed likely will not be the same group at the time any penalty is subsequently assessed . if there is little turnover , the shareholder population when a penalty is levied will be close to what the population was at the time a violation was disclosed .