chemical treatment . this approach has been used in one instance . doe uses a chemical barrier near the columbia river to block chromium from entering the river near major salmon breeding areas . the barrier consists of a 750-yard series of wells through which doe injected a chemical into the groundwater ; the chemical reacts with the chromium to change it to a less hazardous and less mobile form . natural attenuation . this approach relies on subsurface processes such as dilution , adsorption , and chemical reactions with subsurface materials to reduce contaminant concentrations to acceptable levels . for example , a large uranium plume in the groundwater is entering the river about 4 miles above city drinking water intakes . in 1996 , doe and its regulators agreed to allow the plume to dissipate through natural attenuation . doe's efforts to address contamination threats that are farther from the river have involved four main types of actions: characterizing the vadose zone and groundwater through sampling and other studies to help understand the risks from movement of contamination . removing high - risk material from contaminated sites and / or covering the surface of the disposal area with a barrier to prevent water intrusion . decommissioning ( by removing or sealing ) a portion of the 7,000 wells used to monitor groundwater and the vadose zone , and for other purposes , that are no longer needed . monitoring wells are important , but they can also contribute to pollution by serving as conduits for rain , snow melt , or other liquids to flush contaminants through the vadose zone and into the groundwater . reducing water intrusion from leaking pipelines and surface drainage that can drive contamination from the vadose zone to the groundwater . doe also monitors groundwater conditions and uses information about the nature and extent of contamination in the groundwater — and its migration toward the river — to assess current and future risks to the public and the environment . while current levels of contamination can be determined by sampling the river , soil , and groundwater , doe uses computer models to predict how existing and future contamination from site cleanup and disposal activities will impact the river over the next 1,000 to 10,000 years . in november 2005 , we reported on the potential for columbia river contamination from the hanford site . we discussed doe's understanding of the sources and extent of contamination that potentially threaten the river , and the mixed results that doe's efforts to address the contamination have achieved so far . in addition , we discussed past criticisms of doe's program management , including a poorly organized management structure and lack of coordination among various river protection activities . because of continuing concerns about the risks posed by the contamination and doe's management of its river protection program , you asked us to review the status of doe's efforts . this report addresses doe efforts ( 1 ) to understand the risk to the columbia river from hanford site contamination and to deploy effective technologies to address contamination near the river , and ( 2 ) to strengthen the management of its efforts to protect the columbia river from hanford site contamination .