this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . for further information on this testimony , please contact jayetta z. hecker at ( 202 ) 512-2834 or by e - mail at heckerj@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony include , david lichtenfeld , beverly norwood , raymond sendejas , glen trochelman , and alwynne wilbur . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . faa and the department of transportation inspector general have also reported that a surge in controller retirements is on the way ; the question is – will faa be ready for it ? faa faces numerous challenges related to ensuring that well - qualified controllers are ready to step into the gap created by the expected wave of retirements but it has not implemented strategies to meet them . key among these challenges is efficiently hiring and training new controllers in numbers large enough to meet anticipated shortfalls . for example , since it takes 2-4 years and sometimes longer for a newly hired controller to become certified , hiring and training decisions need to be made from a longer - term perspective . however , we found in prior work that faa's process of generally hiring replacements only after a current controller leaves does not adequately take into consideration this training time . hiring challenges include effectively screening candidates to help ensure that they have the aptitude needed to control air traffic . efficiency in hiring will become even more important as faa faces the large surge in controller retirements , for hiring people who do not make it through the training process wastes money and time — and may affect both the cost of the controller workforce and the ability of faa to fill positions quickly enough to maintain a sufficient controller workforce to meet its mission . training challenges include the limited capacity at the training center in oklahoma city and at the air traffic control facilities . in addition , because of the significant amount of on - the - job training that currently occurs through one - on - one training , to effectively handle a large number of new controllers , there needs to be an overlap period during which experienced controllers likely to retire soon and newly hired controllers are both on board . while this will result in a temporary increase in the cost of the air traffic controller workforce , eventually more senior , high salary controllers will retire and be replaced by new controllers at lower salaries , possibly reducing expenses ; and the need for overlap between these two groups can be reduced . our 2002 report recommended that faa develop a comprehensive workforce plan to deal with these challenges , but faa has not finalized a plan and its recent actions call into question whether it will have adequate strategies to address these challenges .