dod concurred with our recommendation . dod's strategy calls for organizations to identify at least one outcome or key performance indicator for assessing the implementation of each sep . these performance indicators or outcomes are unique to the initiatives , and any relation they may have to the strategy's goals and objectives is not apparent . according to officials from the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for supply chain integration , these key performance indicators are used by the components and oversight bodies such as the asset visibility working group to , among other things , periodically assess whether the initiatives are meeting implementation goals and achieving performance expectations . for example , one of the expected outcomes for the transcom active radio frequency identification ( rfid ) sep is to realize a continual reduction in the cost of active rfid technology products . specifically , the cost of rfid tags prior to february 2009 was $75 each . since the latest contract to procure rfid tags was awarded in april 2014 , the cost of rfid tags has decreased to $37 each . as a result , according to dod officials , the department has realized an estimated cost reduction of $5 million to $7 million annually . dod has established a structure for overseeing and coordinating efforts to improve asset visibility . this structure includes the asset visibility working group , which is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the initiatives identified by the components . the asset visibility working group is to meet on a monthly basis to discuss the status of each sep . the components are to report quarterly to the asset visibility working group on the status of their initiatives — including progress made on implementation milestones , return on investment , and resources and funding . additionally , in march 2014 , dod established an online database , or electronic repository , that includes the strategy and seps . according to information provided by the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for supply chain integration , the online database is used to track the status of the seps ; document the final disposition of the sep upon completion or cancellation ; and include outcomes and results as well as lessons learned from the seps . in written comments provided on a draft of this report , dod stated that subsequent to the issuance of its 2014 strategy , dod implemented a life - cycle of a sep process that requires the asset visibility working group to , among other things , review and concur that a sep has met its performance objectives and document an after action report to include outcomes , lessons learned , and performance measures . dod officials told us that the components are responsible for assessing whether their initiatives that are being implemented are meeting implementation goals and achieving performance expectations . however , the performance indicators dod currently uses to assess progress in implementing the initiatives are specific to the individual initiatives , and any relationship these indicators may have to the overarching goals and objectives in the strategy is not apparent .