all checks were to be issued by december 31 , 2001 . irs , through fms , mailed out advance tax refunds according to a schedule that called for taxpayers to begin receiving checks the week of july 23 , 2001 . as shown in table 1 , from then through the end of september , about 84.1 million taxpayers were to have received about $35.5 billion in advance tax refunds . about 2 million notices were returned to irs due to incorrect addresses and , as of october 30 , 2001 , irs had about 300,000 undeliverable checks for which it was seeking updated addresses . taxpayers who called irs during the advance tax refund period had greater difficulty reaching irs assistors than did taxpayers who called during the same timeframe in 2000 or during the 2001 tax filing season . a small number of taxpayers received duplicate checks in the early stages of the program . tigta identified an irs computer programming problem that resulted in about 523,000 taxpayers receiving inaccurate advance refund notices . as noted earlier , the maximum amount of a taxpayer's advance refund was to be $600 , $500 , or $300 depending on the taxpayer's filing status . however , the actual amount of the advance refund was limited to the lesser of ( 1 ) 5 percent of the taxable income on the taxpayer's tax year 2000 return and ( 2 ) the net income tax from the tax year 2000 return after subtracting nonrefundable credits , such as the credit for child and dependent care expenses , child tax credit , credit for the elderly , and education credit . tigta found that irs had erred in developing its computer program by not limiting advance refund amounts to the net income tax after credits , thus resulting in the inaccurate advance refund notices . tigta informed irs of this problem on july 3 , 2001 , and irs was able to correct the problem before any advance refunds were issued — thus avoiding overpayments of about $118 million . irs also sent corrected notices to the affected taxpayers . tigta also determined that 5.3 million taxpayers who filed their tax returns by the april 16 filing deadline would have delays from 1 week to 9 weeks in receiving their advance refund notices . tigta attributed the delays to the following two reasons . irs is to then research a taxpayer's account to determine if there is an updated address to which another check can be sent . irs updates taxpayer addresses each week through a national change of address database maintained by the postal service . taxpayers can also update their addresses with irs by submitting an irs form 8822 “change of address.” in addition , irs authorized its customer service representatives to accept change of address information over the telephone from taxpayers who call about their advance tax refund . according to irs philadelphia service center officials , much of the written correspondence they received involved address changes from taxpayers who wanted to ensure that they would receive their advance refunds .