gao - 04-838 . washington , d.c.: june 30 , 2004 . aviation security: further steps needed to strengthen the security of commercial airport perimeters and access controls . gao - 04-728 . washington , d.c.: june 4 , 2004 . the sections below describe the challenges we identified . one challenge the proposed office of screening coordination and operations will face immediately is the continued development of a system to prescreen domestic airline passengers . the prescreening of passengers — that is , determining whether airline passengers pose a security risk before they reach the passenger screening checkpoint — is used to focus security attention on those passengers representing the greatest potential threat . since the late 1990s , passenger prescreening has been conducted using the computer - assisted passenger prescreening system ( capps i ) . this system , operated by air carriers , compares passenger information against capps i rules as well as a government - supplied watch list that contains the names of known or suspected terrorists . in the wake of september 11 , concerns were raised over the effectiveness of capps i . in 2002 , tsa began developing a second - generation computer - assisted passenger prescreening system , known as capps ii , which was intended to provide a more effective and efficient way to prescreen airline passengers . however , the development of capps ii faced a number of significant delays and challenges . as we reported in february 2004 , key activities in the development of capps ii were delayed , complete plans identifying system functionality were not established , and tsa was behind schedule in testing and developing initial increments of the system . further , we found that tsa had not yet fully addressed seven of the eight issues identified by congress as key areas of interest , such as privacy concerns , passenger redress , and system oversight . we further reported that tsa faced challenges in obtaining the international cooperation needed to obtain passenger data , managing the expansion of the program's mission beyond its original purpose , and ensuring that identify theft — in which an individual poses as and uses information of another individual — cannot be used to negate the security benefits of the system . moreover , in july 2004 , the 9 / 11 commission advised that improvements to the passenger prescreening system are required , noting that the watch lists used by the air carriers for the current prescreening system , capps i , do not include all terrorists or terrorism suspects because of concerns about sharing intelligence information with private firms and foreign countries . the 9 / 11 commission stated that passenger prescreening should be performed by tsa and should use the larger consolidated watch list data maintained by the federal government . as a result of these problems and challenges , as well as widespread concerns with capps ii by congress , the public , and other key stakeholders , dhs terminated the capps ii program and in august 2004 announced that it would develop a new passenger prescreening program called secure flight .