lengthy hiring process . the agencies' lengthy hiring processes can deter candidates from accepting un employment . for example , a report from the secretary general stated that the average hiring process was too slow , taking 174 days from the time a vacancy announcement was issued to the time a candidate was selected , causing some qualified applicants to accept jobs elsewhere . many americans that we interviewed concurred with the report , saying that it was difficult to plan a job move when there was a long delay between submitting an application and receiving an offer . in march 2006 , the secretary general proposed cutting the average recruitment time in half . low or unclear compensation . comparatively low salaries and benefits that were not clearly explained were among the most frequently mentioned deterrents to un employment for americans . american employees we interviewed noted that un salaries , particularly for senior and technical posts , were not comparable with u.s. government and private sector salaries . when candidates consider un salaries in tandem with un employee benefits , such as possible reimbursement for u.s. taxes and school tuition allowances through college , un compensation may be more attractive . however , u.s. citizens employed at iaea and unesco said that their agency did not clearly explain the benefits , or explained them only after a candidate had accepted a position . incomplete or late information hampered a candidate's ability to decide in a timely manner whether a un position was in his or her best interests . in addition , difficulty securing spousal employment can decrease family income and may also affect american recruitment since many u.s. families have two wage earners . at many overseas un duty stations , work permits can be difficult to obtain , the local economy may offer few employment opportunities , and knowledge of the local language may be required . required mobility or rotation . unhcr and undp required their staff to change posts at least every 3 to 6 years with the expectation that staff serve the larger portion of their career in the field ; the un secretariat and unesco were implementing similar policies . while iaea did not require its employees to change posts , it generally only hired employees for 7 years or less . such policies dissuaded some americans from accepting or staying in a un position because of the disruptions to personal or family life such frequent moves can cause . limited external opportunities . recruiting u.s. candidates was difficult because agencies offered a limited number of posts to external candidates . each of the organizations we reviewed , except iaea , advertised professional vacancies to current employees before advertising them externally in order to provide career paths and motivation for their staff . we found that three of the five agencies — unesco , unhcr , and undp — filled 50 percent or more of new appointments through promotions or with other internal candidates rather than by hiring external candidates . iaea filled a large percentage of its positions with external candidates because , in addition to not giving internal candidates hiring preference , the agency employed the majority of its staff members for 7 years or less .