( see fig . ppaca establishes rules governing how issuers can set premium rates . for example , while issuers are no longer able to consider gender or health status in setting premiums , issuers may consider family size , age , and tobacco use . also , issuers may vary premiums based on areas of residence . states have the authority to use counties , metropolitan statistical areas , zip codes , or any combination of the three in establishing geographic locations by which premiums may vary , known as rating areas.a low of 1 to a high of 67 . most states have 10 or fewer rating areas . the number of rating areas per state varies , ranging from ppaca also requires that coverage sold include certain categories of benefits at standardized levels of coverage specified by metal level — bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . each metal level corresponds to a proportion of allowable charges that a health plan is expected to pay on average , known as the actuarial value . health plans within a metal level have the same actuarial value , meaning each plan pays approximately the same proportion of allowable charges as others . plans from different metal levels have different actuarial values and pay a higher or lower proportion of allowable charges . for example , a gold health plan is more generous overall than a bronze health plan . actuarial values for health plans under ppaca range from 60 to 90 percent by metal level as follows: bronze ( 60 percent ) , silver ( 70 percent ) , gold ( 80 percent ) , or platinum ( 90 percent ) . issuers may also offer “catastrophic” health plans to individuals under 30 and individuals exempt from the individual mandate . catastrophic plans have actuarial values that are less than what is required to meet any of the other metal levels . while these plans are required to cover three primary care visits and preventive services at no cost prior to an enrollee reaching the plan's deductible , they generally do not cover costs for other health care services until a high deductible is met . as of early january 2015 , cms has disbursed about $1.6 billion ( 64 percent ) of the $2.4 billion in loans awarded to the 23 co - ops . specifically , cms has disbursed $351 million in start - up loans and $1.2 billion in solvency loans . the $351 million in start - up loan disbursements represents about 98 percent of the total amount of start - up loans awarded , whereas the $1.2 billion in solvency loan disbursements represents about 59 percent of the total amount of solvency loans awarded . ( see fig . cms has disbursed nearly all of the start - up loans awarded to the 23 co - ops . as figure 3 shows , disbursements to 11 co - ops equaled 100 percent of their start - up loan awards . cms and a contractor reviewed applications . the contractor was responsible for evaluating applications and recommending loan amounts and a disbursement schedule based on information in the application package and supporting documents .