( see fig . as of november 2017 , all eight of our selected states were reporting t - msis data , with seven of them having begun in september 2016 or later . cms has acknowledged the need for improved medicaid data . the transformed medicaid statistical information system ( t - msis ) initiative is the agency's primary effort , conducted jointly with states , to improve its collection of medicaid expenditure and utilization data , and replace msis . cms officials cite aspects of t - msis that are designed to broaden the scope and improve the quality of state - reported data , as well as the data's usefulness for states . for example , t - msis is intended to include data not previously reported by states , such as unique provider identification numbers and information on third - party liability , which could be used to help enhance cms and states' program oversight . t - msis also includes automated quality checks that should improve the quality of data that states report . in a january 2017 report , we examined cms efforts to implement t - msis and concluded that uncertainty existed with respect to when all states would report t - msis data ; how cms will ensure the quality of these data ; and how cms will use them for oversight purposes . you asked us to examine states' experiences regarding t - msis implementation , including obstacles they have faced in reporting quality data , and their planned uses of these data for oversight . in this report , we examine 1. states' experiences regarding the implementation of t - msis , including cms's actions to facilitate states' efforts ; and 2. challenges to cms's and states' use of t - msis data for oversight . to examine states' experiences regarding the implementation of t - msis — including cms's actions to facilitate their efforts — we reviewed federal laws and guidance , and interviewed cms officials and contractors who assisted the agency with t - msis implementation . we reviewed cms documentation of the number of states reporting t - msis data and of its actions to support states' t - msis implementation efforts . we also selected a non - generalizable sample of eight states for further review: louisiana , michigan , minnesota , north carolina , pennsylvania , utah , virginia , and washington . we selected these states based on variation in their t - msis reporting status , geographic location , program expenditures , use of medicaid managed care programs , and participation in cms's t - msis pilot program . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of hhs , and other interested parties . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7114 or yocomc@gao.gov .