gao - 05-5 . washington , d.c.: january 12 , 2005 . education has not developed alternate assessments for the naep . table 3 lists accommodations that are allowed on some statewide assessments but not on the naep . another reason why states' exclusion rates for could vary on naep may relate to state policies and requirements regarding student participation of students with disabilities . although states are required to participate in the naep , student participation in this assessment is voluntary . whether students with disabilities take the naep depends primarily on the recommendation of the student's iep team , along with the availability of appropriate accommodations . team decision criteria could vary across states , leading to differences in exclusion rates . education officials said they are implementing a new policy for how students with disabilities should be included in the naep assessment that will reduce variability in the inclusion of students with disabilities . further , officials explained that it can be difficult to reconcile the need to administer individualized assessments under idea and the need to provide standardized assessments under nclba for these students . these concerns were also reflected in a recent report on nclba from a national education organization . specifically , standardized alternate assessments may not be appropriate for all students who need an alternate assessment because they may not be flexible enough to accommodate all students' abilities . however , experts and officials noted that individualized assessments , such as portfolios , can also present challenges . for example , because individualized assessment approaches often rely heavily on the participation of the person administering the assessment , that person can affect how students demonstrate their performance . teachers may select work samples that demonstrate exceptional performance of their student , even though the student does not typically perform that well . officials in one state told us that a team of education officials determined that their alternate assessment needed to be more reliable in both implementation and scoring , a sentiment shared by officials and teachers in other states as well . scoring in the states we studied was done by the student's teacher , teachers from other districts , or officials from the local education agency . officials in the state in which teachers score their own students said that no independent reviews determined whether the scores were accurate or unbiased , and teachers from two other states told us that scores for similar portfolios sometimes varied . students with disabilities are a complex and diverse group . these students can have a wide range of physical and psychological disabilities , from severe cognitive delays or emotional disorders to specific learning disabilities that can affect their ability to learn . in addition , students with the same disability may demonstrate different levels of academic aptitude and achievement . individual students with disabilities may demonstrate grade - level or above achievement in some academic areas , while at the same time demonstrating lower academic achievement in other areas . participation rate data by state can be found in appendix i . in 49 states and the district of columbia , most students with disabilities who were tested in the 2003-04 school year were included through regular reading assessments .