we disagree . in the absence of agencywide guidance that addresses unmet demand for iris assessments , epa offices operate in much the same way they operated before the iris program was formed to develop consensus opinions within the agency about the health effects from chronic exposure to chemicals . as we note in this report , we have previously reported on epa's fragmented and largely uncoordinated science activities and recommended , among other things , that epa establish a top - level science official with the authority and responsibility to coordinate , oversee , and make management decisions regarding major scientific activities throughout the agency . consistent with our prior report and recommendation , we believe that guidance regarding major scientific activities should also come from a top - level science official . however , as we note in our current report , epa has not provided its science advisor with the authority to make management decisions regarding scientific activities across epa as we previously recommended . therefore , we believe that agencywide guidance should come from epa's deputy administrator in coordination with epa's science advisor . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date . at that time , we will send copies to the acting administrator of epa , the appropriate congressional committees , and other interested parties . in addition , this report will be available at no charge on the gao website at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff members have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 or gomezj@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iv . to determine the extent to which the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has evaluated demand for iris toxicity assessments , we reviewed epa's 2003 evaluation of demand for iris toxicity assessments . we also interviewed iris program officials to determine whether they had conducted other evaluations of demand since 2003 , how they derived the 2003 estimate , and whether that estimate reflects current conditions . because the 2003 evaluation did not provide sufficient information on its methodology , we were unable to fully assess its estimate . we corroborated epa officials' assertion that the 2003 assessment no longer reflects current conditions based on our understanding of the iris program . as we discussed earlier , the importance of epa's iris program has increased over time as epa program offices and regions have increasingly relied on iris toxicity assessments in making environmental protection and risk management decisions . in addition , as about 1,000 new chemicals are listed for commercial use each year , potential for changes in demand over time are likely . to determine the extent to which epa's process for nominating and selecting chemical for iris toxicity assessment accurately reflects current demand , we reviewed data provided by the iris program and from the iris program's website on the number of iris toxicity assessments it completed annually from fiscal years 2002 through 2012 .