iv. ) the directorate is located at ft. belvoir , virginia , and several dtra offices throughout the former soviet union provide in - country support for ctr program implementation . at the beginning of the program in 1992 , dod primarily purchased and provided equipment such as cranes , cutting tools , and vehicles to recipient countries . as the program matured , ctr assistance provided more services , such as hiring u.s. contractors who helped recipient countries dismantle nuclear delivery systems and missiles . currently , ctr provides most assistance to recipient countries through contracts with american firms . dod executes , manages , and reviews the contracts according to dod and federal acquisition requirements . specifically , in 2001 , the ctr program began using special contracts with prime contractors who , with their teams of supporting subcontractors , implement the majority of ctr projects in the recipient countries . these five contractors are known as ctr integrating contractors . dtra has also contracted with the science applications international corporation's threat reduction support center ( trsc ) . trsc staff provide support to ctr program and project managers in the areas of operations , logistics , engineering , financial , and program management . since 2003 , dod has improved its management and internal controls over the ctr program . prior to 2003 , dod's internal controls over the program were limited and did not ensure that ctr program objectives were being met . following two project failures in russia , dod implemented a series of new measures in 2003 that provided a more structured approach to managing the ctr program . most importantly , in july 2003 , dod filled vacancies within at&l , the office responsible for ensuring that dtra's implementation of ctr projects was meeting cost , schedule , and performance goals . after dod filled these positions , the new leadership worked closely with dtra officials to introduce important enhancements to the program's internal controls . for example , dod adopted several new methods to assess and mitigate the risks involved in cooperating with ctr - recipient governments . although these methods attempt to reduce risk to an acceptable level , dod cannot fully mitigate the risks involved in working jointly with ctr - recipient governments . while dod's enhancements are an improvement over the previous management and internal controls for the program , ctr procedures do not include final reviews of ctr projects upon their completion . as such , dod has no mechanism for assessing the success of completed projects and applying lessons learned to future projects . beginning in 2003 , dod implemented several new and enhanced management processes to allow program managers to better assess the progress of ctr projects and address program implementation weaknesses to reduce the risk of program failures . for example , dod filled vacant at&l positions ; developed specific guidance for project managers on reporting objectives , schedules , and cost estimates ; and improved communication within the program and with recipient countries . ( for a comparison of dod's ctr internal controls with selected control standards for the federal government , see app .