inspections . visns are required to conduct annual inspections at each vamc within their visn and to report their inspection results to the vha national program office for sterile processing . the visn inspections are a key oversight tool for regularly assessing adherence to rme policies in the sps , gastroenterology , and dental areas within vamcs and use a standardized inspection checklist known as the sps inspection tool . according to vha officials , vha developed the sps inspection tool and generally updates it annually . the most recent fiscal year 2017 sps inspection tool contained 148 requirements . examples of requirements include those regarding proper storage of rme and following manufacturers' instructions when reprocessing rme . oversight requirements . to help ensure that vamcs are adhering to vha's rme policies , vha requires inspections , reports on incidents of improperly reprocessed rme , and corrective action plans for both non - adherent inspection results and incidents of improperly reprocessed rme . although vamcs are also required to conduct annual self - inspections using the sps inspection tool and report the results to vha , the visn annual inspections are a separate and important level of oversight . finally , according to vha officials , while not a formal policy , vha's national program office for sterile processing also inspects each vamc at least once every 3 years . vha requires visns and vamcs to conduct their own inspections even in years when vha also conducts inspections . incident reports . vha collects incident reports or “issue briefs” generated by vamcs on incidents involving rme to help determine the extent to which vamcs are adhering to rme policies , among other things . vha requires vamcs to report significant clinical incidents or outcomes involving rme that negatively affect groups or a cohort of veterans in an issue brief . according to a vha official , when vamc staff report incidents involving rme to their facility leadership , these officials should follow vha guidance to determine which incidents , if any , should be reported in an issue brief to the vamc's visn . similarly , visn officials , in turn , are responsible for determining whether an incident should be reported in an issue brief to vha . corrective action plans . corrective action plans — which detail an approach for addressing any areas of policy non - adherence identified in inspections or incidents identified in issue briefs — are required at both the visn and vamc levels . specifically , both visns and vamcs are required to develop corrective action plans for any deficiencies identified through their inspections , and vamcs are required to develop corrective action plans for incidents identified in issue briefs . according to a vha official , visns and vamcs are not required to send corrective action plans from inspections to vha ; however , vamcs must send their correction action plans to the visn and also any related to issue briefs to vha . further , according to a vha official , although neither the vamc nor visn corrective action plans from inspections are monitored by vha , vha does expect visn officials to inform it of any critical issues that visns believe warrant vha attention .