requirements management . requirements establish what the system is to do , how well it is to do it , and how it is to interact with other systems . the software engineering institute's capability maturity model integration® for acquisition ( cmmi - acq ) and capability maturity model integration® for development ( cmmi - dev ) note that requirements management processes are important for enabling programs to ensure that their set of approved requirements is managed to support planning and execution needs . this should include steps to obtain stakeholder's review and commitment to the requirements and to manage changes to requirements as customer needs evolve . project risk management . the discipline of risk management is important to help ensure that projects are delivered on time , within budget , and with the promised functionality . therefore , the office could not ensure that controls were tested appropriately to identify necessary remedial actions in poa&ms . as a result , ocwr did not adequately oversee the completion of this step and ensure that key poa&ms were appropriately documented . for fma , without an executed test plan , ocwr and its external contractor could not complete or update poa&ms for the system . according to ocwr officials , including the office's deputy executive director , part of the reason for these shortfalls was that the office did not obtain expertise in security to aid in the completion of these oversight activities until september 2018 when the office hired a new it manager . in addition , ocwr officials , including the deputy executive director , could not explain why the contractor did not produce key oversight related artifacts , such as those related to the security testing of controls , as agreed upon in contracts covering fma during the performance period . project scheduling . the success of a program depends , in part , on having an integrated and reliable master schedule that defines , among other things , when work activities will occur , how long they will take , and how they relate to each other . a reliable schedule provides a road map for systematic execution of a program and a means by which to gauge progress , identify and address potential problems , and promote accountability . gao's scheduling assessment guide lists 10 best practices associated with a high - quality and reliable schedule , including capturing and sequencing all activities , as well as establishing the duration of all activities . according to leading practices for acquisition , the purpose of risk management is to identify potential issues that could endanger achievement of critical objectives before they occur . a continuous risk management approach effectively anticipates and mitigates risks that can have a critical impact on a project . organizations that plan to acquire it products and services for a project should also identify and assess risks associated with the acquisition process . incorporating cybersecurity management activities ( such as the selection and implementation of security controls ) into each of these project planning areas can help to reduce cybersecurity risks and better protect critical assets .