gao - 05-489t . washington , d.c.: april 13 , 2005 . hud is funded through appropriations . fhfb is responsible for regulating the fhlbank system's safety and soundness as well as its mission activities . the agency has a five - member board , with the president of the united states appointing four members — each of whom serves a 7-year term — subject to senate approval . the fifth member is the secretary of hud . the president also appoints fhfb's chair subject to senate approval . like ofheo , fhfb carries out its oversight authorities through examinations , establishing capital standards , rule making , and taking enforcement actions . fhfb is funded through assessments of the 12 federal home loan banks and is not subject to the appropriations process . as i stated previously , ofheo has moved aggressively over the past year to identify and address risk management and accounting deficiencies at fannie mae and freddie mac , and fhfb has entered into written agreements with two fhlbanks to correct interest rate risk management deficiencies . nevertheless , we continue to believe that the current fragmented regulatory structure for the housing gses is inadequate to monitor these large and complex financial institutions and their mission activities . establishing a single housing gse regulator with a board structure and equipping the agency with adequate authorities would better ensure that the gses operate in a safe and sound manner and fulfill their housing missions . the current fragmented structure of federal housing gse regulation does not provide for a comprehensive and effective approach to safety and soundness regulation . although the housing gses operate differently , their business activities and risks are becoming increasingly similar . as i described previously , the fhlbank system has established mortgage purchase programs over the past several years and fhlbank system mortgage holdings were $113 billion at year - end 2003 . while still small compared with fannie mae and freddie mac's combined retained mortgage portfolios of $1.3 trillion for the same time period , the fhlbank system now operates more like fannie mae and freddie mac and is increasingly incurring interest rate risks . management of interest rate risk for mortgage holdings involves the application of sophisticated risk - management techniques , including the use of financial derivatives . although such strategies are appropriate for risk management , they require specialized expertise , sophisticated information systems , and an understanding and application of sometimes complex accounting rules . in my view , it simply does not make sense for the federal government to entrust regulation of large and complex gses that are incurring similar risks to two different regulators , which have different approaches to examinations and setting capital standards . moreover , ofheo , and fhfb to a lesser degree , lack key authorities to fulfill their safety and soundness responsibilities , as described below: unlike with bank regulators and fhfb , ( 1 ) ofheo's authority to issue cease and desist orders does not specifically list an unsafe and unsound practice as grounds for issuance and ( 2 ) ofheo's powers do not include the same direct removal and prohibition authorities applicable to officers and directors .