, cash ) . to view the full product , including the scope and methodology , click on the link above . gao is making a number of recommendations to improve the transparency , reasonableness , appropriateness , affordability , and sustainability of the military compensation system . dod generally concurred with gao's recommendations . gao - 05-832sp . for more information , contact j. christopher mihm at ( 202 ) 512-6806 or mihmj@gao.gov . these organizations found that the key challenge with implementing market - based and more performance - oriented pay is changing the culture . to begin to make this change , organizations need to build up their basic management capacity at every level of the organization . transitioning to these pay systems is a huge undertaking and will require constant monitoring and refining in order to implement and sustain the reforms . there is a growing understanding that the federal government needs to fundamentally rethink its current approach to pay and to better link pay to individual and organizational performance . federal agencies have been experimenting with pay for performance through the office of personnel management's ( opm ) personnel demonstration projects . the federal government is in a period of profound transition and faces an array of challenges and opportunities to enhance performance , ensure accountability , and position the nation for the future . high - performing organizations have found that to successfully transform themselves , they must often fundamentally change their cultures so that they are more results - oriented , customer - focused , and collaborative in nature . to foster such cultures , these organizations recognize that an effective performance management system can be a strategic tool to drive internal change and achieve desired results . public sector organizations both in the united states and abroad have implemented a selected , generally consistent set of key practices for effective performance management that collectively create a clear linkage — “line of sight” — between individual performance and organizational success . these key practices include the following . align individual performance expectations with organizational goals . an explicit alignment helps individuals see the connection between their daily activities and organizational goals . connect performance expectations to crosscutting goals . placing an emphasis on collaboration , interaction , and teamwork across organizational boundaries helps strengthen accountability for results . provide and routinely use performance information to track organizational priorities . individuals use performance information to manage during the year , identify performance gaps , and pinpoint improvement opportunities . based on previously issued reports on public sector organizations' approaches to reinforce individual accountability for results , gao identified key practices that federal agencies can consider as they develop modern , effective , and credible performance management systems . require follow - up actions to address organizational priorities . by requiring and tracking follow - up actions on performance gaps , organizations underscore the importance of holding individuals accountable for making progress on their priorities . use competencies to provide a fuller assessment of performance . competencies define the skills and supporting behaviors that individuals need to effectively contribute to organizational results . link pay to individual and organizational performance .