we then analyzed the agencies' responses . although this was not a sample survey , and , therefore , there were no sampling errors , conducting any survey may introduce other kinds of errors . for example , difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted , in the sources of information that are available to respondents , or in how the data are entered into a database ( or were analyzed ) can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results . we took steps in the development of the survey instrument , the data collection , and the data analysis to minimize these survey - related errors . for example , we developed the questionnaire in two stages . first , we had a survey specialist design the survey instrument in collaboration with subject - matter experts . then , we pretested the instrument at two federal departments and internally at gao to ensure that questions were relevant , clearly stated , and easy to answer . we conducted our work in washington , d.c. , from may 2005 through february 2006 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in addition to the individual named above , jenniffer wilson ( assistant director ) , neil doherty , jennifer franks , joel grossman , matthew grote , min hyun , anjalique lawrence , j. paul nicholas , karen talley , and amos tevelow were key contributors to this report . in order to maintain the validity of an evaluation when a product upgrades to its next version , a vendor can request either a re - evaluation of the entire new product version or validation of only the changes in the product . to request the latter , a vendor must participate in the niap assurance maintenance program . to participate in this program , a vendor must submit a request that addresses how it plans to maintain the product and a report of what will be maintained . vendors can select any one of the 10 accredited commercial testing laboratories to perform product evaluations . the vendor and testing laboratory negotiate evaluation costs , which can vary according to the laboratory and the assurance level the product is tested against ( see fig . nvlap identifies nvlap - accredited laboratories on its web site . vendors are able to save time and money since they do not need to complete multiple evaluations to sell their product in different countries . another benefit of the niap process is that it uncovers flaws during product evaluations and can cause vendors to fix them . niap , vendor , and laboratory officials stated that the niap evaluation process has uncovered flaws and vulnerabilities in evaluated products . according to niap officials , software flaws are found in nearly all evaluated products , with an evaluation resulting in an average of two to three fixes . according to the four vendors included in our review , the niap evaluation process discovered flaws or vulnerabilities in their products or their product documentation . also , officials from one of the laboratories included in our review stated that out of the 90 products they have evaluated , all of them had documentation flaws .