who are my adversaries ? the second step is to identify and characterize the threat to these assets . the intent and capability of an adversary are the principal criteria for establishing the degree of threat to these assets . how am i vulnerable ? the third step involves identifying and characterizing vulnerabilities that would allow identified threats to be realized . in other words , what weaknesses can allow a security breach ? in the fourth step , risk must be assessed and priorities determined for protecting assets . risk assessment examines the potential for the loss or damage to an asset . risk levels are established by assessing the impact of the loss or damage , threats to the asset , and vulnerabilities . the final step is to identify countermeasures to reduce or eliminate risks . in doing so , the advantages and benefits of these countermeasures must also be weighed against their disadvantages and costs . countermeasures identified through the risk management process support the three integral concepts of a holistic security program: protection , detection , and reaction . protection provides countermeasures such as policies , procedures , and technical controls to defend against attacks on the assets being protected . detection monitors for potential breakdowns in protective mechanisms that could result in security breaches . reaction , which requires human involvement , responds to detected breaches to thwart attacks before damage can be done . because absolute protection is impossible to achieve , a security program that does not incorporate detection and reaction is incomplete . biometrics can support the protection component of a security program . it is important to realize that deploying them will not automatically eliminate all security risks . technology is not a solution in isolation . effective security also entails having a well - trained staff to follow and enforce policies and procedures . weaknesses in the security process or failures by people to operate the technology or implement the security process can diminish the effectiveness of technology . accordingly , there is a need for the security process to account for limitations in technology . for example , procedures for exception processing would also need to be carefully planned . as we described , not all people can enroll in a biometrics system . similarly , false matches and false nonmatches will also sometimes occur . procedures need to be developed to handle these situations . exception processing that is not as good as biometric - based primary processing could be exploited as a security hole . the effect on the process is directly related to the performance of the technology . in our study of biometrics for border security , we found that fingerprint recognition appears to be the most mature of the biometric technologies . fingerprint recognition has been used the longest and has been used with databases containing up to 40 million entries . iris recognition is a young technology and has not been used with large populations . while facial recognition has also been used with large databases , its accuracy results in testing have lagged behind those of iris and fingerprint recognition . as with any credentialing or identity management system , it is critical to consider the process used to issue the credential .