( fig . 5 provides information , by grade category , on the percentage of the total number of positions held by americans . the period covered is from 1992 to 2000 , with each bar representing staffing grade information as an average over a separate 3-year period between 1992 and 2000 . of these , seven americans were hired . six americans were eventually hired . fao reported receiving 11,670 applications for 130 vacancy announcements for professional positions it issued in 2000 . more than 8,000 of the applications had been evaluated as of march 2001 , of which 1,279 were deemed qualified — 115 of them americans . however , fao officials noted , recent statistics show that while the number of applications from americans steadily increased between 1997 and 1999 , there was a significant decline in 2000 . fao has not yet conducted a study examining the reasons for this decline . the state department has written policies stating that equitable representation of americans employed by u.n. organizations is a “high priority” and has mechanisms in place to support american employment in these bodies . nevertheless , state's level of effort in achieving this objective does not reflect the stated priority . despite only minimal progress in improving representation of americans in the u.n. system , state has reduced resources aimed at recruitment of qualified professionals and has curtailed other related activities without assessing how these reductions will affect recruitment . state's reduction in resources resulted in its scaling back activities to support recruitment for professional positions — the pipeline for senior - level positions . executive order 11552 of august 24 , 1970 , calls on executive branch agencies to assist in and encourage details and transfers of federal employees to international organizations to the maximum extent possible and with due regard to the agencies' manpower requirements . according to u.s. agency officials , placing federal employees on details and transfers to international organizations can be an effective way to provide significant input on policy and technical issues of interest to the united states . in fiscal year 2000 , 17 federal agencies had 165 employees on detail or transferred to the united nations and other international organizations , according to state department records . of this total , the agencies with the largest number of federal employees assigned to international organizations were: hhs , 59 employees ; the state department , 20 ; the departments of transportation and the treasury , 18 each ; agriculture , 15 ; the department of energy , 6 ; and labor , 4 . an official from hhs attributed that department's level of participation to the fact that the agency considers its contributions to international organizations an integral part of the department's mission to combat diseases such as polio and acquired immune deficiency syndrome . according to this official , public health specialists in hhs vigorously vie for opportunities to gain international work experience , which they view to be not only meaningful and important but also career - building .