we also analyzed programwide schedule initiatives . we compared contractor schedules and program initiatives to gao - identified best practices in developing and maintaining schedules . to determine whether the program is applying best practices in managing and mitigating its risks , we analyzed program documentation , including the program's risk management plan and outputs from its risk register . we compared program risk management policies and procedures to government and industry recognized risk management best practices and compared the program's implementation of its risk management policies and procedures . we also interviewed government and contractor staff to discuss the program's development progress and recent challenges as well as their scheduling and risk management practices . we conducted this performance audit from august 2011 to june 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . appendix i contains further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . it also cannot determine if total float within the schedule can be used to mitigate critical tasks by reallocating resources from tasks that can be delayed without launch date impact . unless the weaknesses in these subordinate schedules are addressed , including the generation of valid critical paths in all schedules , the programwide ims that is derived from them may not be sufficiently reliable . weaknesses in implementing scheduling best practices undermine the program's ability to produce credible dates for planned milestones and events , as illustrated by schedule discrepancies that occurred between the ground project and the flight project and the subsequent replanning that was required . however , 18 percent of remaining activities had incomplete or missing logic , and 43 percent had soft date constraints . if the schedule is missing logic links between activities , float estimates will not be accurate . incorrect total float values may in turn result in an invalid critical path and an inaccurate assessment of project completion dates . in the case of the advanced baseline imager , many detailed activities had large total float values throughout . moreover , the advanced baseline imager schedule did not have a valid critical path for one of its three flight models and did not have a critical path that spans the entire program . the spacecraft schedule substantially met more than half of the best practices . it had a valid critical path through the launch dates for the first two satellites , included and mapped all activities appropriately , included logic links for over 99 percent of its activities , and was appropriately updated . we acknowledged the reasons for delays in goes - r's launch readiness date in our draft report submitted to noaa and in our prior reports on this program , and have added language to this report that relates to the bid protest and nasa's response in delaying the award . noaa also commented that the revised incremental schedule was less risky than its original waterfall schedule .