some modifications to the design . as a result , these officials were not certain whether the items could have been acquired using the pilot program . dpap officials noted that they are aware of many of these issues , but have no ongoing efforts to specifically address them . gao's prior work has identified several sound management practices when developing , implementing , and assessing pilot programs , including developing objectives that link to the goals of the pilot and ensuring the results of the in the case of the mpndi pilot pilot are communicated to stakeholders.program , dod has not proactively identified opportunities to use the pilot program in areas useful to dod — a goal of the pilot — such as by identifying how the authority might help dod attract nontraditional contractors to fill needs in specific industries , technologies , or for certain capabilities that are not met by existing authorities . the pilot program was also intended to test whether streamlined acquisition procedures , similar to those available for commercial items , can serve as an incentive for “nontraditional defense contractors” to innovate in areas useful to dod . dod has not determined whether the pilot program provides new flexibilities or the opportunity to use streamlined acquisition procedures that are not already available under other authorities . lastly , dod's prior annual reports to congress have not identified whether there are specific requirements under the pilot program , such as the need to award contracts competitively , that might hinder its use . taking action to identify how the pilot program authority may assist in ( 1 ) attracting nontraditional contractors , ( 2 ) testing the use of new flexibilities or streamlined procedures , and ( 3 ) identifying and reporting to congress on specific requirements of the pilot program that may hinder its use , could better position dod to determine whether the pilot program provides meaningful value to the department . dod has had a longstanding concern to better involve commercial and small business companies so that it can acquire innovative solutions to meet military requirements . congress created and later extended the mpndi pilot program as a way of providing additional flexibilities to assist dod in acquiring needed items , to spur innovation and participation from nontraditional defense contractors , such as by using streamlined acquisition procedures or eliminating certain requirements that had been identified as barriers to attracting firms that traditionally did not do business with dod . however , dod has not yet used the program in the 3 years since it was initiated . determining whether the pilot program provides meaningful value to the department requires that dod do more than make the authority available for use by its personnel . in that regard , dod has not provided assistance to its program and contracting officials to help identify opportunities to use the pilot program as currently structured , nor has it reported to congress on issues that hinder its use , such as the requirement to use competitive procedures . further , dod identified a number of existing authorities that enabled them to acquire needed goods and services quickly from the private sector .