outcomes . achieving and sustaining progress in these areas would demonstrate the department's ability and commitment to addressing our five criteria for removing issues from the high - risk list . dhs committed to taking actions to address all 31 of these my testimony this morning will discuss our observations , based on prior and ongoing work , on dhs's progress in ( 1 ) developing a strategy for addressing its high - risk designation for the implementation and transformation of the department and ( 2 ) achieving outcomes critical to addressing the high - risk designation . an unqualified opinion states that the financial statements present fairly , in all material respects , the financial position , results of operations , and cash flows of the entity in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles . this statement is based on prior reports and testimonies we issued from june 2007 through february 2012 , as well as letters we submitted to dhs in march and november 2011 providing feedback on the department's january and june 2011 versions of its integrated strategy for high risk management . the statement is also based on selected updates we obtained from may 2011 through february 2012 . for the past products , among other things , we interviewed dhs officials ; analyzed dhs strategies and other documents related to the department's implementation and transformation high - risk area ; and reviewed our past reports , issued since dhs began its operations in march 2003 . all of this work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards , and more - detailed information on the scope and methodology from our prior work can be found within each specific report . for the updates , we obtained information from dhs on its transformation and management integration efforts through , among other things , ( 1 ) obtaining the december 2011 version of the integrated strategy for high risk management , and ( 2 ) meeting with dhs officials , including the under secretary for management and deputy under secretary for management . this statement is also based on preliminary observations from our ongoing work in response to your request to review dhs's progress in implementing the new it governance approach . for this work , among other things , we are reviewing dhs documentation on its planned it governance process and interviewing dhs officials responsible for implementing this process . we are conducting this work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . since january 2011 , dhs has continued to update and strengthen its strategy for how the department plans to address our high - risk designation and resolve its management challenges . in january 2011 , dhs provided us with its initial integrated strategy for high risk management , which summarized the department's preliminary plans for addressing the high - risk area .