capacity . the agency has the capacity ( i.e. , people and resources ) to resolve the risk ( s ) . action plan . a corrective action plan exists that defines the root cause and solutions , and provides for substantially completing corrective measures , including steps necessary to implement solutions we recommended . monitoring . a program has been instituted to monitor and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective measures . demonstrated progress . the agency is able to demonstrate progress in implementing corrective measures and in resolving the high - risk area . these five criteria form a road map for efforts to improve and ultimately address high - risk issues . addressing some of the criteria leads to progress , while satisfying all of the criteria is central to removal from the list . in our april 2016 report , we provided additional information on how agencies had made progress addressing high - risk issues . figure 1 shows the five criteria for removal for a designated high - risk area and examples of actions taken by agencies as cited in that report . importantly , the actions listed are not “stand alone” efforts taken in isolation from other actions to address high - risk issues . that is , actions taken under one criterion may also be important in meeting other criteria . for example , top leadership can demonstrate its commitment by establishing a corrective action plan including long - term priorities and goals to address the high - risk issue and using data to gauge progress — actions which are also vital to monitoring criteria . va officials have expressed their commitment to addressing the concerns that led to the high - risk designation for va health care . as part of our work for the 2017 high - risk report , we identified actions va had taken , such as establishing a task force , working groups , and a governance structure for addressing the five areas of concern contributing to the designation: ( 1 ) ambiguous policies and inconsistent processes ; ( 2 ) inadequate oversight and accountability ; ( 3 ) information technology ( it ) challenges ; ( 4 ) inadequate training for va staff ; and ( 5 ) unclear resource needs and allocation priorities . for example , in july 2016 , va chartered the gao high risk list area task force for managing risk and improving va health care to develop and oversee implementation of va's plan to address the root causes of the five areas of concern we identified in 2015 . va's task force and associated working groups are responsible for developing and executing the department's high - risk mitigation plan for each of the five areas of concern we identified . va also executed two contracts with a total value of $7.8 million to support its actions to address the concerns behind the high - risk designation .