the report excludes key selection methods . specifically , the two methods that account for the bulk of lb&i's audit work — offshore iic and other miscellaneous iic — for fiscal years 2011 through 2015 are excluded . it also excluded the compliance and workload delivery method , which was included in the initial list of methods that lb&i said it uses . while lb&i staff review the report informally , it has no documented guidance or criteria for how to assess the performance of its workload selection methods in order to make decisions or take actions . the audit results are not arrayed to easily review other potentially important considerations , such as ratios of direct revenue yield per dollar of cost across lb&i selection methods . without data that aligns the selection methods to the audit results , lb&i has less assurance that it is allocating its limited resources most effectively as it selects more returns to audit . lb&i officials acknowledged that being able to more easily identify selection methods within the audit inventory would enhance irs' ability to assess audit results by selection method , an assessment that could be used to inform decision making , as discussed later in the report . lb&i plans to conduct issue - based projects it calls “campaigns” to address taxpayer compliance . campaigns may involve audits of tax returns or other types of compliance efforts , such as taxpayer outreach or tax form changes . according to lb&i , ideas for campaigns come from staff members who submit proposals , a process which started during our work . as part of this submission , staff must identify campaign goals , metrics , training , and resource needs . lb&i officials initially identified fourteen selection methods that lb&i uses to help select tax returns for audit . the list of those selection methods , including definitions , follows: discriminant analysis system ( das ) : das is a mathematical system that lb&i uses to identify corporate ( form 1120 ) returns that may merit selection for audit . das prioritizes returns based on their probability of being profitable to audit . das computes a score that allows lb&i to rank the returns . 1065 modeling: the partnership ( form 1065 ) computer model combines results from mathematical formulas and business rules to identify partnership returns for audit consideration . 1120-s modeling: as with the 1065 model , the s corporation ( form 1120 s ) computer model combines results from mathematical formulas and business rule to identify s corporation returns for audit consideration . form 8886 disclosures: the office of tax shelter analysis ( otsa ) in lb&i reviews this disclosure form for potentially abusive tax avoidance ; taxpayers are to disclose particular transactions that may indicate such abuse . form 8918 material advisor disclosures: otsa in lb&i reviews this disclosure form , which is to be filed by those who promote tax shelters , for inappropriate shelter schemes to lower tax liability . lb&i filtering: computer programs that lb&i staff develop to identify particular issues that have a tendency towards noncompliance on tax returns for audit consideration .