pub . 89-329 , §§ 401-467 , 79 stat . 1219 , 1232-54 ( codified as amended at 20 u.s.c . 2006 national employer health benefits surveys and a 2007 national individual market survey . to describe efforts to increase the number of insured college students , we reviewed published reports and interviewed insurance industry officials to identify and describe efforts that would either directly increase the number of insured college students aged 18 through 23 or would increase the availability of insurance for all or most college students aged 18 through 23 . to describe these efforts in detail , we collected data from our random sample of 340 colleges on colleges' health insurance requirements and participation in consortiums to purchase health insurance . we also reviewed relevant state laws and higher education governing board policies . the results from our analyses of cps and meps and our collection of data on the availability of student health insurance and the health insurance requirements at colleges are generalizable to certain populations , as noted in earlier text . while some of our results are generalizable , other results , such as those related to the characteristics of college student insurance plans , are not . we reviewed all data for reasonableness and consistency and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards from may 2007 through march 2008 . appendix i provides more detailed information on our methodology and the characteristics and limitations of the data we report . college students have several options for obtaining health insurance . they may obtain private health insurance through group market plans offered by employers , colleges , and other groups or through individual market plans . in addition , some college students may obtain coverage through public health insurance programs , such as medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) . college students may obtain health insurance through employer - sponsored group market plans , which are plans employers offer to their employees and their dependents . under these plans , employers typically subsidize a share of employees' premiums for health insurance , and premiums are calculated based on the risk characteristics of the entire group . to offer health insurance , employers either purchase coverage from an insurance carrier or fund their own plans . all plans purchased from insurance carriers must meet state requirements , which vary by state . for example , some states require employer - sponsored plans purchased from insurance carriers to offer coverage to dependents . although requirements for dependent coverage vary by state , plans have traditionally offered health insurance coverage for dependents through age 18 , and have generally continued coverage for dependents through age 22 only if they attend college full - time . under federal law , college students who have lost eligibility for dependent coverage under a parent's employer - sponsored insurance plan may be able to use provisions in cobra to continue their health insurance for a limited period of time .