of political influence . because of the sensitivity of certain statistical information , seemingly because of the sensitivity of certain statistical information , seemingly mundane actions , such as the timing of a data release , can be called into mundane actions , such as the timing of a data release , can be called into question , as interested parties may perceive the change as a maneuver to question , as interested parties may perceive the change as a maneuver to obscure or manipulate the information for partisan purposes . certain roles , responsibilities , and processes need to be clarified as well . indeed , officials at two statistical agencies we spoke with said there is ambiguity as to whether a statistical press release is a statistical product and if so , whether statistical agencies can issue them with or without first getting releases cleared at the departmental level . additionally , omb has issued a number of guidelines , directives , and standards on federal statistics . are there any gaps and overlaps among them , and can they be better integrated ? documentation: to what extent , and how , should agencies document their data dissemination procedures and policies , and how often should they be reviewed and updated ? the agencies we examined did not always document their processes for disseminating statistical data , relying instead on professional practice . however , as nrc points out: “although a long - standing culture of data quality contributes to professional practice , an agency should also seek to develop and document standards through an explicit process.” moreover , documented guidance would lend more transparency to the data dissemination process , and thus provide a basis for agencies to explain their dissemination decisions to policy makers , news media , and the public . indeed , an omb official told us that statistical policy directive number 3 is a useful tool for explaining to high level policy officials the procedures agencies must follow to maintain the integrity of the data , and why the officials may not access principal economic data before it is released to the public nor comment on it until after its release . documented guidance could also help ensure continuity in the face of employee turnover . the importance of documenting agencies' data dissemination practices can be seen in the bureau's experience in releasing data from the 2000 census on the homeless and others without conventional housing , when the bureau was criticized for shifting its position on reporting components of this population . in our 2003 report , we noted that although the bureau's decision stemmed from its concerns over the reliability of the underlying data , the bureau's lack of documented , clear , transparent , and consistently applied guidance governing the release of data from the 2000 census hampered the bureau in explaining its actions . had such guidance been in place , it could have helped the bureau be more accountable and consistent in its dealings with the public , and helped to ensure that the bureau's decisions both were , and appeared to be , totally objective . flexibility: how much leeway should agencies have in implementing omb's directive ?