va concurred with these recommendations . table 2 summarizes these recommendations and the steps va has taken to address them . in our november 2017 report , we found that from october 2013 through march 2017 , the five va medical centers we reviewed had only reported one of nine providers that should have been reported to the npdb as required by vha policy . furthermore , none of these nine providers were reported to state licensing boards as required by vha policy . these nine providers either had adverse privileging actions taken against them or resigned or retired while under investigation before an adverse privileging action could be taken . the va medical centers documented that these nine providers had significant clinical deficiencies that sometimes resulted in adverse outcomes for veterans . for example , the documentation shows that one provider's surgical incompetence resulted in numerous repeat surgeries for veterans . similarly , the documentation shows that another provider's opportunity to improve had to be halted and the provider was removed from providing care after only a week due to concerns that continuing the review would potentially harm patients . in addition to these nine providers , one va medical center terminated the services of four contract providers based on deficiencies in the providers' clinical performance , but the facility did not follow any of the required steps for reporting providers to the npdb or relevant state licensing boards . this is concerning , given that the va medical center documented that one of these providers was terminated for cause related to patient abuse after only 2 weeks of work at the facility . at the time of our review , two of the five va medical centers we reviewed each reported one provider to the state licensing boards for failing to meet generally accepted standards of clinical practice to the point that it raised concerns for the safety of veterans . this provider voluntarily resigned in 2017 . in our february 2019 report , we found that three factors were largely responsible for inconsistent adherence to vha policies that disqualify providers from employment . first , some medical center officials are not aware of key vha policies , such as the requirement that a provider who has had a license revoked or surrendered for cause is ineligible for employment unless the license is reinstated . for example , in the case of the provider who surrendered a license in 2014 , documentation shows that the medical center staff became aware of the surrendered license in 2015 , but vha staff stated that the removal was stalled due to confusion about policies . officials at two other va medical centers incorrectly told us that vha cannot report contract providers to the npdb . second , vha policy does not require the visns to oversee whether va medical centers are reporting providers to the npdb or state licensing boards when warranted . this lack of awareness of key policies may be linked to a lack of mandatory training for credentialing staff . as a result of vha staff misinterpretation of vha policy and insufficient oversight , we concluded that vha lacks reasonable assurance that all providers who should be reported to the npdb and state licensing boards are reported .