ii. ) the lawsuit is ongoing . you asked us to review issues related to local media advertising markets . this report examines ( 1 ) what available information indicates about the prevalence and characteristics of advertising sales agreements among local stations or mvpds and ( 2 ) selected stakeholders' perspectives on the impacts of advertising sales agreements among local stations or mvpds . to determine the prevalence and characteristics of jsas among local stations , we obtained and analyzed all local television jsas found in the stations' public inspection files on fcc's website . to provide assurance that our review of jsas was as comprehensive as possible , we also purchased data on jsas from bia / kelsey , a media research and consulting firm , which we compared with the jsas we identified in the stations' files ; we did not identify any additional jsas that were not available in the stations' public inspection files . we assessed the reliability of using bia / kelsey's jsa data for this purpose by obtaining information from bia / kelsey about how the data were collected and maintained and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for this purpose . we examined the filings of jsas in stations' public inspection files to determine if any jsas were filed in one station's folder but missing from the folder of another station involved in the jsa . we evaluated fcc's efforts to ensure completeness of stations' jsa filings based on fcc's rules and stated expectations for stations' public files and federal internal control standards related to information and communications . to determine the prevalence and characteristics of interconnects among mvpds , we interviewed fcc officials and the following selected stakeholders: eight local station owners that we selected to represent companies of various sizes and those that do and do not have jsas ; five mvpds selected to represent cable , satellite , and telecommunications providers and two companies selling advertising on their behalf ; five media industry associations selected because they represent broadcasters , large and small mvpds , and advertising sellers ; two public interest groups and two academic stakeholders selected because they filed comments in fcc's jsa rulemaking or were recommended by other stakeholders ; and five financial analysts selected based on our prior work and our research on their backgrounds . fcc does not regulate nor collect data on interconnects . further , mvpd stakeholders told us that the written agreements that identify the terms of interconnects are confidential . consequently , our information about interconnects is largely testimonial . our interview results are not generalizable because we did not select these stakeholders using a representative sample , and some stakeholders we contacted , particularly public - interest stakeholders , declined to be interviewed . to determine selected stakeholders' perspectives on advertising sales agreements among local stations and mvpds , we reviewed filings in two fcc proceedings: 1 ) fcc's rulemaking on television jsas and 2 ) fcc's review of a 2014 proposed merger between comcast and time warner cable . we analyzed filings that stated specific benefits or concerns related to jsas or interconnects .