omb agreed with these recommendations . more recently , we reported on efforts at the departments of defense , energy , and homeland security to identify duplicative it investments . more specifically , we noted that although defense , energy , and homeland security use various investment review processes to identify duplicative investments , 37 of our sample of 810 investments were potentially duplicative at defense and energy . these investments accounted for about $1.2 billion in spending for fiscal years 2007 through 2012 . the department also noted that our statement that the “department has no direct authority over it investments in two semi - autonomous agencies ( the national nuclear security administration and the energy information administration ) ” should be clarified to say that it is the department cio who does not have this authority . we found support for this clarification in documentation we had already received and therefore made it as requested . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix viii . in written comments , the environmental protection agency generally agreed with two of the three recommendations we made and generally disagreed with the third . specifically , the environmental protection agency generally agreed with our recommendations to ( 1 ) fully describe three portfoliostat action plan elements and ( 2 ) report on the agency's progress in consolidating the managed print services and strategic sourcing of end user computing to shared services as part of the omb integrated data collection quarterly reporting until completed . the agency disagreed with our recommendation to develop a complete commodity it baseline , stating that it had provided a complete baseline to omb on august 31 , 2012 , and had also reported to us during our review that the information was current and complete at the time of submission . during our review , we found that the environmental protection agency did not have a process in place to ensure the completeness of the information in the baseline . without appropriate controls and processes in place to confirm this , the environmental protection agency cannot be assured that its data are complete . we therefore stand by our recommendation . the environmental protection agency's comments are reprinted in appendix ix . in written comments , the general services administration agreed with our findings and recommendations and stated it would take action as appropriate . the agency's comments are reprinted in appendix x . in written comments , the department of homeland security disagreed with our recommendation to fully describe its efforts related to consolidating commodity it spending under the cio in future omb reporting , stating that the department had already addressed this recommendation . specifically , the department stated that it had included updated information on this topic in its fiscal year 2013 information resources management plan that was submitted to omb in may 2013 . we reviewed the information resources management plan and agree that it addresses our recommendation . we therefore removed the recommendation from the report . the department's comments are reprinted in appendix xi . in written comments , the department of housing and urban development concurred with our recommendations and stated it would provide more definitive information with timelines once the final report had been issued .