pub . 107-252 , 116 stat . ( please check one response. ) if yes: what is the maximum wait time goal ? ( please check one response. ) at about how many polling places did wait times of greater than 60 minutes occur at any time on either the november 2012 or november 2008 general election day ? ( please check one response. ) on the november 2012 general election day , did any voters have to wait in line to turn in their ballot to a machine , poll worker , or ballot box after completing their ballot ? we understand that for dre machines , voters submit their ballots immediately after completing them , but for other methods , such as optical / digital scan or paper ballots , voters may have to wait in line to turn in their ballot to feed through a machine or submit their ballot to a poll worker or ballot box . ( please check one response. ) if yes: on average , for all of the polling places in your jurisdiction for the november 2012 general election day , how long did voters typically have to wait in line to turn in their ballots for counting after completing them ? ( please check one response. ) which of the following , if any , were reasons voters had to wait to turn in ballots for counting after voters completed their ballots ? ( please check one response for each row. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) . what was the other reason that voters had to wait to turn in ballots for counting ? part iii: policies and practices in your jurisdiction 21 . did your jurisdiction use any of the following policies or practices for the november 2012 general election ? ( please check one response for each row. ) 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) 95 percent confidence interval – upper bound ( percentage ) 0.9 95 percent confidence interval – lower bound ( percentage ) . what other policies or practices did your jurisdiction use ? did your jurisdiction conduct a formal audit or investigation of the possible causes of long voter wait times on the november 2012 general election day ? ( please check one response. ) has your jurisdiction revised or is it in the process of revising any of its election day policies or procedures since the november 2012 general election specifically to address any of the possible causes of long voter wait times ? ( please check one response. ) if yes: which policies or procedures were revised or are in the process of being revised specifically to address any of the possible causes of long voter wait times on the november 2012 general election day ? ( please check one response on each row. )