we have not yet verified this information . in addition to access controls , other important controls should be in place to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of an agency's information . these controls include policies , procedures , and techniques for securely configuring information systems , sufficiently disposing of media , and implementing personnel security . weaknesses in these areas increase the risk of unauthorized use , disclosure , modification , or loss of sensitive information and information systems supporting epa's mission . epa had personnel security controls in place . configuration management controls ensure that only authorized and fully tested software is placed in operation , software and hardware are updated , patches are applied to these systems to protect against known vulnerabilities , and changes are documented and approved . to protect against known vulnerabilities , effective procedures must be in place , appropriate software installed , and patches updated promptly . up - to - date patch installation helps mitigate flaws in software code that could be exploited to cause significant damage and enable malicious individuals to read , modify , or delete sensitive information or disrupt operations . nist guidance states that agencies should document approved system changes and retain records of configuration changes to systems and that agencies should configure security settings to the most restrictive mode consistent with operational requirements . a basic element of cryptography is encryption . encryption is the conversion of data into a form , called a cipher text , which cannot be easily understood . encryption can be used to provide basic data confidentiality and integrity by transforming plain text into cipher text using a special value known as a key and a mathematical process known as an algorithm . nist guidelines state that agencies should use encryption to protect the confidentiality of remote access sessions and encrypt sessions between host systems . the nist standard for an encryption algorithm is federal information processing standards ( fips ) 140-2 . epa did not always effectively encrypt certain sensitive information . for example , epa did not always encrypt private keys stored on certain servers and had used a weak password encryption feature on network devices . in addition , the agency allowed the use of insecure network protocols to manage network devices . the agency also did not always use a fips - compliant algorithm to encrypt passwords on three support servers we reviewed . these weaknesses expose critical and sensitive information to unnecessary risk of unauthorized access , modification , or destruction . to establish individual accountability , monitor compliance with security policies , and investigate security violations , it is crucial to determine what , when , and by whom specific actions have been taken on a system . agencies accomplish this by implementing system or security software that provides an audit trail , or a log of system activity , that can be used to determine the source of a transaction or attempted transaction and to monitor a user's activities . audit and monitoring involves the regular collection , review , and analysis of auditable events for indications of inappropriate or unusual activity , and the appropriate investigation and reporting of such activity .