these efforts are largely in the initial stages of implementation . hhs has taken steps to give the issue of human subjects protection greater prominence . until recently , nih's office for protection from research risks ( oprr ) was responsible for oversight and enforcement of regulations when hhs funding was involved . because the office was located at nih , it was not clear that its authority extended beyond nih - funded research . there was also the perception that its autonomy was compromised by its location within an agency that also funds research . to address these concerns about authority and autonomy , hhs established ohrp in the office of the hhs secretary , office of public health and science in june 2000 , enhancing the status and visibility of human subjects protection activities . ohrp assumed the human subjects protection functions of the former oprr . ohrp has a 2-year plan to organize and coordinate the department's diverse human subjects protection activities and reengineer the system for protection of human subjects in research . in march 2001 , fda formally elevated and centralized its human subjects protection activities by creating the office for human research trials and locating it in the office of the commissioner . at fda , human subjects protection activities previously were diffuse , dispersed across various centers and the office of the commissioner . the new office is involved with intra - agency coordination of policy , education , and oversight relating to human subjects protection . ohrp , fda , and nih officials told us they are now working together more closely to coordinate and utilize resources for human subjects protection activities . the three hhs components have also sought to improve the mechanisms they use to conduct oversight and enforcement activities related to human subjects protection . to reduce regulatory burden and enhance its oversight capabilities , ohrp has recently revised its assurance process . the research community had concerns about the assurance approval and renewal processes . they contended that the processes had been unnecessarily burdensome and created disproportionate workload demands on hhs and research institution staff who are needed to meet other , equally important and time - consuming human subjects protection requirements . to address these problems , ohrp undertook , as one of its first major initiatives , implementation of a simplified assurance process that is less administratively burdensome . the streamlined assurance process , which is currently being phased in , is designed to reduce the paperwork burden that characterized the former process . ohrp , in collaboration with fda , has initiated irb registration as another step to improve its ability to conduct oversight and facilitate compliance . previous hhs efforts to monitor irbs and communicate with them about policies and guidance had been hampered because hhs did not have a comprehensive list of all irbs , estimated to number in the thousands . as part of the new assurance process , institutions will be required to register their irbs . registration will enable hhs to build an irb database , which will facilitate the identification of and communication with officials who actively review projects using human subjects .