consideration for promotion . state instructs the selection boards who recommend employees for promotion to “...weigh positively creditable and exemplary performance at hardship and danger posts…” however , the instructions only identify iraq and afghanistan by name . state has taken special measures to fill positions in iraq and afghanistan , including assigning officers to these two posts before assigning them to other posts . incentives for officers to serve in iraq and afghanistan include: priority consideration for onward assignments . state has instituted a program whereby a foreign service employee may be selected for his / her assignment for 2010 at the same time as he / she is selected for a 2009 iraq assignment . the option to serve in iraq or afghanistan on detail and extend current assignment . for example , it does not ask employees about the extent to which the opportunity to include upstretch jobs on their core bid list or the favorable promotion consideration by selection boards impact their decisions to bid on hardship post assignments . excluding some incentives from the survey hampers state's ability to evaluate the effectiveness of programs for hardship post assignments individually and collectively . second , the overall survey design has limitations preventing state officials from segregating responses by post and also does not collect key demographic information . for example , the survey data do not allow state officials to determine which responses came from posts with no hardship differential , such as london , united kingdom , and which came from posts of greatest hardship , such as lagos , nigeria . the survey also does not ask respondents for key demographic information , such as age and family status . the absence of this information makes it difficult to assess the effectiveness of the incentives as they apply to posts differently . further , the appeal of one incentive relative to another incentive may differ based upon an officer's personal circumstances . third , state did not establish specific indicators of progress against which to measure the survey responses over time . as previously noted , state tracks the percentage of critical positions filled with qualified bidders by the end of the assignments cycle . however , state has not attempted to link this information to the survey results , as suggested by government management standards . since the survey incentive question is so vague , tracking it over time would not provide a useful indicator of progress to assess the outcomes of its programs for hardship post assignments . state has not taken advantage of available tools to evaluate incentive programs for hardship post assignments . state officials maintain that external constraints make it challenging to evaluate the department's incentive programs . they reported that , in their view , it is not possible to isolate the effectiveness of a single incentive because of the large number of factors staff consider when bidding on assignments . specifically , the department cited the difficulties of capturing the personal and family preferences and values that influence bid decisions in a database .