gao - 06-222r . washington , d.c.: december 15 , 2005 . requirements are somewhat divergent . the navy appears to be most interested in fielding a relatively small aircraft of moderate endurance that may operate solo from aircraft carriers to provide surveillance for the battle group . the air force's future striker will likely be a larger land - based platform able to operate in groups , with a longer range requiring aerial refueling and employing a large weapons - carrying capacity . the air force is expected to use j - ucas experience in conducting an analysis of alternatives during 2006 of the future striker , which may be manned , unmanned , or some combination . air force plans are still evolving at this time and it is unclear how much of the previous investment in j - ucas technology and continuing navy efforts will benefit the air force program . as the j - ucas evolves one more time — and efforts return to the individual services — some key challenges will exist to maintain the advantages that were offered by a joint effort . the services need to be aware of those advantages and not arbitrarily reject them for parochial reasons . for example , exploiting past plans for common operating systems , components , and payloads could offer cost savings in acquisition and life - cycle support as well as improved interoperability . in particular , the common operating system could be a cutting edge tool to integrate and provide for interoperability of air vehicles , allowing groups of unmanned aircraft to fly in a coordinated manner and function autonomously ( without human input ) . a top priority when the defense advanced research projects agency led j - ucas , the common operating system is now likely to be terminated , according to a program official . concerns have also been raised about possible duplication of dod unmanned aircraft systems as the services look to expand individual fleets . the joint decision of the air force and army to develop a memorandum of understanding on the predator and warrior programs is encouraging and could be a model for inhibiting duplication and fostering synergy of efforts . these two systems are similar in mission and design and are manufactured by the same contractor . the services agreed to a collaborative solution in terms of acquisition , logistics , and employment and to optimize funding and leverage current and future systems to rapidly field identified capabilities . a more detailed memorandum of understanding is expected soon to articulate the path forward for each of the services in respect to developing complementary capabilities . one possible outcome could be a decision to acquire one system to meet the needs of both services . we note , however , that the air force recently substantially increased its planned investments in predator a to buy much greater quantities ; this year's funding estimates through 2011 are 165 percent more than was estimated for the same period last year . it would seem more prudent to do the analysis and reach the collaborative decisions with the army before committing to increased investments . mr. chairman , this concludes our prepared statement .