it is a regularly scheduled weekly program . it is at least 30 minutes in length . it is identified on - screen throughout the program using the symbol ‘e / i' so that viewers may identify the program as educational and informational .  the educational and informational objective of the program and the age range of the target audience are specified by the broadcaster in a children's television programming report that is filed quarterly with fcc and included in the broadcaster's public inspection file . among other things , this report identifies efforts made by the broadcaster during the preceding quarter to serve the educational and informational needs of children .  the program's identification as educational and informational and an indication of its intended age group are provided to publishers of program guides . such program guides could include newspapers , magazines , or cable operators and satellite providers for their on - screen program guides . broadcast stations use the above fcc definition and criteria as a guide to determine if a program can be classified as core children's programming . it is up to a broadcast station's management or other personnel to determine which programming will be designated by the station as its core children's programming . to increase children's access to educational and informational programming , fcc's rules state that broadcast stations that air a minimum of 3 hours of core children's programming per week are eligible to have the children's programming portion of their license renewal application approved by fcc staff rather than by the full commission . thus , to avoid commission - level review , most stations choose to air at least 3 hours of core children's programming per week . in anticipation of the digital television transition , fcc expanded this incentive to include multicast channels — that is multiple channels aired by a single broadcast station . digital stations providing more than one stream of free programming are eligible for staff - level review of their license renewal application if they air at least 3 hours of core children's programming per week on their main channel and additional hours on their multicast channels . to shield children aged 12 and under from excess advertising , cta limits advertising shown during children's programming by broadcasters and cable operators to a maximum of 10.5 minutes per hour on weekends and 12 minutes per hour on weekdays . fcc has also developed rules to create a clear distinction between program content and advertising in children's programs . for example , characters from a program are prohibited from appearing in or delivering advertisements during that program , an action known as “host - selling.” these rules apply to commercials during any programming developed and intended for children 12 and under , including most , but not all , core children's programming because core children's programming can be intended for children up to age 16 . fcc strengthened and expanded its rules in 2004 and 2006 to include additional aspects of advertising , such as prohibiting the display of some internet web addresses during children's programs .