this concludes my prepared statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you may have . for information about this testimony , please contact bernard ungar , director , physical infrastructure issues , on ( 202 ) 512-8387 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included ron king , maria edelstein , and lisa wright - solomon . notes army corps of engineers believes that it must relocate to a facility that meets seismic standards $ ( 207,980 ) delegated building — irs pays its operating costs $ ( 1,003,372 ) . to identify the potential benefits to the federal government and private sector of allowing federal agencies to enter into public - private partnerships , we hired contractors to develop and analyze hypothetical partnership scenarios for 10 selected gsa buildings . gsa's national capital region had previously contracted for a study to analyze the financial viability of public - private partnership ventures for three buildings in washington , d.c. because the majority of the work for these properties had already been done , we had the contractor update its work on these 3 buildings and selected them as 3 of the 10 gsa properties . to help us select the other 7 properties for our study , gsa provided a list of 36 properties that it considered good candidates for public - private partnerships . in preparing this list of properties , gsa officials said that they considered factors such as the strength of the real estate market in each area , the extent to which the property was currently utilized or had land that could be utilized , and the likelihood of receiving appropriations to rehabilitate the property in the near future . we judgmentally selected seven properties from this list to include properties ( 1 ) from different geographic areas of the country , ( 2 ) of different types and sizes , and ( 3 ) with historic and nonhistoric features . to analyze the potential viability of public - private partnerships for each of the 10 selected gsa properties , the contractors analyzed the local real estate markets , created a hypothetical partnership scenario and redevelopment plan , and constructed a cash flow model . in the contractor's judgment , the partnership scenarios were structured to meet current budget - scoring rules and provisions in h.r . 3285 , introduced in the 106th congress . these provisions included the requirements that the property must be available for lease , in whole or in part , by federal agreements do not guarantee occupancy by the federal government ; the government will not be liable for any actions , debts , or liabilities of any person under an agreement ; and leasehold interests of the federal government are senior to those of any lender of the nongovernmental partner . however , a determination on how the partnerships would be treated for budget - scoring purposes would have to be made after more details are available on the partnerships . we accompanied the contractor on visits to the seven gsa properties that had not been previously studied . we interviewed , or participated in discussions with , developers and local officials in the areas where the properties were located as well as officials from gsa .