reporting measures . required reporting . federal law requires states to report certain information related to the health and welfare of beneficiaries to cms for two pcs programs . this required reporting will help inform cms and congress about the health and welfare of beneficiaries receiving services from these programs . cms officials told us that they are working on developing guidance for states to submit the required information . for the participant - directed option program , cms has not collected the evaluations states are required to provide every 3 years . states are required to provide an evaluation of the overall impact of the program on the health and welfare of participating beneficiaries compared to non - participants . the first state was approved for a participant - directed option program in 2007 , and eight other states were subsequently approved , all in 2008 through 2010 . in 2008 , cms stated that it would issue further guidance on the requirement , but this guidance has not been completed . officials from one state told us that although cms did not request the required information , the state submitted it to cms . cms officials stated that they have not analyzed the data from that state as of june 2016 . for the community first choice program , cms has collected data once in the 4 years that states have been approved to provide pcs under community first choice , despite the requirement for states to submit the data annually . hhs collected required state data on the physical and emotional effects of the programs on beneficiaries ; these data were summarized in a report on community first choice released in 2016 . cms officials told us in august 2016 that they are working on developing guidance for states to submit the required information and expect to issue guidance for the community first choice program in 2016 . cms may collect other information on the participant - directed option and community first choice programs . states are required to track quality measures on an ongoing basis as part of their quality assurance systems . the measures must be made available to cms upon request . as cms's contractor develops findings on how states' compliance with hcbs waiver requirements , cms officials stated that where information can be shared across authorities to ensure efficiencies and consistencies , cms will do so in the future . for the participant - directed option program , cms officials told us that they were not aware of any cms requests for information from states on the quality of care measures they use to monitor the performance of their pcs programs , such as the percentage of beneficiaries' cases reviewed in which a critical incident occurred . for the community first choice program , officials told us that cms has not requested information from states on the measures they use to assess beneficiaries' outcomes resulting from the pcs services they receive , particularly for health and welfare . cms officials have stated , however , that the measures are an important component to help ensure quality , and plan to collect the information after guidance related to collecting the measures is issued .