student demographics . students in bie schools — both tribally - operated and bie - operated — tend to have different demographic characteristics than students in public schools nationally . these characteristics , including higher poverty rates and a higher percent of students with special needs , are among the factors yielding higher per - pupil expenditures on average , as we have noted in previous reports . in bie schools , students tend to be from lower income households than public school students . for example , all bie schools were eligible for title i funding on a school - wide basis because they all had at least 40 percent of children from low income households in school year 2009-10 , according to an education study . in contrast , half of all public schools were eligible for title i funds on a school - wide basis . in addition , bie - operated day schools have a higher percentage of students receiving special education services than public schools nationwide , according to bie and education data . students in special education generally need additional services , such as physical , occupational or speech therapy , so expenditures tend to be higher for these students . smaller enrollment and remote location . the smaller enrollment and isolated location of many bie schools contribute to their higher expenditures . in school year 2009-10 , bie schools , including bie - operated schools , generally had smaller average enrollment than public schools nationwide . for example , over 85 percent of bie - operated day schools ( 28 of 32 schools ) had fewer than 300 students according to our analysis , as compared to about 30 percent of public schools nationwide . along with smaller size , the remote location of many bie schools hinders their ability to benefit from economies of scale , as we have previously reported . for example , expenditures for facilities operations and maintenance may be higher , to the extent that many schools are geographically dispersed and unable to share facilities personnel , supplies , or services . other factors may help explain higher per - pupil expenditures at bie - operated schools , including the higher costs of instruction , transportation , facilities operations and maintenance , and administration . instructional expenditures were greater at bie - operated schools than at public schools nationwide , due partly to teacher salaries . teacher salaries were typically higher in bie - operated schools than in public schools , according to bie salary schedules and an education study of school year 2011-12 . for example , in school year 2011-12 , the yearly base salary for a teacher with a bachelor's degree and no experience at bie - operated schools was $39,775 , compared to averages of $35,500 at public schools nationwide and $33,200 at rural public schools nationwide . the higher salaries at bie - operated schools are mainly due to a federal law which requires bie to pay teachers using the same pay scale as teachers at department of defense schools located overseas . the law requires similar pay , in part , to help recruit and retain teachers at bie - operated schools .