i am here today to share the results of that survey with you . the eac was established by comptroller general david walker to provide a consolidated forum for him to meet with representatives from the various employee liaison groups ( e.g . advisory council for persons with disabilities , blacks in government , gay and lesbian employee association , etc. ) so that these groups could voice the concerns of their constituency groups . he also decided to include representatives from each of the staff positions ( i.e . administrative professional support staff ( apss ) , attorneys , and each of the band levels ) . consequently , the eac was chartered in january 2000 to serve as an advisory body to the comptroller general and other senior executives by seeking and conveying the views and concerns of the individual employee groups they represent , proposing solutions to those concerns where appropriate , providing input by assessing and commenting on gao policies , procedures , plans and practices , and communicating issues and concerns of the cg and senior managers to employees . five eac members volunteered to conduct the survey that you requested . i am pleased to be here today at your hearing on h.r . 3268 , the “government accountability office ( gao ) act of 2007” and other gao reforms , to discuss the results of the survey that you previously requested that the employee advisory council ( eac ) conduct of all gao employees ( except senior executive service / sl and interns ) on gao's band ii restructuring and the watson wyatt market - based compensation study used to set salary ranges . my name is shirley jones and i am an assistant general counsel at gao . for the last four years i have served as the attorneys representative to the eac . since your hearing last may , i have worked with the eac committee that conducted the survey . in addition to myself , the committee consisted of betsy morris , senior analyst , defense capabilities and management , beverly ross , senior it specialist / data analyst , applied research and methods , nellie shamlin , executive assistant , professional development program , and shana wallace , assistant director , applied research and methods . we received assistance from a survey specialist , luann moy , an assistant director from our applied research and methods group . upon completion of our preliminary survey development work , the survey was pre - tested among a small number of employees representing the different band levels and positions in the agency , and representing both headquarters and field staff . a draft of the survey instrument was provided to the chairman's staff for comment . a courtesy copy was given to the comptroller general and the attorney representing the ifpte . the finalized survey was ultimately launched on thursday , november 15 , 2007 . the survey was closed on friday , december 14 , 2007 . your staff was briefed on the results on january 15 , 2008 and march 5 , 2008 . the survey was sent to all gao employees except senior executive service / sl and interns ( a total of 3,002 employees ) .