see gao - 09-399 . property transported by commercial passenger aircraft . according to tsa , in fiscal year 2010 , spot referred about 50,000 passengers for additional screening and about 3,600 referrals to law enforcement officers . the referrals to law enforcement officers yielded approximately 300 arrests . of these 300 arrests , tsa stated that 27 percent were illegal aliens , 17 percent were drug - related , 14 percent were related to fraudulent documents , 12 percent were related to outstanding warrants , and 30 percent were related to other offenses . dhs has requested about $254 million for fiscal year 2012 for the spot program , which would support an additional 350 ( or 175 full - time equivalent ) bdos . if tsa receives its requested appropriation , tsa will be in a position to have invested about $1 billion in the spot program since fiscal year 2007 . according to tsa , as of august 2011 , tsa is pilot testing revised procedures for bdos at boston - logan airport to engage passengers entering screening in casual conversation to help determine suspicious behaviors . according to tsa , after a passenger's travel documents are verified , a bdo will briefly engage each passenger in conversation . if more information is needed to help determine suspicious behaviors , the officer will refer the passenger to a second bdo for a more thorough conversation to determine if additional screening is needed . tsa noted that these bdos have received additional training in interviewing methods . tsa plans to expand this pilot program to additional airports in the fall of 2011 . a 2008 report issued by the national research council of the national academy of sciences stated that the scientific evidence for behavioral monitoring is preliminary in nature . the report also noted that an information - based program , such as a behavior detection program , should first determine if a scientific foundation exists and use scientifically valid criteria to evaluate its effectiveness before deployment . the report added that such programs should have a sound experimental basis and that the documentation on the program's effectiveness should be reviewed by an independent entity capable of evaluating the supporting scientific evidence . according to the report , a terrorist's desire to avoid detection makes information - gathering techniques , such as asking what a person has done , is doing , or plans to do , highly unreliable . using these techniques to elicit information could also have definite privacy implications . these findings , in particular , may be important as tsa moves forward with its pilot program to expand bdos' use of conversation and interviews with all passengers entering screening . as we reported in may 2010 , an independent panel of experts could help dhs develop a comprehensive methodology to determine if the spot program is based on valid scientific principles that can be effectively applied in an airport environment for counterterrorism purposes . thus , we recommended that the secretary of homeland security convene an independent panel of experts to review the methodology of the validation study on the spot program being conducted to determine whether the study's methodology was sufficiently comprehensive to validate the spot program .