pub . 111-352 , 124 stat . gprama amended the government performance and results act of 1993 , pub . 103-62 , 107 stat . placed the program on our high - risk list , top executive branch leadership put in place an effort to reform the security clearance process . for example , in 2007 , dod and odni formed the joint security clearance process reform team , known as the joint reform team , to improve the security clearance process governmentwide . specifically , they tasked the joint reform team to execute joint reform efforts so that they achieve irtpa timeliness goals and improve the processes related to granting security clearances . in 2008 , the president in a memorandum called for a reform of the security clearance program and subsequently issued an executive order establishing the performance accountability council . under the executive order , this council is accountable to the president for leading the implementation of reform , including aligning security and suitability processes , holding agencies accountable for implementation , and establishing goals and metrics for progress . dod worked with the joint reform team and the performance accountability council to develop a corrective action plan to improve timeliness and demonstrate progress toward reforming the security clearance process . for example , dod's leadership , in conjunction with the joint reform team , developed a plan for reform that continuously evolved to incorporate new goals and address identified issues . to communicate these plans , the joint reform team issued an initial reform plan in april 2008 that presented a new seven - step design intended to streamline the security clearance process , including the use of a more sophisticated electronic application , a more flexible investigation process , and the establishment of ongoing evaluation procedures between formal clearance investigations . the report was updated in december 2008 to include an outline of reform progress and further plans , and in march 2009 the joint reform team issued its enterprise information technology strategy for the security clearance and suitability reform program . then , in line with gao recommendations , dod worked with the performance accountability council to issue a strategic framework that the council included in its 2010 report to the president . the strategic framework identified key governmentwide reform goals and identified the root causes for timeliness delays and delays to agencies honoring reciprocity . it also set forth a governmentwide mission , performance measures , a communications strategy , roles and responsibilities , and metrics to measure the quality of security clearance investigations and adjudications . dod continues to work with the performance accountability council to sustain clearance reform efforts and enhance transparency and accountability through annual reporting to congress . dod issued guidance on adjudication standards . in may 2009 , we found that although dod asserted that adjudicators follow a risk - management approach for granting security clearances , dod had not issued formal guidance clarifying if and under what circumstances adjudicators can adjudicate incomplete investigative reports — such as missing information relevant to residences , employment , or education . as a result , we recommended that dod issue guidance that clarifies when adjudicators may use incomplete investigative reports as the basis for granting clearances .