this statement is based on our february 2019 report . for this work , we focused on the cra oversight roles of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) . ftc and cfpb have taken steps to enforce cra compliance with requirements to protect consumer information . however , this statement and our report identified specific actions that could strengthen the oversight of these companies and better protect consumers from the compromise of their personal information . to assess risk at the market level , cfpb considers market size and other factors that contribute to market risk . to assess risk at the institution level , cfpb considers an institution's market share within a product line , as well as field and market intelligence . field and market intelligence includes quantitative and qualitative information on an institution's operations for a given product line , including the strength of its compliance management systems , the number of regulatory actions directed at the institution , findings from prior cfpb examinations , and the number and severity of consumer complaints cfpb has received about the institution . cfpb then determines specific areas of compliance to assess by considering sources such as consumer complaints , public filings and reports , and past examination findings related to the same or similar products or institutions . most recently , cfpb examinations of cra's consumer reporting have focused on issues such as data accuracy , dispute processes , compliance management , and permissible purposes . although cfpb's examination prioritization incorporates several important factors and sources , the process does not routinely include assessments of data security risk , such as how institutions detect and respond to cyber threats . cfpb staff said the bureau cannot examine for or enforce compliance with the data security standards in provisions of glba and fcra or ftc's implementing rules , even at larger participant cras . after the equifax breach , however , cfpb used its existing supervisory authority to develop internal guidelines for examining data security , and conducted some cra data security examinations . cfpb staff said that they do not routinely consider data security risks during their examination prioritization process and have not reassessed the process to determine how to incorporate such risks going forward . in 2006 , we suggested that congress consider providing ftc with civil penalty authority for its enforcement of glba's privacy and safeguarding provisions . we noted that this authority would give ftc a practical tool to more effectively enforce provisions related to security of data and consumer information . following the 2008 financial crisis , congress introduced several bills related to data protection and identity theft , which included giving ftc civil penalty authority for its enforcement of glba . in light of the equifax breach , as well as cfpb's acknowledgment of the cra market as a higher - risk market for consumers , it is important for cfpb to routinely consider factors that could inform the extent of cra data security risk such as the number of consumers that could be affected by a data security incident and the nature of potential harm resulting from the loss or exposure of information .