in its circular no . a - 136 , omb encourages agencies to break out over - and underpayments as part of improper payment reporting , if available . ( for more details related to over - and underpayment estimates , see gao - 07-92 , app . iii. ) with statistical sampling , sample results can be generalized to the entire population from which the sample was taken . from our review , we found six agencies that did not use statistical sampling as a basis for reporting improper payments totaling approximately $389 million for nine programs with outlays exceeding $58 billion . for example , the department of labor ( labor ) analyzed fiscal year 2003 single audits to identify questioned costs for its workforce investment act program , which , in turn , were used as a proxy for reporting its improper payment estimate . specifically , the improper payment rate was determined by calculating the projected questioned costs and dividing this total amount by the corresponding outlays . we do not believe this is a reasonable proxy for improper payment levels because single audits , by themselves , may lack the level of detail necessary for achieving ipia compliance . specifically , single audits generally focus on the largest dollars in an auditee's portfolio . thus , all programs identified as susceptible to improper payments at the federal level may not receive extensive coverage under a single audit . consequently , both the depth and level of detail of single audit results are , generally , insufficient to identify improper payments , estimate improper payments , or both . we also found instances where agencies estimated improper payments for only one component of the risk - susceptible program . for example , hhs's medicare program is the largest program constituting the total improper payment estimate , with an estimate of $12.1 billion for fiscal year 2005 . however , this estimate represents payment errors only for its fee - for - service program component . hhs has not yet begun to estimate improper payments for its managed care component , with outlays totaling about $52 billion , or 15 percent of medicare program outlays . in its fiscal year 2005 financial report , hhs's centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) identified bringing the medicare managed care component into compliance with ipia as a key challenge in the coming years . in addition , cms's external auditors identified medicare's managed care benefits payment cycle as a material weakness in its report on internal controls . specifically , the auditors found that existing cms policies and procedures are not sufficient to adequately reduce the risk of material benefit payment errors from occurring or not being detected and corrected in a timely manner . a key element that agencies are required to address as part of their improper payment reporting includes a description of any statutory or regulatory barrier that may limit the agencies' corrective actions in reducing improper payments . reporting this type of information gives the congress the ability to use its authorization , appropriation , and oversight responsibility to help agencies meet performance goals .