nai . this variable identifies sites that may be of interest to one or more native american entities whose members or land would be directly affected by the release of hazardous materials . associated tribe . this variable identifies the specific indian entity or entities associated with a site with nai . tcots tracks information about potential future tribal consultation opportunities and serves as a repository for consultation - related documents for active consultations for all epa programs , including superfund . epa uses tcots to ( 1 ) track current and forecasted consultation , ( 2 ) publicize current epa consultation opportunities for tribal governments , and ( 3 ) provide reports to omb , as called for in the 2009 presidential memorandum on tribal consultation . epa data identifying npl sites that are located on tribal property or that affect tribes are not reliable . specifically , epa data identifying sites that are on tribal property , sites that have nai , and the tribes that have interest in nai sites are not accurate or complete based on our reviews of agency data and interviews with epa officials . epa data identifying npl sites that are on tribal property are not accurate . epa headquarters officials told us that the sems data variable for identifying sites “on tribal property” may not always accurately identify whether npl sites are located on tribal property . because epa officials told us that the agency's data regarding npl sites on tribal property may not be accurate and provided explanations for why these data are unreliable , we did not evaluate these data to determine the total number of inaccuracies . epa officials we interviewed provided a number of reasons why the agency's data regarding npl sites located on tribal property may not be accurate: first , epa officials told us that some site location information was inaccurately transposed during maintenance of the former database of record used prior to adopting sems , and that these errors , in some cases , carried over to sems . according to these officials , the transposed information resulted in some sites appearing in the incorrect geographic hemisphere ( i.e. , sites located in the western hemisphere appeared to be located in the eastern hemisphere in the incorrectly transposed data ) . these officials told us that they have worked over the past year to correct these errors and to verify the accuracy of site coordinates . second , epa officials told us that accurately documenting which sites are on tribal property can be complicated due to difficulties identifying tribal property boundaries and evolving site boundaries . for example , tribal property boundaries may be difficult to establish without reviewing land titles and other documents . further , epa officials told us they use the best available data to identify tribal property but there are limitations in that data . in addition , epa officials we interviewed told us that site boundaries can be difficult to define or change over time . for example , an agency official told us npl sites may not have clearly delineated boundaries until after the remedial investigation is complete and the full extent of contamination has been determined .