part 720 . treasury stated that it agreed with our conclusion that the requirements of the cmia did not prevent grantees from receiving grant funds when needed . both treasury and omb staff provided technical comments that have been addressed as appropriate in this report . we found no substantial evidence that the cmia provision that limits the extent to which grantees can hold federal funds before payout , prior to its exemption for certain first responder grants in fiscal year 2005 , had prevented first responders from receiving dhs grant funds when such funds were needed . specifically , the majority of saas we contacted did not cite the cmia as a contributing factor to first responder funding delays , and the national governors association , u.s. conference of mayors , and other associations we contacted did not provide information that demonstrated that the cmia prevented local governments and other subgrantees from receiving first responder grant funding when they needed it . in addition , according to a report prepared by the hsac task force , numerous factors , only one of which was related to the cmia , have been responsible for first responder funding delays . importantly , as we reported in february 2005 , a major challenge in managing first responder grants is balancing two goals: minimizing the time it takes to distribute grant funds to state and local first responders , and ensuring appropriate planning and accountability for the effective use of grant funds . dhs's approach to striking this balance has been evolving from experience , congressional action , and feedback from states and local governments . in march 2006 , dhs reported that the cmia exemption had been used only to a minimal extent and , according to a dhs official , dhs is meeting with saas and local governments to determine the impacts , if any , of the cmia exemption on first responder grant funding . of the 13 saas we contacted to determine whether the cmia had prevented first responders from receiving dhs grant funds when such funds were needed , officials from six of these agencies told us that their state agency had experienced delays in getting first responder funds to subgrantees ; however , most characterized the delays as not serious . only one state agency official attributed the delays directly to the cmia . according to that official , under the funding technique for the cmia that was agreed to between the state and treasury for fiscal year 2004 , the state was to be reimbursed by the federal government for eligible grant - related expenditures . however , certain smaller subgrantees , such as volunteer fire departments , did not have the financial resources to purchase specialized equipment with their own funds and then wait for reimbursement from the state . the official stated that , contrary to the agreement with treasury , the state began advancing federal funds to the subgrantees to enable them to purchase the equipment . generally , however , the saa officials were more apt to tie delays in operations related to first responders to factors other than the cmia .