we further clarified this position in the report . in response to our discussion on the marine corps' investigating future - kit armoring strategies using the “a” kit and “b” kit concept for armor kits , dod added that the marine corps is now planning to incorporate this concept on its logistics vehicle replacement ( lvsr ) and the mtvr . dod further noted that the lvsr will be the first military vehicle to incorporate the a and b kit concept . the update is expected to be completed by september 2006 . dod provided additional comments related to the context of the report . specifically , dod noted that it believes the marine corps exhibited due diligence in providing armor protection for its deployed tactical wheeled vehicle fleet . it further described in detail the marine corps' approach to first develop an interim solution using commercially available materials , including 3 / 16-inch hhs , to ensure all vehicles entering iraq would have at least some protection until armor with a better level of protection could be fielded . we agree that the marine corps exercised diligence in armoring its trucks for iraq and other deployed locations given the circumstances and we believe this information is accurately presented in the report . however , as noted in the report , a more unified and synchronized approach between the army and the marine corps may have improved the availability of the preferred 3 / 8-inch rha for the marine corps' interim armor . dod also provided additional comments related to the accuracy of the report which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate . the department's specific comments and our responses to them are discussed in detail in appendix iii . in summary , the department disagreed with our statements regarding the ( 1 ) lack of coordination between the marine corps and the army on addressing truck armor requirements and solutions , ( 2 ) lack of a formal departmentwide process to ensure interservice coordination , and ( 3 ) delays in the marine corps' identification of the requirement for 3 / 8-inch rha and its attempts to acquire and install this improved armor . while we acknowledge that the marine corps made attempts to coordinate with the army through various informal processes , evidence showed that the lack of a synchronized approach between the services led to differing processes within the services for generating armor requirements and solutions . similarly , while we agree that the department had a number of interservice working groups and committees designed to enhance interservice coordination , we continue to believe that the lack of a more formal interservice coordination process precluded the marine corps and the army from identifying armor requirements and solutions for both services at the same time . lastly , while the department refuted our evidence that the marine corps did not identify a requirement for 3 / 8-inch rha until april 2004 , it was unable to adequately document its position . see appendix iii for a more detailed discussion of these issues .