( see fig . on average , contract and fee - basis physicians made up 5 to 40 percent of the physicians in a given mission - critical physician occupation at each vamc in our review . for example , officials from a large , highly complex vamc told us that , in march 2017 , they augmented the 86 employed primary care physicians with eight contract and three fee - basis physicians , which represented about 16 percent of their primary care physician workforce . further , this vamc also had about 64 primary care physician trainees providing certain medical services under the supervision of a senior physician . most physicians providing care at vamcs are employed by vha . vha also supplements the capacity of its employed physician staff by acquiring additional physician services through fee - basis arrangements or contracts . under fee - basis arrangements , providers are paid a pre - agreed - upon amount for each service provided . under contracts , physician services may be obtained on a short - term basis ; for example , through sole - source contracts with academic affiliates . vamcs may also use physicians who volunteer their time , who are referred to as work - without - compensation providers . in addition to vha - employed , contract , and fee - basis physicians , vamcs often supplement their capacity by using physician trainees , who include medical residents and advanced fellows . the attrition was primarily due to voluntary resignations and retirements . my statement today is based on our october 2017 report examining vha physician staffing , recruitment , and retention strategies . in particular , my statement focuses on ( 1 ) vha information on how many mission - critical physicians provided care at vamcs ; ( 2 ) vha guidance for determining its physician staffing needs ; and ( 3 ) the strategies vha used to support the recruitment and retention of physicians at vamcs , and the extent to which it has evaluated these strategies to determine their effectiveness . as part of that work , we made several recommendations for vha to improve staffing , recruitment , and retention strategies for physicians . to do the work for our october 2017 report , we reviewed key documents and interviewed knowledgeable officials from vha in headquarters offices , as well as in six vamcs across the country . more detailed information on the objectives , scope , and methodology for our 2017 report can be found in that report . for this statement , we obtained information from vha officials in june 2018 about any steps they have taken to implement our 2017 recommendations . this statement is based on work conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .