, for school year 2017-2018 . education has provided assistance to states in a number of ways . for example , the department hosted webinars on the state plan template that states may choose to use , and on the peer review process . education has also implemented a technical assistance initiative called the state support network to support state and district school improvement efforts under essa . this network aims to connect states and districts with technical assistance providers and subject matter experts to develop strategies for supporting schools . according to the network's website , it aims to help states and districts learn from prior school improvement efforts , assess needs and assets to inform strategies , and build sustainable systems to support continuous improvement . during our review , representatives of most national stakeholder groups with whom we spoke told us that states could use guidance on a number of issues . one example of guidance that they told us states might consider useful is identification of appropriate evidence - based interventions . they explained that this is important because it allows them to tailor the indicator for each level . differentiate schools ( distinguishing between levels of performance ) accountability system , including the four academic indicators , for all students and for each subgroup of students ; and include differentiation of any school in which any subgroup of students is determined by the state to be consistently under - performing . ohio officials told us that they propose to continue to use the state's current system of six indicators , with modifications , to assess school and student performance . under the proposal , schools would receive a letter grade on each indicator . some of the indicators , such as academic achievement , would measure current performance while other indicators , such as academic progress , would measure growth . ohio state officials told us that they also intend to roll up indicator scores into an overall letter grade for schools in 2018 . they said that reporting a letter grade on each indicator provides detailed information , while an overall letter grade provides an easily understandable overview of performance . ohio stakeholders and school district officials expressed concerns about both the use of letter grades and rolling up grades on each indicator into an overall score . they explained that words , such as meets or exceeds expectations , could more accurately communicate performance than letter grades . california officials said they plan to distinguish performance of schools and student subgroups by using a dashboard in which school and student subgroup performance would be color - coded based on each of six state indicators . these officials said that each indicator measures current student performance as well as changes in performance over time . unlike ohio , california does not plan to aggregate the indicators into overall scores for schools and student subgroups . california officials told us that they chose their approach for two reasons . first , aggregating scores on indicators into an overall score can mask individual areas where a school may be struggling . in contrast , reporting individual indicators allows key distinctions to be maintained in performance across a variety of factors .