we did not assess the implementation or effectiveness of these projects . to assess the reliability of data on trade capacity - building projects , we compared information provided by these agencies with source databases , discussed discrepancies with agency officials , and reviewed agencies' procedures for assessing the completeness and accuracy of the project data collection and storage . we determined that the data we obtained were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review . for a full description of our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from may 2016 to april 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we provided a draft of this report to usda , commerce , dhs , dol , state , usaid , and ustr for their review . in addition , the united states has bilateral investment treaties in force with 40 countries . according to ustr , such treaties provide binding legal rules regarding one country's treatment of investors and investments from another country to help promote economic reforms , improve investment climates , and attract new investment . according to state , one of the basic aims of the u.s. bilateral investment treaty program is to encourage the adoption of policies that treat private investment in a nondiscriminatory way . state officials also noted that the department has labor officers and environment , science , technology , and health officers based overseas who may participate in monitoring and enforcing partner countries' implementation of labor and environment chapters of ftas . usaid , state , and dol had 80 trade capacity - building assistance projects active in fiscal year 2016 that supported fta partner countries' compliance with their fta obligations . the total funding for these projects was about $256 million . moreover , state explains that these treaties limit the conditions in which performance requirements , such as local content requirements , may be imposed . according to state , these treaties also include a dispute settlement mechanism giving investors the right to submit an investment dispute to international arbitration . the united states is also a party to 52 bilateral and regional trade and investment framework agreements that , according to ustr , provide strategic frameworks and principles for dialogue on trade and investment issues . these agreements all serve as a forum for the united states and other governments to meet and discuss issues of mutual interest with the objective of improving cooperation and enhancing opportunities for trade and investment , according to ustr . the united states and partner countries consult on a wide range of issues related to trade and investment . topics for consultation and possible further cooperation include market access issues , labor , the environment , protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights , and , in appropriate cases , capacity - building , according to ustr .