military assistance . the roc serves as the 911 for contractors who need military assistance . contractors who need assistance contact either the national roc or the regional rocs and roc personnel contact the closest military unit and ask it to provide assistance . assistance , such as a quick reaction force or medical assistance , is provided if military assets are available . security providers we spoke with said that they rarely call for a quick reaction force because incidents with insurgents are usually over within a matter of minutes but on some occasions the quick reaction forces have proved to be very helpful . for example , one after action report described an incident in february 2005 in which a private security team was ambushed by 20 insurgents and attacked by small arms fire and three rocket - propelled grenades . the contractors contacted both the regional roc in mosul and the national roc in baghdad . while security providers , reconstruction contractors , and military representatives of the pco believe that the roc has improved coordination on the complex battle space in iraq , both the private security providers and the military believe that several coordination issues remain to be resolved . security providers and military officials expressed continuing concern about incidents between security providers and the military when approaching military convoys and checkpoints and the need for a better understanding of the complex battle space by both private security providers and the military . one of the coordination issues that contractors and the military continued to be concerned about is blue on white violence . blue on white violence is the term used by contractors and the military to describe situations when the military fires at friendly forces ( such as contractors ) or , as happens less frequently , when private security employees fire at military forces . an analysis of incident reports completed by the roc indicates that these incidents happen most frequently when contractors encounter a military checkpoint or a military convoy . private security providers have told us that they are fired upon by u.s. forces so frequently that incident reports are not always filed with the roc . according to some incident reports filed with the roc , some contractors believe that u.s. forces have fired on private security provider vehicles without provocation . for example , one security company official reported that his convoy was traveling on a route in iraq when a u.s. military convoy approached . according to the report , the security convoy identified itself using generally recognized identification procedures and pulled off the road to allow the military convoy to pass . after about half of the 20-vehicle convoy had passed , a gunner in the military convoy began firing at the security convoy . according to the after incident report filed with the roc , no injuries or damage resulted from this incident . a similar incident happened on the road from the international zone to the baghdad airport . as in the previous incident , part of a u.s. military convoy passed the private security convoy without incident when a gunner in the fourth vehicle of the convoy began to fire at the lead vehicle in the private security convoy .