aoc agreed . it noted that the sequence 2 contractor had already begun to work additional hours to recover lost time on the utility tunnel . aoc also noted that its construction management contractor has an inspection process in place to identify problems with quality and has recently enhanced its efforts to oversee worker safety . propose a cvc opening date to congress that allows a reasonable amount of time between the completion of the base project's construction and the cvc facility's opening to address any likely problems that are not provided for in the construction schedule . the december 15 , 2006 , opening date that aoc proposed earlier this month would provide about 90 days between these milestones if aoc meets its september 15 , 2006 , target for substantial completion . however , we continue to believe that aoc will have difficulty meeting the september 15 target , and although the 90-day period is a significant step in the right direction , an even longer period is likely to be needed . in addition , problems with aging equipment , fire damage , management weaknesses , and a leadership vacancy could affect cpp's ability to provide chilled water and steam . more specifically: in july , two chillers in cpp's east refrigeration plant were taken out of service because of a significant refrigerant gas leak . the refrigerant , whose use is being phased out nationally , escaped into the surrounding environment . because of the chillers' age and use of an outdated refrigerant , aoc has determined that it would not be cost - effective to repair the chillers . cpp's chilled water production capacity will be further reduced between december 1 , 2005 , and march 15 , 2006 , when the west refrigeration plant is to be shut down to enable newly installed equipment to be connected to the existing chilled water system . however , the remainder of cpp's east refrigeration plant is to remain operational during this time , and aoc expects that the east refrigeration plant will have sufficient capacity to meet the lower wintertime cooling demands . additionally , cpp representatives indicated that they could bring the west refrigeration plant back online to provide additional cooling capacity in an emergency . cpp is developing a cost estimate for this option . in june , one of two cpp boilers that burn coal to generate steam was damaged by fire . according to a cpp incident report , cpp operator errors contributed to the incident and subsequent damage . both boilers were taken off - line for scheduled maintenance between july 1 and september 15 , and cpp expects both boilers to be back online by september 30 , thereby enabling cpp to provide steam to cvc when it is needed . several management issues at cpp could further affect the expansion plant's and cpp's operational readiness: cpp has not yet developed a plan for staffing and operating the entire plant after the west refrigeration plant becomes operational or contracted for its current staff to receive adequate training to operate the west refrigeration plant's new , much more modern equipment . cpp has not yet received a comprehensive commissioning plan from its contractor .