( see app . i for additional information on our scope and methodology. ) we conducted this performance audit from january to november 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . and ( 2 ) how do those efforts compare with effective interagency collaboration practices ? jpdo's global harmonization work group focuses on ensuring the global interoperability of nextgen . we address the following questions: ( 1 ) what efforts has faa taken to ensure the interoperability of nextgen with sesar ? to obtain an understanding of the collaborative efforts taken toward interoperability , we reviewed agreements between the united states and the eu concerning collaborative research on air traffic management and documents related to nextgen and sesar , including key planning documents , research action plans , and status reports . we also interviewed faa and eu officials , as well as stakeholder associations representing airlines , airports , and airframe and equipment manufacturers in the united states and europe to obtain their perspectives on the collaborative effort . we surveyed the literature on effective collaborative practices and compared faa's efforts with practices that our past work has shown can lead to effective collaboration . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nextgen and sesar , when fully implemented , will represent a significant departure from current air traffic control procedures , in which aircraft fly over fixed , ground - based navigational aids , and pilots respond to voice commands from air traffic controllers . nextgen and sesar envision an airspace system in which network - based information and automation optimize an aircraft's operation in all phases of flight — - from flight planning at the start to landing and taxiing to the gate at the end — to reduce delays and maximize airspace capacity , while reducing environmental impact and fuel consumption . see figure 1 for an illustration of how nextgen is envisioned to work . nextgen and sesar envision trajectory - based operations , which would use technological advances in communications , navigation , and surveillance , some of which are still under development .  communications between aircraft and air traffic control would change from primarily voice mode between pilots and air traffic controllers to data communications , known as data comm . prescripted e - mail - like messages would replace routine voice communications between air traffic controllers and pilots . data communications would also enable ground systems to communicate directly with the aircraft's flight management system .  navigation procedures used will be based on the performance capabilities of the aircraft , meaning that appropriately equipped aircraft and flight crews will be able to select their own flight paths , within limits , and use satellites rather than existing ground - based aids for navigation . the aircraft's navigation system would alert the crew to deviations from the planned route .