note that we did not interview sellers 14-20 . through data mining of information submitted on transit benefit applications , we found many employees who appeared to provide inaccurate and inflated commuting cost information on their transit benefit applications . the following table provides a complete listing of the 23 individuals we interviewed . smartrip cards feature a similar warning . we identified 58 individuals selling metrocheks on ebay on july 24 , august 7 , and august 23 , 2006 , and confirmed that at least 20 of these individuals were in fact federal employees . collectively , these 20 employees fraudulently sold more than $21,000 worth of metrocheks over the last 2 years and could be subject to prosecution for unlawful conversion under 18 u.s.c . in addition , because the employees we investigated signed certifications stating that they will only use their transit benefits to cover actual out - of - pocket commuting costs , they could be subject to criminal prosecution under the false statements act , 18 u.s.c §1001 . in subsequent interviews with 13 of the 20 ebay sellers , we found instances where federal employees received parking benefits in addition to metrocheks , were on extended leave from work , or did not even use public transportation to commute to work . in addition , none of the individuals we interviewed reported the income generated from the illegal sale of metrocheks on their tax returns and they would be required to report these sales as part of their gross income . table 1 highlights the information we obtained on 8 of these individuals through ebay , paypal ( an internet payment service ) , and our interviews . more detailed information on 4 of the cases follows the table . for a list of all 20 federal employees selling metrocheks on ebay , see appendix ii . case 1: seller has been employed as a gs - 14 specialist at transportation's federal motor carrier safety administration since 1990 . seller has received the maximum amount of transit benefits since he first entered the transit benefit program in november 2004 . seller explained that he accumulated excess benefits over time by using other means of transportation to and from work , including “slugging,” riding with a neighbor , and driving his motorcycle . seller readily admitted to selling his transit benefits on ebay on multiple occasions for personal gain ( 12 lots of metrocheks valued at a total of $1,080 ) , but stated that he did not know it was illegal to sell his transit benefits — despite the warning printed on every metrochek and the certification statement he signed on his application and each time he picked up his benefits . case 3: seller is a gs - 14 information technology specialist and has been employed by irs since 2003 . seller has received the maximum amount of transit benefits since he first entered the transit benefit program in february 2004 . seller also receives parking benefits from irs and accumulated excess benefits over time by driving to work and parking in an agency - owned parking space for free .