pub . 111-353 , 124 stat . mechanism be funded and staffed ? have online collaboration tools been developed ? written guidance and agreements: if appropriate , have participating agencies documented their agreement regarding how they will be collaborating ? have they developed ways to continually update and monitor these agreements ? nearly all of the experts agreed that a centralized mechanism should be held accountable for its results and suggested several options for achieving accountability . for example , most said the mechanism could establish goals that member agencies would be publicly accountable for meeting . several experts also said the mechanism should periodically report to congress and the public ; for example , one expert said that would provide accountability . some others said holding public meetings would be helpful to get stakeholders' views and to provide information to the public on the mechanism's activities . we have also found that outcomes and accountability are key features of any collaborative mechanism . nearly all of the experts we interviewed emphasized the importance of regular meetings . most told us that it would be important to have meetings quarterly . as one expert explained , such a frequency would help to establish momentum for the mechanism . some suggested it could be helpful to hold more frequent meetings initially , to get the mechanism off the ground . if leadership is shared , have roles and responsibilities been clearly identified and agreed upon ? experts also told us that doing so would provide for a long lasting , effective collaboration that would also have visibility within the government . however , several experts acknowledged that enactment of a statute to formalize a collaborative mechanism would present the most challenges in terms of time and effort . some experts said that an interagency agreement could work as a means to set up the mechanism and would likely be the easiest and most immediate option . however , most of the experts also told us that interagency agreements can be weak and may not provide the most sustainable or effective way to formalize such a group . some other experts said a presidential directive would be the best way to formalize the mechanism because it would bring high - level visibility to such a group . on the other hand , most experts expressed concern that , if established by a presidential directive , the mechanism may not survive a change in administrations . we have found that lack of continuity is a frequent issue with collaborative mechanisms that are tied to the executive office of the president , particularly when administrations change . have participating agencies clarified roles and responsibilities ? participants been included ? do they have the ability to commit resources for their agency ? some experts who were members of the fswg told us that the fswg met more frequently early on and less frequently over time . several experts also suggested the possibility of a two - tier structure , with high - level officials meeting less frequently and another group of subject matter experts and additional staff meeting more frequently . our prior work has highlighted the importance of in - person meetings to build relationships and trust .