gao - 05-193sp . washington , d.c.: may 2005 . social security: issues relating to noncoverage of public employees . gao - 03-710t . washington , d.c.: may 1 , 2003 . this formula reduces the amount of payable benefits . regarding the gpo , spouse and survivor benefits were intended to provide some social security protection to spouses with limited working careers . the gpo provision reduces spouse and survivor benefits to persons who do not meet this limited working career criterion because they worked long enough in noncovered employment to earn their own pension . regarding the wep , the congress was concerned that the design of the social security benefit formula provided unintended windfall benefits to workers who had spent most of their careers in noncovered employment . they have also been a source of confusion and frustration for the workers they affect . i hope i can help clarify and provide some perspective on the complex relationship between social security and public employees . today , i will discuss social security's coverage of public employees , social security's current provisions affecting noncovered public employees , and proposals to modify those provisions or make coverage mandatory for all public employees . my testimony is based on a body of work we have published over the past several years . in summary , social security does not cover about one - fourth of public employees , for various historical reasons . as a result , these employees do not pay social security taxes on earnings from their noncovered jobs . nevertheless , they can still be eligible for social security benefits based on their spouses' or their own earnings in covered employment . currently , social security has two provisions to address the resulting fairness issues . the government pension offset ( gpo ) affects spouse and survivor benefits , and the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) affects retired worker benefits . both provisions reduce social security benefits for those who receive noncovered pension benefits . however , the social security administration ( ssa ) cannot effectively and fairly apply these provisions because it does not have access to complete and accurate information on receipt of such noncovered pension benefits . implementation of some of our recommendations has improved the availability and tracking of key information for federal retirees , which we estimate will save hundreds of millions of dollars . however , congressional action is still needed to improve access to information on state and local government pensions . in recent years , various social security reform proposals that would affect public employees have been offered . some proposals specifically address the gpo and the wep and would either revise or eliminate them . while we have not analyzed these proposals , we believe it is important to consider both the costs and the fairness issues they raise . still other proposals would make coverage mandatory for all state and local government employees . according to social security actuaries , doing so for all newly hired state and local government employees would reduce the 75-year actuarial deficit by about 11 percent . it could also enhance inflation protection , pension portability , and dependent benefits for the affected beneficiaries , in many cases .