gao - 14-42 . washington , d.c.: january 30 , 2014 . ( see fig . the usoc established the safesport program , an athlete safety program that addresses misconduct in sports through information , training , and resources . the program was born out of a working group convened by the usoc in 2010 to develop a set of recommendations for promoting safe training environments in sports . what steps do selected athletic programs take to prevent and respond to the sexual abuse of youth athletes ? to perform this work , we used a variety of approaches . to understand what role federal agencies play in preventing and responding to the sexual abuse of youth athletes under age 18 , we reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations as well as relevant agency documents , such as guidance and procedures for conducting compliance reviews . we interviewed officials from the departments of education ( education ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and justice ( justice ) . we also interviewed relevant experts on coaching , athletics administration , and sexual abuse , and officials from a range of relevant organizations , including youth sport and education associations ; victim advocacy groups ; the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) ; the united states olympic committee ( usoc ) ; and the usoc's national governing bodies ( ngb ) for the selected private athletic programs of figure skating , hockey , and swimming , and four of their regional affiliates . we also reviewed relevant literature from these groups . to gather information on how selected athletic programs address the sexual abuse of youth athletes , we conducted site visits to a nongeneralizable sample of athletic programs in three states — california , florida , and texas . what role do federal agencies play in preventing and responding to the sexual abuse of youth participating in these programs ? we interviewed representatives of and reviewed documentation for a total of 11 athletic programs , which included 3 universities that operate youth sports camps and 8 local private athletic clubs . states and athletic programs were selected based on criteria including popularity of sport among youth , college rankings in selected sports , gender participation , and geographic diversity . we gathered information about the relevant policies and procedures selected athletic programs have designed for screening staff and volunteers , education and awareness training , monitoring and supervision , reporting of complaints , responding to complaints , and imposing sanctions . we also reviewed training materials on the subject of youth protection . for more information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from february 2014 to may 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .