dod concurred with our recommendation . in december 2017 , the deputy secretary of defense appointed a reform leader for service contracts and category management — an approach intended to manage entire categories of spending across government for commonly purchased goods and services — and established related reform teams to help ensure department - wide efficiency in contract spending . in february 2016 , we found that dod's and congress's insight into future spending on contracted services was limited because dod did not identify service contract spending needs beyond the current budget year . although program offices generally kept track of their future service contract needs and estimated costs for 5 years out , they were not required to identify planned service contract spending beyond the budget year . we recommended that the military departments revise their programming guidance to collect information on how contracted services will be used to meet requirements beyond the budget year . dod partially concurred with our recommendation , but noted that the volatility of requirements and each budget cycle constrain the department's ability to accurately quantify service contract requirements beyond the budget year . we agreed that requirements and budgets change over time , but our work showed that the needed data already exists and is not captured in such a way to inform senior leadership on future service contract spending . we continue to believe that implementing this recommendation will assist the department in gaining better insight into contracted service requirements and enable more strategic decisions about the volume and type of services it plans to acquire . we are not making new recommendations in this report . osd submitted this inventory summary to congress in february 2018 . this official added that osd will discuss whether changes in its guidance for the next inventory are needed to clarify what information the military departments and defense components should submit . the military departments generally have not developed plans to use the inventory to inform management decisions as required by subsection 2330a ( e ) of title 10 of the u.s. code and osd's inventory guidance . further , manpower and budget officials said they make limited use of the inventory to inform strategic workforce planning , workforce mix , and budget decisions . this situation is similar to what we have found in our past work . manpower and budget officials we spoke with stated the inventory is often too outdated to inform their decision - making , though the inventory provides a single source of certain types of information that are not readily available elsewhere . this limited use may also reflect , in part , the lack of accountable officials responsible for developing plans and enforcement mechanisms to use the inventory , as we recommended in november 2014 . subsection 2330a ( e ) of title 10 of the u.s. code , dod instruction 5000.74 , and osd's inventory guidance direct the military departments and defense agencies to use the inventory to inform workforce and budget decisions . when we last reported on this issue in october 2016 , we identified 12 guidance documents from the military departments related to strategic workforce planning , workforce mix , and budget decisions .