it software assets . eight agencies provide complete information on their software assets ; 14 agencies provide partial information ; and 1 agency did not provide information . for example , the small business administration ( sba ) provides information on its data center systems , their technical dependencies on platforms and servers , and consolidation approaches for its systems ; while gsa provides information on its data center systems and a consolidation approach for each system , but provides only partial information on each system's technical dependencies on platforms and servers . additionally , energy provides only partial information on the systems in its data center , the systems' technical dependencies , and consolidation approaches for those systems . it hardware assets and utilization . nine agencies provide complete information on their it hardware assets and the utilization of those assets and 14 provide partial information . for example , epa provides complete information on maximum and average server utilization , as well as counts of its physical servers , virtual hosts , and virtual operating systems ; while sba provides complete information on counts of its physical servers , virtual hosts , and virtual operating systems , but only partial information on maximum and average server utilization . another 7 agencies , including the departments of defense ( defense ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , and transportation ( transportation ) , provide partial information on their maximum and average server utilization , and on their counts of physical servers , virtual hosts , and virtual operating systems . it facilities , energy , and storage . three agencies provide complete information on their it facilities , energy , and storage , while 20 provide partial information . for example , the department of state ( state ) includes all the required information , while the department of education ( education ) provides complete information on its annual data center operational cost , total rack count , and storage information , but only provides partial information on its annual data center electricity cost and total electricity usage . also , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , has partial information on its total rack count and does not provide any information for the other required parts of this element .  geographic location and real estate . nine agencies provide complete information on their data center locations , while 14 provide partial information . for example , the office of personnel management ( opm ) provides complete information on its number of data centers and the gross floor area of those centers , but does not provide information on the number of server rooms and closets and the gross floor area of those facilities . according to an omb official , agencies have been instructed to move forward with their consolidation initiatives , and as noted earlier , omb intends to monitor the agencies' progress annually . we have previously reported that without a clear description of the strategies and resources an agency plans to use in meeting its goals , it will be difficult to assess the likelihood of the agency's success in achieving its intended results .