at a usps facility . about 4.2 billion pieces of mail ( about 45 percent of all exclusions ) were excluded in the second quarter of fiscal year 2015 due to “no start - the - clock.” 2 . no mail piece barcode scan was recorded by usps's automation equipment: this prevents usps from being able to track the barcoded mail . about 1.5 billion pieces of mail ( 16 percent of all exclusions ) were excluded in the second quarter of fiscal year 2015 due to a lack of a barcode scan recorded by usps automated equipment . inaccuracies in mail preparation: these include deficiencies in preparing bundles of mail or the quality of barcodes on mail pieces . about 1.2 billion pieces of mail ( 13 percent of all exclusions ) were excluded in this quarter due to inaccuracies in mail preparation . the percentage of market - dominant mail volume that was eligible for measurement but excluded for various reasons increased from 21 to 26 percent over the period from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013 to the second quarter of fiscal year 2015 . thus , exclusion of eligible mail from measurement has become a more important cause for why measurement data are not complete . usps officials told us that the increase in excluded mail volume can be attributed to the overall increase of mail volume eligible for inclusion in measurement . see gao - 06-733 . decision making , we reviewed the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) , and the gpra modernization act of 2010 framework for meeting fiscal , management , and performance challenges , practices used by high - performing agencies , and prior gao reports . to determine how usps measures delivery performance , how prc oversees usps's measurement , and how usps and prc report delivery performance information , we reviewed usps's annual reports to congress and prc , prc's annual compliance determinations , usps and prc websites , and other documentation on this measurement and reporting . we also obtained written responses from usps and prc related to mail delivery performance measurement and reporting and interviewed usps , prc officials , and mailing industry officials . usps's responses contained data on the amount of mail included and excluded from delivery performance measurement in fiscal years 2010 through the second quarter of fiscal year 2015 . we assessed the reliability of usps's data through a review of related documents , such as written responses from usps . we found these data sufficiently reliable for providing a general description related to the completeness of delivery performance information . to assess prc's oversight of usps's measurement of mail delivery performance , we compared prc's efforts to its statutory authorities and responsibilities related to such oversight . further details about our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from october 2014 to september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives .