( app . nonetheless , dot reported that it was unsure of meeting any of these aviation safety goals in 2001 . in the marine sector , dot reported that it met all three of its safety goals — to reduce the number of recreational boating fatalities , reduce the rate of passenger vessel fatalities , and increase the number of mariners reported in imminent danger who are rescued . next year , dot will simplify the passenger fatality measure because the current measure has been difficult to understand . dot indicated that it expects to meet all three goals in 2001 . the report acknowledges that the data on recreational boating fatalities are probably underreported by at least 6 percent due to the need for interpretation of what constitutes a recreational boating fatality at the state level . in addition , in 2001 , dot will switch data sources for passenger vessel fatalities . the report indicates that the new data source — the marine information system for safety and law enforcement — will be a significant improvement , but the improved data quality may cause serious difficulties in making comparisons to prior data . the agency's strategies for achieving its marine safety goals in 2002 appear reasonable . the strategies include increasing staffing and training at rescue stations and command centers and promoting the wearing of lifejackets by recreational boaters . in 2000 , dot's evaluation of its recreational boating safety program concluded that wearing personal flotation devices could save the lives of about 500 boaters each year . in addition , the agency intends to work with the u.s. navy and air force , which also have search and rescue responsibilities , primarily for their own vessels and aircraft . the air force is the lead agency for land - based search and rescue , and the coast guard is the lead for maritime search and rescue . despite one of the deadliest pipeline accidents in recent years , dot projects that it met both of its goals for hazardous material transport safety — reducing pipeline failures and serious hazardous material transport incidents — because neither goal measures the increasing number of fatalities . dot statistics show that pipeline fatalities have been increasing steadily over the past years ( see fig . however , we recognize that the overall number of fatalities from pipeline accidents remains low , and that a single major accident can result in a significant increase in the number of annual fatalities . preliminary estimates also show that dot will meet its performance goal for reducing serious hazardous materials incidents in 2000 . however , the fact that there were more incidents in 2000 than there were in 1999 will make it challenging for dot to meet its 2001 goal . dot acknowledged that the number of pipeline failures is likely underreported , and federal , state , and industry teams have been formed to improve the data . in addition , dot reported that it is revising the collection and processing of pipeline accident data to improve the consistency and accuracy of the data on accident causes . to reduce the risk of pipeline failures , dot works to establish safety regulations and ensure compliance .