according to pub . 106-346 , agencies must establish a telework policy that allows eligible employees to participate in telework . telework - related literature suggests that , in addition to or within an agencywide telework policy , agencies should establish eligibility criteria to ensure that teleworkers are selected on an equitable basis using criteria such as suitability of tasks and employee performance ; establish policies or requirements to facilitate communication among teleworkers , managers , and coworkers ; develop a telework agreement for use between teleworkers and their managers ; and develop guidelines on workplace health and safety issues to ensure that teleworkers have safe and adequate places to work off - site . as shown in figure 2 , our analysis indicates that two of the five practices in this category , including establishing an agencywide telework policy , have been fully implemented by all of the agencies . the remaining three practices , including establishing eligibility criteria to ensure that teleworkers are selected on an equitable basis , still need additional attention to be fully implemented by some or all of the agencies we reviewed . are actively asked if they wish to telework or are able to telework because their supervisor informed them they could telework on some basis ? ” if this new definition is properly applied by all agencies in reporting data to opm , this should address the issue we found . also included in the draft survey are two new proposed questions related to allowing employees the opportunity to telework . these questions ask how employees were presented with the option to telework and how many turned it down . the steps taken by opm in response to our findings show a ready willingness to address issues that are hindering telework implementation . continued efforts by opm to publicize these new telework guidelines will help to ensure that telework coordinators in federal agencies have a clear understanding of the information they need to fully implement their own telework programs . as discussed earlier , the legislative framework for telework has provided both gsa and opm with lead roles in the implementation of telework in the federal government , providing each agency with responsibilities for the telework initiative . according to officials at both agencies , gsa and opm have not developed a memorandum of understanding or other formal agreement regarding their responsibilities for the federal government's telework initiative or regarding which agency will provide specific services , resources , and guidance . therefore , these agencies have not established a delineation of their respective roles . in comments on a draft of this report , gsa and opm said that they have recognized the need to better outline separate and shared responsibilities and that a memorandum of understanding was among the options they were considering to clearly designate each agency's responsibilities . despite the fact that gsa and opm hold quarterly partnership meetings to discuss telework - related issues in the federal government , officials from both agencies told us that very little coordination has occurred at these meetings . rather , the meetings have actually served as a means to raise differences of opinion that have been identified by either agency , but the resolution of those differences has proven to be difficult .