( see fig . first , the facility must pay an application fee and submit to the accreditation body an entry application that provides such information as equipment performance specifications , the qualifications of its personnel , and the results of the facility medical physicist's equipment tests . a facility seeking accreditation reinstatement follows the same process as the new applicant , but must also submit to the accreditation body a corrective action plan that describes the action the facility has taken to correct problems that prevented it from achieving or maintaining certification . if the accreditation body determines that a new or reinstating facility meets the mqsa standards for the initial accreditation phase , it notifies fda ; for states with an fda - approved state certification body , fda in turn notifies the state certification body . fda or the state certification body then issues a provisional certificate that allows the facility to operate legally for up to 6 months . second , to achieve full accreditation , the facility must submit to the accreditation body phantom and clinical images , quality control tests , and other information required by mqsa . if the accreditation body determines that the facility meets mqsa standards applicable to the images and all other submitted information , it accredits the facility and each of the facility's approved mammography machines for 3 years . the accreditation body notifies fda of each mammography machine's approval ; for states with certification bodies , fda in turn notifies the state certification body . on the basis of the accreditation body's notification , fda or the state certification body issues a 3-year mqsa certificate to the facility , which allows it to legally perform mammography up to the certificate expiration date . accreditation bodies notify facilities they have accredited about 6 to 8 months prior to expiration of their 3-year certification period that they must apply for reaccreditation . facilities applying for reaccreditation are not required to obtain a provisional certificate if they submit all the information required for full accreditation before their certificate expires and if the facility meets fda standards . after approval by its accreditation body , a facility receives a new 3-year mqsa certificate from fda or the state certification body . each accreditation body is required to make annual on - site visits to a sample of facilities that it accredited . the on - site visits include reviewing samples of randomly selected clinical images to assess image quality , verifying the information that facilities provided in the accreditation application , and reviewing documentation showing that facilities sent reports on mammography results to patients and physicians . in addition , on - site visits have an educational element ; for example , members of the accreditation body team may suggest ways to improve clinical image quality . the annual mqsa compliance inspections conducted by fda and the state certification bodies differ in focus and scope from the on - site accreditation visits , although both the inspections and the on - site accreditation visits are intended to monitor and assess facility compliance with mqsa standards .