payment incentives . medicaid officials in nevada and pennsylvania described efforts to use payment incentives to manage costs for high - expenditure beneficiaries . nevada officials told us that the state's arrangement with its care management organization for high - expenditure beneficiaries included payment incentives related to reductions in cost , as well as performance on certain quality measures , such as immunization rates and treatments for specific conditions such as asthma , coronary artery disease , and heart failure . however , state officials said that they faced difficulties measuring these outcomes . the care management organization did not receive incentive payments for the first year of operation of the program ( 2014-2015 ) and state officials said they did not have results on incentive payments for subsequent years . pennsylvania officials told us that in response to the high cost of drugs to treat hepatitis c , pennsylvania's medicaid agency created a risk - sharing arrangement with mcos that had high - expenditure beneficiaries with hepatitis c. according to state officials , the mcos were required to submit their enrollees' hepatitis c test scores to show whether beneficiaries were obtaining treatment and experiencing improvement . the state then allocated additional funds to mcos that demonstrated positive quality outcomes , thus saving the cost of re - treating beneficiaries who failed to follow through on treatment . the pennsylvania officials also told us that the state provided payment incentives to mcos in its integrated care plan program , in which physical health and behavioral health mcos coordinate with each other in the care of high - expenditure beneficiaries with persistent serious mental illness , such as schizophrenia , depression , or psychosis . to quality for incentive payments , these mcos had to create an integrated care plan for each beneficiary with a qualifying condition . the state's medicaid agency identified outcome measures that mcos were held accountable to in calendar year 2018 related to emergency department utilization , inpatient admissions , inpatient readmissions , prescription medication adherence , and engagement in treatment for substance use disorders . as metrics improved , mcos become eligible for incentives . according to state officials , pennsylvania allocated $10 million for integrated care plan program incentive payments for calendar year 2018 . restrictions on the use of providers . indiana medicaid officials described their program to address over - utilization of services by certain high - expenditure beneficiaries who may be engaged in doctor or pharmacy shopping — a strategy of using multiple providers that results in over - utilization or improper utilization of prescription drugs or other services . according to the officials , if other efforts to address a beneficiary's over - utilization fail over a 2- to 4-month period , the beneficiary may be enrolled in indiana's right choices program . this program restricts , or “locks in,” the beneficiary to a single physician , pharmacy , and hospital . officials said that this program has helped to ensure that the provider is aware of the beneficiary's history and has proven effective in getting beneficiaries to change their behavior .