( see app . ii for information on our past concerns about medicaid supplemental payments. ) the medicaid upl is a ceiling on the amount of federal matching funds a state may receive for medicaid payments ; it is based on the amount that medicare would pay for similar services . because states' regular payments are often lower than what medicare would pay for comparable services , states are able to make upl supplemental payments , which are separate from and in addition to regular payments , and the federal government will share in those payments up to the maximum amount allowed under the upl . ( see fig . the upl is not a provider - specific limit but instead is applied on an aggregate basis for certain provider ownership types and categories of services . specifically , the upl is applied on an aggregate basis to the three ownership types — local government , state government , and private . separate upls exist for providers of inpatient hospital services , outpatient hospital services , nursing facility services , and physician and other practitioner services , and for services provided in intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled ( icf / dd ) . to obtain federal funding for both regular and supplemental payments , states submit their estimated aggregate expenditures by type of service to cms each quarter for an upcoming quarter . after cms has approved the estimate , it makes federal funds available to the state for the purpose of making medicaid payments during the upcoming quarter . states typically make medicaid payments to providers with a combination of nonfederal funds and federal funds . within 30 days of the end of each quarter , states are required to submit their actual expenditures for the quarter on the standardized form cms - 64 . cms uses the cms - 64 data , which aggregates states' expenditures , to reconcile actual expenditures with states' estimates . cms - 64 expenditure reports on medicaid payments show provider ownership for 10 percent of total medicaid payments made in federal fiscal year 2011 . each quarter , states submit their total medicaid payments on the cms - 64 expenditure reports by more than 70 categories of service . the expenditure reports capture aggregate state expenditures and are not intended to collect provider - specific payment information . provider ownership information is reported for 6 categories of service for upl supplemental payments and 2 categories of service for regular payments , accounting for $40 billion , or 10 percent , of the $414 billion in medicaid payments in federal fiscal year 2011.cms - 64 expenditure data that is reported by provider ownership , payments to government providers accounted for $21 billion , or 52 percent , and payments to private providers accounted for the remaining $19 billion , or 48 percent . ( see fig . because states report their cms - 64 expenditure data at an aggregate state level and not by provider or by claim , we could not determine the extent to which the difference in payments to government providers versus private providers was due to a higher volume of services provided or a larger number of providers in the ownership group .