their views are not generalizable . we also met with officials from nasa and the departments of commerce , state , and transportation as well as officials from the under secretary for defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; the principal dod space advisor ; the assistant secretary of the air force for space acquisition ; missile defense agency ; and the air force space and missile system center's rocket systems launch program office . to evaluate the potential costs and savings of allowing surplus icbm motors to be used for commercial space launch , we conducted a cost benefit analysis using office of management and budget guidance and general economic principles . we estimated potential launch prices for a launch vehicle using surplus icbm motors at our calculated breakeven motor prices and compared these prices to publicly available prices of current and emerging commercial launch vehicles . we also reviewed the industry responses to the air force request for information to ascertain industry views on the implications of allowing the commercial use of surplus icbm motors . further details on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from june 2016 to august 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . the u.s. government has sought to help develop a competitive launch industry from which it can acquire launch services in order to lower the price of space launch and assure its access to space . the air force's evolved expendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) program is responsible for acquiring intermediate to heavy u.s. national security space launches for dod and the intelligence community and has recently implemented a competitive strategy for acquiring launch services by allowing certified commercial providers to compete for certain national security launch opportunities . dod has historically relied on the eelv program's intermediate and heavy launch vehicles to place its national security satellites into desired orbits . these launch missions have typically taken 2-3 years from initial order to launch date . additionally , dod has been striving for over 10 years to develop launch systems that can deliver smaller payloads into orbit more quickly . for example , as we reported in 2015 , the air force's operationally responsive space office is one of several efforts underway to develop or demonstrate low - cost responsive launch capabilities for small to medium satellites . the operationally responsive space office uses icbm motor - based launch vehicles , among others , to deliver quick - response space - based capabilities with small satellites . nasa has also sought to acquire launch services from multiple providers to reduce launch costs and meet the needs of a diverse set of civil objectives . for example , in 2006 , nasa started the commercial orbital transportation services program and provided several commercial companies funding under space act agreements to help develop and demonstrate cargo transport capabilities using commercial space transportation systems .