individual income tax return . we adjusted our raw result based on an irs estimate of net misreporting percentage . see appendix iii for a discussion of our and irs's estimation techniques . for this analysis , we looked only at partnership and s corporation income that was separately reported on schedule e ( form 1040 ) , supplemental income and loss . middle - tier entity: a flow - through entity that both receives allocations from another flow - through entity and allocates income to another flow - through entity ( and possibly also to ultimate owners ) . partnerships showed greater complexity , with 77 percent of all partnerships owned exclusively by individuals and 22 percent owned by mixed types of owners.corporations in tax year 2011 are shown in table 4 . another factor in the complexity of a flow - through entity is the number of ultimate owners ( see the text box above for a definition of ultimate owners ) . as shown in figure 7 , most s corporations are closely held , i.e. , owned by a small number of ultimate owners . in tax year 2011 , 62 percent had only one ultimate owner , and an additional 28 percent had only two ultimate owners . partnerships tend to have more ultimate owners . in tax year 2011 , 51 percent had 2 ultimate owners , 38 percent had 3 to 10 ultimate owners , and 9 percent had 11 or more ultimate owners . most enterprises ( see text box above for definition ) are simple and have few component entities , but some are multitiered and have large numbers of component entities ( see figure 8 ) . enterprises are of particular interest to irs because controlling owners have the ability to influence activity throughout the network . in tax year 2011 , about 62 percent of enterprises had two tiers — i.e. , they were simple networks — and were composed of about four entities on average ( counting both flow - through entities and ultimate owners ) . about 35 percent of enterprises had three tiers and were composed of about five entities on average . in comparison , the seven enterprises that were nine or more tiers deep were composed of about 735 entities on average . the internal revenue service ( irs ) estimated that individual taxpayers misreported , in net terms , 15 percent of the total income from partnerships and s corporations that they should have reported on their tax returns . this percentage is known as the net misreporting percentage ( see figure 9 ) . we calculated the total income that should have been reported — $606 billion — from the irs's national research program ( nrp ) data on individual taxpayer compliance as the sum of the absolute values of the income amounts that individual taxpayers should have reported . absolute values are used in calculating the amount of income that should have been reported to prevent negative income amounts from canceling out positive income amounts . based on these figures , we estimated that in tax years 2006 through 2009 , individual taxpayers reported about $91 billion less per year in net income from partnerships and s corporations than they actually were allocated .