dss relied on the facility to provide this information . however , facilities that were operating as subcontractors often did not have that information readily available . dss industrial security representatives faced several challenges in carrying out their foci responsibilities , largely due to complexities in verifying foci cases , limited tools to research foci transactions , insufficient foci training , staff turnover , and inconsistencies in implementing guidance on foci cases . for industrial security representatives , verifying if a contractor is under foci is complex . representatives are required to understand the corporate structure of the legal entity completing the certificate pertaining to foreign interests form and to evaluate the types of foreign control or influence that exist for each entity within a corporate family . for example , representatives are required to verify information on stock ownership by determining the distribution of the stock among the stockholders and the influence or control the stockholders may have within the corporation . this entails identifying the type of stock and the number of shares owned by the foreign person ( s ) to determine authority and management prerogatives . some industrial security representatives told us they did not always have the tools needed to verify if contractors are under foci . the nispom requires a facility to investigate all security violations . if classified information is suspected of being compromised or lost , the facility must provide its dss industrial security representative with information on the circumstances of the incident and the corrective actions that have been taken to prevent future occurrences . the industrial security representative is to then review this information and , using the criteria specified in dss's industrial security operating manual , make one of four final determinations: no compromise , suspected compromise , compromise , or loss . if a determination other than no compromise is made , the industrial security operating manual directs the representative to inform the government customer about the violation so a damage assessment can be conducted . however , for 39 of the 93 security violations that we reviewed , industrial security representatives made no determination regarding the compromise or loss of classified information . i believe this hearing today contributes to that strategic reexamination . this testimony is based on the cited reports , which were done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provided a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . nisp was established by executive order in 1993 to replace industrial security programs operated by various federal agencies . the goal of the national program is to ensure that contractors' security programs detect and deter espionage and counter the threat posed by adversaries seeking classified information . contractor facilities must be cleared prior to accessing or storing classified information and must implement certain safeguards to maintain their clearance .