it's not the evm tools . it's not the sap accounting system . it is the nasa culture.” nasa's use of contracts with one entity to provide goods or services to several different nasa projects was also cited as a challenge to use of evm . our review of the observatory evm data found various data anomalies that call into question the reliability of the data . for example , we found actual costs recorded without any work being performed , inconsistencies between the reported estimate at completion and budget at completion , large month to month performance swings , and unexplained variances . nasa officials explained that during this time period the observatory contractor was engaged in re - planning efforts so nasa did not want them to expend resources reporting performance management data to an outdated performance measurement baseline that did not reflect the new rebaseline assumptions . further , while variances analyses were provided in the variance analysis reports for wbs elements that exceeded contractual thresholds , there was no explanation for the anomalies we found . a variance analysis report provides a detailed , narrative report explaining significant cost and schedule variances and other contract problems and topics . without this information , management cannot understand the reasons for the variances and the contractor's plan for fixing them . for example , nasa centers may have a contract with one firm to provide engineering support services . multiple projects may seek services using a single task order on this contract . because of the way the nasa accounting system is configured , this approach can create artificial variances when looking at evm data on a month - to - month basis . according to a nasa representative , contractual requirements can correct these issues and allow for a closer accounting of the funds for evm purposes and in fact , one nasa center has already instituted such requirements in a new contract for services . extended test activities also contributed to the cumulative negative cost variance . the oli instrument is the only part of the project that performed evm . the oli contractor met two of the three fundamental ansi / eia - 748 practices necessary for a reliable evm system . in 2007 , the defense contract management agency ( dcma ) certified ball aerospace and technology corporation's evm system . though the contractor has a certified system , the implementation of that system is questionable based on our findings below . we assessed the contractor evm data against three ansi / eia guidelines . however , the observatory contractor was still required to submit contract performance reports depicting actual cost and estimate at completion data . since there were only 3 months of evm data after the rebaseline , we were not able to forecast a variance at completion .