uscis . in particular , we reviewed uscis documentation and spoke with officials from asylum division headquarters and local asylum offices regarding the asylum division's staffing allocation model for the credible and reasonable fear workload . we reviewed publicly available data about eoir's workload and case adjudications , including data about the number of credible and reasonable fear reviews eoir judges completed and data about judges hired from fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2019 . we also reviewed guidance documents , such as eoir's 2018 case priorities and performance measures memorandum , which established performance measures for credible and reasonable fear reviews . in addition , we used eoir data to analyze the timeliness of eoir's completion of credible and reasonable fear reviews and compared eoir's processing times for fiscal year 2014 through the third quarter of fiscal year 2019 with required time frames . by reviewing documentation on eoir's case management system and interviewing officials with knowledge about eoir's case management system and the methodology used to calculate the publicly - reported data , we determined that the eoir data we reviewed on credible and reasonable fear review processing times and outcomes was sufficiently reliable for analyzing the number of credible and reasonable fear reviews completed and pending , and the duration of the reviews . we conducted this performance audit from november 2018 to february 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . this appendix provides detailed information on eligibility , screening standards , and possible screening outcomes for both credible fear and reasonable fear cases . noncitizens placed into expedited removal who make fear claims will be referred to u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) for a credible fear screening by an asylum officer or , if the individual has been issued a final administrative removal order after conviction for an aggravated felony or has a prior order of removal that is reinstated , and expressed a fear of return , for a reasonable fear screening . table 8 below describes the eligibility and screening standards , as well as the potential outcomes for uscis's credible fear screening cases . similarly , table 9 details eligibility , screening standards , and potential outcomes for reasonable fear screening cases . if noncitizens are placed into expedited removal proceedings instead of full removal proceedings , they are to be ordered removed from the united states without further hearing before an immigration judge unless they indicate either an intention to apply for asylum or a fear of persecution or torture or a fear of return to their country ( referred to throughout this appendix as making a “fear claim” ) .