this designation includes transportation of src i ammunition . the military surface deployment and distribution command , which falls under ustranscom , tracks the movement of src i ammunition . additionally , according to dod officials , the military surface deployment and distribution command coordinates responses to transportation issues of src i ammunition while in transit . table 2 shows key stakeholders and roles in the transportation of src i ammunition . dodm 5100.76 , physical security of sensitive conventional arms , ammunition , and explosives ( aa&e ) sets forth dod policy on the physical security of sensitive conventional aa&e . according to dodm 5100.76 , continuous program and policy oversight is required to ensure protection of aa&e within dod , and dod components are required to track and conduct physical inventories of src i ammunition by serial number . further , dod policy requires src i ammunition to have a higher level of protection and security than that provided for src ii through src iv conventional ammunition . dod and the military services have policy and guidance on how to account for , safeguard , conduct physical inventories , adjust if necessary , track , and ship src i ammunition within and between services and to contractors for repair . appendix iii provides additional detail on dod policy and military service guidance relevant to the management of src i ammunition . the military services have several automated information systems for managing accountability and visibility of src i ammunition . these automated information systems also maintain various item - specific data such as serial number , production lot number , dod identification codes , serviceability , reporting location , ownership , quantity , and shipment information . figure 1 shows the automated information systems . the department is in the final stages of evaluating various automated information systems , including nlac , to be designated as the dod - wide authoritative source of data for conventional ammunition , including src i ammunition . dod's evaluation to select one authoritative information system for conventional ammunition comes in response to our march 2014 recommendation that the department designate an authoritative source of data on conventional ammunition , which includes src i ammunition . also , the evaluation is in response to a congressional mandate to issue department - wide guidance by september 2015 to designate an authoritative source of data for conventional ammunition . dod concurred and stated that it would assess the alternatives and designate the appropriate solution by the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2015 . also , we recommended that dod identify and implement internal controls , consistent with federal internal control standards , that would provide reasonable assurance that nlac collects comprehensive , accurate data from other service ammunition systems . dod concurred and stated in its agency response to our report that the army updated the performance work statement for nlac to include analyzing new data sources to identify improved system interfacing that will improve data accuracy , completeness , quality assurance , and auditability . for more details of our findings , recommendations , and the status of actions taken by dod relating to dod's management of src i ammunition , see appendix iv .