ii ) . insurance companies and investment banks developed catastrophe bonds , and the bonds are offered through the sprvs . recent catastrophe bonds have been nonindemnity - based to limit moral hazard ; therefore , they expose the sponsor to basis risk . the sprvs are usually established offshore to take advantage of lower minimum required levels of capital , favorable tax treatment , and a generally reduced level of regulatory scrutiny . currently most risk - linked securities are catastrophe bonds . most catastrophe bonds issued to date have been noninvestment - grade bonds . catastrophe bonds achieved recognition in the mid - 1990s . they offered several advantages that catastrophe options did not , among them customizable offerings and multiyear pricing . catastrophe bonds , to date , have been offered as private placements only to qualified institutional buyers . a catastrophe bond offering is made through an sprv that is sponsored by an entity that may be an insurance or reinsurance company . the sprv provides reinsurance to a sponsoring insurance or reinsurance company and is backed by securities issued to investors . the sprvs are similar in purpose to the special purpose entities ( spe ) that banks and other entities have used for years to obtain funding for their loans . these spes pay investors from principal and interest payments made by borrowers to the spe . in contrast , the sprvs that issue catastrophe bonds receive payments in three forms ( premiums , principal , and interest ) ; invest in securities ; and pay investors in another form ( interest ) . the sprv returns the principal to the investor if the specified catastrophe does not occur . figure 5 illustrates cash flows among the participants in a catastrophe bond . as shown in figure 5 , the sponsoring insurance company enters into a reinsurance contract and pays reinsurance premiums to the sprv to cover specified claims . the sprv issues bonds or debt securities for purchase by investors . the catastrophe bond offering defines a catastrophe that would trigger a loss of investor principal and , if triggered , a formula to specify the compensation level from the investor to the sprv . the sprv is to hold the funds raised from the catastrophe bond offering in a trust in the form of treasury securities and other highly rated assets . to avoid consolidation on the sponsor's balance sheet , the trust also is to contain a minimum independent equity - capital investment of at least 3 percent of the sprv's assets , per gaap . according to a rating agency official , the 3 percent equity capital is usually obtained from capital markets in the form of preferred stock . typically , investors earn a return of the london interbank offered rate ( libor ) plus an agreed spread . the sprv deposits the payment from the investor as well as the premium from the company into a trust account . the premium paid by the insurance or reinsurance company and the investment income on the trust account provide the funding for the interest payments to investors and the costs of running the sprv .