the former u.s . ambassador to the 2000 wrc said that ambassador status is generally believed to confer a high level of support from the administration , and it is viewed as helping to achieve consensus in finalizing u.s. positions and enhancing our negotiating posture . however , the former ambassador also said that the brief tenure of the appointment leaves little time for the ambassador to get up to speed on the issues , solidify u.s. positions , form a delegation , and undertake pre - conference meetings with heads of other delegations to promote u.s. positions . in addition , the ambassador said there is concern about the lack of continuity in leadership from one conference to the next , in contrast to other nations that are led by high - level government officials who serve longer terms and may represent their nations through multiple conferences . leaders of national delegations with longer terms are perceived as being more able to develop relationships with their counterparts from other nations , helping them to negotiate and build regional and international support for their positions . on the other hand , ntia officials expressed the view that the ambassador's negotiating skill was of equal importance to the duration of the appointment . ntia has several activities to encourage efficient spectrum use by the federal government , but does not have assurance that these activities are effective . ntia is required to promote the efficient and cost - effective use of the federal spectrum that it manages — over 270,000 federal frequency assignments at the end of 2000 — “to the maximum extent feasible.” ntia has directed agencies to use only as much spectrum as they need . ntia's process for assigning and reviewing spectrum places primary responsibility for promoting efficiency in the hands of the individual agencies because the determination of agencies' spectrum needs depends on an understanding of their varied missions . moreover , the large number of frequency assignments that require attention ( ntia processes between 7,000 and 10,000 assignment action requests — applications , modifications , or deletions — from agencies every month on average ) makes it necessary to depend heavily on the agencies to justify and review their assignment needs . ntia authorizes federal agency use of the spectrum through its frequency assignment process . as part of this process , ntia requires an agency to justify on its application that it will use the frequency assignment to fulfill an established mission and that other means of communication , such as commercial services , are not appropriate or available . in turn , agencies generally rely on mission staff to identify and justify the need for a frequency assignment and complete the engineering and technical specifications for the application . ntia and irac review the application to ensure , among other things , that the assignment will not interfere with other users . once ntia has authorized spectrum use by agencies , it requires that the agencies review their frequency assignments every 5 years to determine that the assignments are still needed and meet technical specifications . ntia said that it may delete assignments that have not been reviewed for more than 10 years .