gps . we found that the gps iiia schedule remains ambitious and could be affected by risks such as the program's dependence on a ground system that will not be completed until after the first iiia launch . we found that the gps constellation availability had improved , but in the longer term , a delay in the launch of the gps iiia satellites could still reduce the size of the constellation to fewer than 24 operational satellites — the number that the u.s. government commits to — which might not meet the needs of some gps users . we also found that the multiyear delays in the development of gps ground control systems were extensive . as mentioned earlier , we have initiated a review of the development of the new strategy and plan to issue a report on our findings in june 2011 . given concerns raised through recent studies about visibility into costs and the industrial base supporting eelv , it is important that this strategy be supported with reliable and accurate data . the actions that the office of the secretary of defense and the air force have been taking to address acquisition problems listed in tables 2 and 3 are good steps . however , more changes to processes , policies , and support may be needed — along with sustained leadership and attention — to help ensure that these reforms can take hold , including addressing the diffuse leadership for space programs . diffuse leadership has had a direct impact on the space system acquisition process , primarily because it has made it difficult to hold any one person or organization accountable for balancing needs against wants , for resolving conflicts among the many organizations involved with space , and for ensuring that resources are dedicated where they need to be dedicated . this has hampered dod's ability to synchronize delivery of space , ground , and user assets for space programs . for instance , many of the cost and schedule problems we identified on the gps program were tied in part to diffuse leadership and organizational stovepipes throughout dod , particularly with respect to dod's ability coordinate delivery of space , ground , and user assets . additionally , we have recently reported that dod faces a situation where satellites with advances in capability will be residing for years in space without users being able to take full advantage of them because investments and planning for ground , user , and space components were not well coordinated . specifically , we found that the primary cause for user terminals not being well synchronized with their associated space systems is that user terminal development programs are typically managed by different military acquisition organizations than those managing the satellites and ground control systems . recent studies and reviews examining the leadership , organization , and management of national security space have found that there is no single authority responsible below the president and that authorities and responsibilities are spread across the department . in fact , the national security space enterprise comprises a wide range of government and nongovernment organizations responsible for providing and operating space - based capabilities serving both military and intelligence needs .