therefore , it did not investigate him . according to cbp data , this individual has been in the country for more than a year . in january 2004 , ice assigned a special agent to cbp in order to assist with information exchange and coordination of visa revocation issues . according to dhs , if cbp determines that an individual whose visa was revoked is in the country , ice is notified immediately . we could not determine why all of the names were not on all lists . however , we determined that some of the names were not included because the agencies disagreed over whether some of these individuals' visas were revoked on terrorism grounds or when their visas were revoked , and others were not included because we were provided incomplete information . ( see fig . 2 for the points of delay we observed in our review of visas revoked over a 3-month period. ) we also found instances of delays in state's notification to dhs . in addition , conflicting records of how many individuals' visas were revoked for terrorism concerns during our reporting period and which of these people may be in the united states suggest a risk that agencies may have been prevented from taking appropriate action in some cases . further , we found that ice was not consistently or promptly notified after cbp determined that aliens with revoked visas might be in the united states . we also found that ice officials were generally unaware of the basis for individual revocations . additionally , we found that ice waited more than 2 months to request that field offices investigate individuals with visas revoked on terrorism grounds who may be in the country . finally , outstanding legal and policy issues continue to exist regarding the removal of individuals based solely on their visa revocation . our review of all visas revoked on terrorism grounds from october through december 2003 showed that delays occurred in identifying individuals whose visas should be revoked . according to a state official , in august and september 2003 , there was a backlog of approximately 5,000 names of suspected terrorists in tipoff that had not been screened to identify any visa holders . therefore , there was a delay between identifying individuals who may be suspected terrorists and determining whether they had a visa . this official explained that the backlog developed in part because of a quadrupling in the amount of counterterrorism intelligence gathered after september 11 without a commensurate increase in staff allocated to screen this intelligence information . she added that the backlog was cleared in december 2003 following the temporary assignment of additional staff from consular affairs . our review of a sample of 35 visas revoked based on terrorism concerns showed that delays occurred in transmitting recommendations to consular affairs to revoke visas . to eliminate the backlog of names to be checked , consular affairs temporarily assigned two full - time employees to screen these intelligence data from tipoff . tsc officials told us that terrorism intelligence should be screened to identify visa holders as quickly as possible .