it is not duplicative . where similar programs exist in multiple countries we will select the one that best addresses the other selection criteria . as part of our review , we examined available documentation and analyzed the selected countries' systems based on strategies used to increase coverage and the potential effectiveness in the united states . in particular , we examined eligibility and enrollment features , as well as measures targeted to workers who tend to lack coverage ( eg , those who work for small employers or are self - employed ) . we interviewed knowledgeable industry stakeholders and government officials from each country , as well as academics and national stakeholders based in the united states , about each strategy's strengths , weaknesses , tradeoffs , and lessons learned for the united states . we did not conduct an independent legal analysis to verify the information provided about the laws , regulations , or policies of the countries selected for this study . instead , we relied on appropriate secondary sources , interviews , and other sources to support our work . we submitted key report excerpts to agency officials in each country for their review and verification , and we incorporated their technical corrections as necessary . we note also that the fact that a legal feature was successful in one or more of the countries we visited , which may have significantly different cultures , histories , and legal systems than the united states , does not necessarily indicate that it would be successful in the united states . we conducted this performance audit from june 2014 through september 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . states we reviewed would attempt to use employers' existing payroll processes to reduce administrative burden for employers , but some stakeholders said this may create challenges that could be mitigated based on state experience with other programs . for example , maryland's task force found that the best way to minimize administrative burden on small employers is to use their existing payroll process . while some stakeholders were concerned with employers' payroll deduction capabilities , research shows that the majority of employers already use electronic payroll services . because of this , state and national stakeholders told us that deducting and remitting contributions from a worker's paycheck would not substantially increase the burden or cost for most employers . however , california stakeholders noted that using employers' existing payroll processes would create a large state role in educating employers about their responsibilities and collecting payroll deductions . for example , the california secure choice program would need to be able to accept contributions from millions of small employers and one stakeholder noted that the program would likely have to deal with privacy issues if employers use tax identification information to remit payments . however , some states hoped to utilize the experience of state agencies that accept payroll deduction for other employer deductions and payments .