acquisitions . estimated cost savings from changes to va's purchasing and contracting strategies . fee care . estimated saving from purchasing care from non - va providers at lower rates . realigning clinical staff and resources . estimated savings by using less costly health care providers , such as licensed practical nurses instead of certain types of registered nurses . medical and administrative support . estimated savings from employing resources more efficiently . va real property . estimated saving from initiatives including repurposing vacant or underutilized buildings , decreasing energy costs , and changing procurement practices for building maintenance . in a february 2012 report , we highlighted issues regarding va's methodology for estimating savings from some operational improvements , including changes to va real property , medical and administrative support activities , and the realignment of clinical staff and resources . we also recommended that va develop a sound methodology for estimating savings from its operational improvements . in response , va concurred with the recommendation except for two real property initiatives where va maintained that the savings estimates were not flawed . however , since our february report was issued after the release of the president's budget request for fiscal year 2013 , va has not yet implemented our recommendations . va officials told us during the course of our current review that the agency is taking steps to address deficiencies in the methodology used for estimating savings for some of its operational improvements . without a sound methodology , va runs the risk of falling short of its estimated savings , which may ultimately require va to make difficult trade - offs to provide health care services with the available resources . we determined that the estimates for some of the operational improvements provided in va's budget justification may not be reliable estimates of future savings and therefore are of limited use for decision makers . va's budget justification is intended to provide congress with estimates of resource needs and what the agency plans to achieve with requested appropriations . our work shows that changes in the way that va estimates and reports its required resources are responsible for the increase in the president's fiscal year 2013 budget request for va health care , when compared to last year's advance appropriations request for the same year . however , va was not transparent in its budget justification about two of the factors that accounted for the change in va's initiatives and ongoing health care services estimates . by neither disclosing that it used a new reporting approach for initiatives nor indicating that its advance appropriations requests did not include funding for continuing initiatives , va did not provide congress with information relevant to understanding these estimates . in addition , va may not have provided congress reliable information with which to make decisions regarding va's appropriations in regards to nrm and some operational improvements . va's most recent nrm estimates do not appear to correct for the long - standing pattern where va's nrm spending exceeds va's nrm estimates . va's estimates have not consistently accounted for additional spending by va medical facilities . as a result , the nrm estimates may be unreliable , as they may continue to underestimate va's future spending for nrm .