b . health and hospitals — current expenditures for the provision of services for the conservation and improvement of public health , other than hospital care , and financial support of other governments' health programs ; for a government's own hospitals as well as expenditures for the provision of care in other hospitals ; for the provision of care in other hospitals and support of other public and private hospitals . c. higher education — current expenditures for higher education activities and facilities that provide supplementary services to students , faculty or staff , and which are self - supported ( wholly or largely through charges for services ) and operated on a commerci basis ( higher education auxiliary enterprises ) and for degree - grant institutions operated by state or local governments that provide academic training beyond the high school level , other than for auxiliary enterprises of the state or local institution ( other higher education ) . d. highways — current expenditures for the maintenance , operation , repair , and construction of highways , streets , roads , alleys , sidewal bridges , tunnels , ferry boats , viaducts , and related non - toll structures ( regular highways ) and for highways , roads , bridges , ferries , and tunnels operated on a fee or toll basis ( toll highways ) . e. police and corrections — current expenditures for residential institutions or facilities for the confinement , correction , and rehabilitation of convicted adults , or juveniles adjudicated , delinqu or in need of supervision , and for the detention of adults and charged with a crime and awaiting trial ( correctional institutions ) ; fo correctional activities other than federal , state and local residential institutions or facilities ( other corrections ) ; and for general police , sheriff , state police , and other governmental departments that preserve law and order , protect persons and property from illegal acts , and work to prevent , control , investigate , and reduce crime ( police protection ) . f. public welfare — current expenditures associated with supplemental security income ( ssi ) , temporary assistance for need families ( tanf ) , medical assistance program ( medicaid ) ( public welfare — federal categorical assistance programs ) ; cash payments made directly to individuals contingent upon their need , other than those under federal categorical assistance programs ( public welfare — other cash assistance programs ) ; public welfare payments made directly to private vendors for medical assistance and hospital or health care , including medicaid ( title xix ) , plus mandatory state payments to the federal government to offset costs of prescription drugs under medicare part d and payments to vendors or the federal government must be made on behalf of low - income or means - tested y beneficiaries , or other medically qualified persons ( public welfare — vendor payments for medical care ) ; payments under public welfare programs made directly to private vendors ( i.e.