under the direction of the u.s . ambassador and through the u.s. consul general in milan , this office served as the center for u.s. security operations and other activities . in particular , during the games , this office housed a u.s. olympic command group , comprising senior representatives from state , dod , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . the u.s. command group was responsible for providing — in the event of a request for assistance by the italian government — specialized expertise in a variety of areas , including security operations , crisis operations , terrorism investigations , consequence management , and intelligence collection and dissemination . in addition , this office provided limited consular services to american citizens and included a public diplomacy office to liaison with press and support vip visits during the games . u.s. efforts in italy were supported by a washington , d.c. - based interagency working group — the international athletic events security coordinating group — which included representatives from the intelligence community , state , dhs , dod , doe , and doj , among others . specifically , state's bureau of diplomatic security ( ds ) and office of the coordinator for counterterrorism serve as cochairs of this interagency working group . ( see fig . 1 for locations of venues for the 2006 winter olympic games in turin , italy. ) locating suitable lodging for u.s. security and support personnel near key venues was necessary . furthermore , the distance from the nearest u.s. presence — the u.s. consulate in milan , which is located about a 90-minute drive from turin — required the establishment of a temporary u.s. post in turin to support u.s. security efforts and serve as a platform for u.s. activities . although the host government has the ultimate responsibility for providing security for the olympics , the united states has a vested interest in ensuring the safety of its citizens in all olympic locations . in 2001 , the united states began planning its security assistance for the 2004 athens summer olympics , responding both to the heightened worldwide anxiety following the september 11 attacks and to greece's request for international advice on its security plan . despite widespread fears of a potential terrorist attack on the olympics , greece hosted a safe and secure event with no terrorist incidents . with the conclusion of the athens games , the united states began planning for security support to the 2006 turin winter olympic and paralympic games . this security support is provided by the united states under general executive branch policy guidance and individual agency authorities . for example , state officials cited the use of presidential decision directive 62 , which extends the u.s. counterterrorism policy in presidential decision directive 39 to the protection of americans overseas . state is the lead agency for ensuring the protection of american citizens overseas . according to u.s. officials in italy , up to 20,000 americans attended the 2006 turin olympics daily . the next olympics will be the summer games in beijing , china , august 8 to 24 , 2008 ; followed by the paralympics , september 6 to 17 , 2008 .