use limitation . fis agreements with customer agencies limit how background investigation reports may be used by stating that information provided by fis should be used only for the purpose of adjudication . additionally , all attempts to access case files within pips ( eg , viewing or editing ) are recorded in an automated log file . these logs are reviewed daily by fis personnel to identify unauthorized access attempts that violate agency restrictions on use . this aligns with the principle that the information should not be disclosed or used for anything other than the specified purpose . security safeguards . fis uses a collection of security safeguards to protect and control access to pii located physically at fipc . physical security controls and processes include ( 1 ) screening individuals with metal detectors and x - ray machines prior to entry to the facility ; ( 2 ) using electronically coded cards and badges to grant access to the room containing hard copies of active case files ; ( 3 ) checking manifests of case files mailed to other facilities to ensure that the contents of the files have not changed ; and ( 4 ) ensuring the proper destruction of investigative materials with locked disposal bins and supervised shredding by a fis official . fis officials also reported that a number of information security measures are used to protect personal information maintained in fis systems . for example , fis policy requires that access to pips is to be limited to officials who are authorized by their respective agencies' security offices and have appropriate background investigations . the system is also to restrict agency user access to information from cases they have been specifically authorized to review . in recent years , field investigators have been involved in over 80 percent of reported incidents of lost or stolen paper files in the fis division ( see figure 6 ) . as previously discussed , the more than 7,000 field investigators who conduct background investigations for opm collect and are responsible for safeguarding extensive amounts of pii . as a result , these field investigators are key to ensuring that pii is properly protected , especially when it is in paper form . recently , fis has taken steps to promote better accountability for the protection of personal information provided to and received from investigators . this includes providing training to all employees and holding a “no pii loss week,” during which all staff were encouraged to focus on proper handling and storing of pii in their possession . oversight of these investigators and fis employees can ensure that appropriate protections are being implemented for the pii contained in investigative files . recent recommendations by the opm oig highlight the importance of such oversight . in response to recommendations by the oig to conduct oversight , fis officials began conducting periodic checks of documents received from investigators once an investigation is closed to encourage a full and proper accounting of pii . however , fis officials had not monitored whether investigators are following agency policies described in the investigator's handbook and the policy on the protection of personally identifiable information ( pii ) for handling pii while investigative activity is underway .