in total , we spoke with 28 practitioners . we received technical comments that have been incorporated where appropriate . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the acting commissioner of internal revenue . we also will make copies available to others upon request . in addition , the report will be available at no charge on the gao web site at http: / / www.gao.gov . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-9110 or at brostekm@gao.gov . contact points for our offices of congressional relations and public affairs may be found on the last page of this report . gao staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix ii . to determine the potential effect that adjusting civil tax penalties for inflation would have on the dollar value of penalty assessments and collections , we used the consumer price index - urban ( cpi - u ) to adjust actual penalty assessment and collection information contained in the enforcement revenue information system ( eris ) , which was created to track internal revenue service ( irs ) enforcement revenues . we provided inflation - adjusted estimates for penalties that had been assessed for at least $1 million in any one year from 2000 to 2005 and had either a fixed minimum or set amount . this excluded less than two one - hundredths of a percentage of all assessments each year . in addition , we assumed that assessment rates and collection rates would stay the same regardless of penalty amount . this assumption may bias our estimates upwards because higher penalties may encourage taxpayers to comply with tax laws and , therefore , irs would not assess as many penalties . however , improved compliance could also increase revenues . for collections , we assumed that a particular collection would increase the inflation - adjusted penalty amount only if the unadjusted penalty assessment had been paid in full . for example , if a taxpayer paid $50 of a $100 penalty assessment , we assumed that the $50 collected was all that would have been collected even with a higher assessment , and therefore did not adjust the collection amount . we made this assumption in order to avoid overstating the effect that adjusting penalties for inflation would have on collections because the data did not tell us why a penalty was partially collected . to the extent that taxpayers who paid the unadjusted penalty amount in full would not pay the adjusted penalty amount in full , our estimates would overstate additional collections . one reason for a partial collection is that it is all the taxpayer can afford . we did not include penalties that are percentage based but have a fixed maximum in our inflation adjustments . two penalty categories in the eris data set that we received have fixed maximums and had total assessments of over $1 million for at least 1 year from 2000 to 2005 .