state did not provide comments . three recommendations were made . in partially concurring with our first recommendation , dod stated that it intends to rescind or replace , in the near future , the metric established to measure the time dod takes to deliver the first items to recipient countries . dod commented that collecting data on when the first spare part or support equipment is delivered does not provide meaningful data . for example , the inspector general recommended that the director of dsca perform a review of appropriated funds that have expired to return excess funds to the original fund holders . dsca agreed to review excess appropriated funds that expired in previous fiscal years and to return unneeded funds . in addition , a 2009 audit evaluated the cash management of the fms trust fund , determined whether internal control was adequate , and reviewed the management control program in place for the fms trust fund . two recommendations were made , including that dsca discontinue transferring funds appropriated for the afghanistan security forces fund and iraq security forces fund to the foreign military sales trust fund , and discontinue the use of administrative fee surcharges for certain transactions . however , dsca did not concur with either recommendation and has not taken action to implement them . at the request of the secretary of defense , dod created the security cooperation reform task force ( task force ) in 2010 to study ways to improve security cooperation and security assistance programs , including fms . the task force produced two reports . in its first report , the task force made more than 50 recommendations addressed to the secretary of defense for improving security cooperation processes . the second report provided information on the status of the recommendations . our review of these two reports identified 17 recommendations that the task force addressed to dsca . we found that dod had implemented one recommendation and partially implemented 16 recommendations , as summarized in table 7 . one of the security cooperation reform task force recommendations was that dod “maintain an inventory of high - demand and long lead - time items via the special defense acquisition fund ( sdaf ) .” the sdaf is a revolving fund that allows dod and state to purchase select types of defense equipment and services in anticipation of partner countries' future fms needs . the fund reduces the amount of time it takes the united states to provide some items and enhances u.s. readiness by reducing the need to divert assets to meet urgent partner needs . the best candidates for purchase through sdaf are items that take a long time to purchase , make , and deliver . according to documents provided by dsca , the use of the sdaf over the last 5 years has facilitated the sale of about $584 million in procurements to purchase equipment for about 45 countries worldwide . for example , the dsca response shows that the sdaf has been used to purchase a stock of night vision devices that typically have procurement lead - times of more than 18 months .