appropriate performance measures . although dot's and marad's performance plans have tracked the ship disposal program's progress since 2001 , the department - level performance measures that are being used are not linked to the program's goal of disposing of all obsolete ships by september 30 , 2006 . for example , marad's 2004 performance plan links the ship disposal program to dot's facility cleanup performance goal , which aims to ensure that dot operations “leave no significant environmental damage behind.” to measure progress toward the facility cleanup goal , marad's performance measure uses the number of vessels that have been physically removed from the fleet for subsequent disposal rather than the number of ships that have been completely disposed of as called for by statute . marad officials stated that the reason the chosen performance measure is not more directly linked to the statutory requirement is because of marad's recognition , in 2002 , that the deadline was unachievable due to the program's inconsistent funding and disposal impediments . a marad official stated that tracking the number of removed ships as a performance measure is appropriate because removing ships contributes to the facility cleanup goal . however , using removal rather than disposal as a performance measure may obscure marad's actual progress toward achieving the disposal deadline cited in the statute . for example , marad counted toward meeting its fiscal year 2004 removal target the four ships that were towed to the united kingdom in october 2003 , but , as of november 2004 , these ships were still fully intact and awaiting permit approvals before scrapping could begin . in another example , marad program officials reported to senior managers in march 2004 that the program had exceeded its fiscal year 2004 ship performance target for removals by 10 ships . however , 6 months later , only 3 of these ships had been completely disposed of . marad officials stated that they also use other measures not tracked in its performance plan . according to marad , as with the other disposal methods , deep - water sinking requires the removal of environmentally hazardous materials from ships before they are sunk . for example , the number of contracts awarded and ships disposed of are recorded continuously and frequently communicated to program officials . while we found that marad does collect the data , this information is not reported against established targets in its performance reports , reports to congress , or budget requests making assessing program progress difficult . finally , marad's performance targets are set too low to complete the disposal of the 155 obsolete ships in marad's 2001 inventory by the 2006 deadline . as table 4 shows , marad's projected performance targets for the ship disposal program were to remove a total of 29 ships — less than 20 percent of the inventory — from the fleet for subsequent disposal from fiscal year 2001 to 2005 . marad officials acknowledged that while the targets were too low to meet the statutory deadline , they were more realistic and achievable given the program's constraints such as unpredictable funding .