infographic . also in 2015 , the usda center for nutrition policy and promotion issued an infographic , “let's talk trash,” to help inform american consumers about the benefits of reducing flw , as shown in figure 4 . usda made the infographic available on its www.choosemyplate.gov website , which includes additional resources to help consumers think about the amount of flw at home . strategies for schools . in 2015 , usda's food and nutrition service issued a summary of strategies for schools to reduce flw that included a list of resources to encourage flw diversion by donating uneaten food to nonprofit institutions and information about composting . the food and nutrition service also recommended that schools introduce “share tables” into cafeterias so that students could exchange unwanted but otherwise edible food items . in june 2016 , usda issued a memorandum to remind states' child nutrition program directors of the opportunities to use share tables to reduce flw in a number of child nutrition programs , such as the national school lunch program . in july 2016 , the food and nutrition service issued guidance directed at school staff members and students , among others , with tips to prevent flw , including encouraging students to use share tables . to further provide information , raise awareness , and educate different stakeholders along the food supply chain , epa and usda have collaborated on the following flw reduction efforts: a guide to conducting student food waste audits . in 2017 , epa , usda , and the university of arkansas collaborated to create this guide for students and school personnel about the amount of flw in their cafeterias . the guide provides information on why and how to do a food waste audit and what to do with the data collected . it also offers flw prevention ideas . public / private partnerships . epa and usda support public / private partnerships to provide key information , solutions , and best practices to reduce flw across the food supply chain . for example , epa and usda established the u.s. food loss and waste 2030 champions initiative in november 2016 as a way to increase efforts to meet the national flw reduction goal . this 2030 champions initiative recognizes organizations that have committed to cutting flw in their own operations in half by 2030 and encourages champions to report on their progress . in may 2018 , epa hosted a public webinar to highlight the actions of three 2030 champions to share best practices , tools , and resources these organizations created to prevent food from going to waste . in march 2019 , usda officials told us that eight additional businesses have joined the 15 champions involved in the initiative since its launch . in addition , epa and usda also support further with food , an online hub developed by epa , usda , and 10 other organizations that provides information and solutions to raise public awareness and reduce flw . participation in external conferences . epa and usda have conducted outreach , including through participation in conferences and seminars , and have disseminated resources related to flw .