this information is provided in appendix i . to examine the actions taken by cdc and hrsa to coordinate on hiv - related activities , and steps the agencies have taken to encourage implementation of routine hiv testing , we reviewed reports that describe programs administered by the two agencies . we also reviewed meeting minutes from the cdc / hrsa advisory committee on hiv and sexually transmitted diseases ( std ) prevention to identify hiv activities coordinated by cdc and hrsa . in addition , we interviewed officials at cdc and hrsa as well as a judgmental sample of officials from 14 state and local health departments knowledgeable about these topics . we selected health departments based on their geographic location and the number of hiv cases in their jurisdiction . our sample is not generalizable to all state and local health departments . to examine the extent to which select state and local health departments have implemented routine hiv testing in their jurisdictions and what barriers exist to its implementation , we interviewed our sample of officials from state and local health departments as well as officials from the henry j. kaiser family foundation , the national alliance of state and territorial aids directors ( nastad ) , and other organizations that work on hiv - related issues , including an organization that contracts with state and local health departments to coordinate hiv - related issues and an association for hiv providers . we also reviewed medical journal articles and reports by the henry j. kaiser family foundation and nastad on the implementation of routine testing . we did not conduct a state - by - state review of all laws related to hiv testing or independently verify information related to state laws . to examine available information on how much of cdc's hiv prevention funding is spent on hiv testing , we reviewed cdc budget information and interviewed officials at cdc . to examine national data on the types of settings where hiv tests are conducted , we examined nhis data from 2007 on the number of hiv tests conducted by setting type . we performed data reliability checks by testing for missing data and outliers and compared our results to published data on this topic and determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to examine available data on the types of settings where hiv - positive results occur , we obtained and reviewed 2007 cdc surveillance data on the number of hiv - positive results by facility of diagnosis . we reviewed related documentation and interviewed agency officials and determined these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . to examine available data on national and state estimates of the number of undiagnosed and diagnosed hiv - positive individuals who are not receiving care for hiv , we reviewed cdc surveillance data and the unmet need estimates reported by care act grantees to hrsa . we also obtained and reviewed information from cdc and hrsa on how these estimates are calculated . we reviewed related documentation and interviewed agency officials to determine if national - and state - level data were reliable for our purposes . during this period they are connected with medical and social services .