other activities . nist , fcc , and fema's u.s. fire administration reported involvement in other activities that support consumer product safety oversight . for example , with the increasing use of nanomaterials , nist stated that it has collaborated with cpsc to measure and better understand the release of nanotechnology - based products and exposure pathways . according to nist , in these collaborations , it has provided unique measurement expertise , for example , for determining the quantities and properties of nanoparticles released from flooring finishes and interior paints and their subsequent airborne concentrations . we found that oversight of consumer product safety is fragmented across multiple agencies with some overlap occurring — for example , when agencies regulate different uses of the same product . we did not find specific cases of duplication in oversight . fragmentation and overlap can help provide more comprehensive oversight by allowing agencies to leverage one another's expertise , resources , and authorities , but they can also create inefficiencies . in particular , nist's role as regulator for the markings of toy and imitation firearms may be an inefficient use of resources because it may not leverage the agency's primary mission and expertise , which are related to scientific measurement . in addition , because of potential jurisdictional uncertainty regarding whether some recreational boating equipment should be regulated by the coast guard or cpsc , the potential exists for some hazards to not be adequately addressed . federal regulatory oversight of consumer product safety is fragmented across multiple agencies , and some overlap occurs among these agencies based on their statutory authorities for certain products . the agencies we surveyed and interviewed provided several examples of regulatory oversight involving multiple agencies , including scenarios in which agencies regulate different components of the same product , regulate different uses of a product , or administer different regulatory oversight activities for the same product . we did not find specific cases of duplication in oversight . figure 2 contains examples of consumer products regulated by more than one agency . ( see app . iv for a full - text presentation of the examples in fig . in the following examples , agencies regulate different components of a product , which can result in fragmentation and overlap . articles or equipment that come into contact with food ( cpsc , fda ) : fda regulates substances making up the surfaces of products , such as spoons , drinking glasses , and lunch boxes , that come into contact with and can potentially leach into food . in contrast , cpsc regulates the parts of food containers or preparation articles that do not come into contact with food , as well as certain chemical substances . an example of a product with overlapping regulation is spoons intended for use by infants . the substances making up the portion of the spoon that comes into contact with the food would generally be regulated by fda to ensure the safety of substances in the spoon that may migrate into the food . however , if the spoon had a plastic coating , it could also be subject to cpsc's limits on the use of certain phthalates in children's products .