we examined: 1 . what is known about the number and types of families eligible for child care subsidies and the extent to which they receive them ; and 2 . how states determine which eligible families receive subsidies when subsidy need exceeds supply . to determine what is known about families eligible for subsidies and the extent that they receive them , we estimated the number of children nationwide and state - by - state that: ( 1 ) met federal requirements for ccdf eligibility and ( 2 ) were eligible to receive ccdf subsidies based on state policies . we also compared the characteristics of children eligible for subsidies to children receiving subsidies . we used data from urban institute's transfer income model , version 3 ( trim3 ) to estimate the number of children meeting federal requirements and state eligibility polices . we used hhs's ccdf summary data tables from administrative records , as well as hhs's public use sample data on ccdf recipients , to gather information on children receiving subsidies . we determined the statistical significance of comparisons between children eligible for subsidies and children receiving subsidies at a 95 percent confidence level . we assessed the reliability of all sources by ( 1 ) performing electronic testing of required data elements , ( 2 ) reviewing existing information about the data and systems that produced them , and ( 3 ) interviewing agency and other officials knowledgeable about the data . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report . to examine how states determine which eligible families receive subsidies when need exceeds availability , we held interviews with child care administrators or their designees from 32 states that had wait list policies about how they assess need for subsidies in their states , prioritize who they serve , and manage wait lists . of these 32 states , 19 used wait lists as of early 2015 . the remaining 13 states served all applicants they determined eligible for the program , thus did not use wait lists . to answer both objectives , we reviewed applicable federal laws and regulations , and interviewed hhs officials , and contractors who provide technical assistance on child care subsidy eligibility and access issues . we also interviewed stakeholders from research and advocacy organizations , as well as academia . we identified interviewees through reviewing policy papers and applicable websites , attending webinars , and asking hhs officials and other interviewees to suggest additional knowledgeable individuals to contact . we selected a total of seven stakeholders and government officials to participate in a group discussion about good wait list practices , which we used to inform our questions for the group interviews we held with state child care officials described above . we also identified and reviewed applicable studies that discussed eligibility and access issues associated with child care subsidies . we identified studies through reviewing key online research repositories and consulting with interviewees . finally , we primarily used urban institute's 2014 ccdf policies database book of tables to review state policies . we conducted our work from may 2015 to december 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .