hrs. / wk . were in your state in 2005 ? ( enter 0 if none. ) how many of these plots used only soybeans as the host ? ( enter 0 if none. ) how many of these plots used only other ( nonsoybean ) plants as hosts ? ( enter 0 if none. ) how many of these plots used both soybeans and other ( nonsoybean ) plants as hosts ? ( enter 0 if none. ) rows 4a , 4b , and 4c should add up to the total number above . other - sponsored plots are funded or sponsored by state government , the north central soybean research program , the united soybean board , or by other grants . how many individuals in your state worked , on a regular basis , as monitors for 2005 sentinel plots funded or sponsored by usda or other sources ? ( please indicate number of monitors in each category . if none , enter 0. ) a. field - based extension or research personnel b. campus - based extension or research personnel c. private , independent crop consultants d. state department of agriculture personnel e. agribusiness employees or consultants h. other ( s ) ( please specify below. ) three states listed other responses , including master gardeners , students , retired extension specialists , and temporary employees . is the number of sentinel plot monitors planned for your state in 2006 the same , more , or less than in 2005 ? ( please check one. ) yes how many ? uncertain go to q3 n = 30 ( not all respondents answered all parts. ) which of the following topics will likely be included in upcoming ( that is , between november 1 , 2005 , and april 30 , 2006 ) extension presentations , programs , or workshops on asr ? ( please check 'will likely be included' or 'will likely not be included' for each topic. ) a. b . identification of asr and “look - alike” diseases types and purposes of fungicides c. d. f. insurance coverage or disaster funding for losses due to asr g. observations and results from 2005 , “lessons learned” 2b . which three of the above topics do you consider the most critical to include ? ( in column 3 , please check the three topics you consider the most critical to include. ) part 2: sentinel plots , monitoring , and scouting someone knowledgeable about your state's sentinel plots and monitoring and scouting programs should answer questions 3 – 14 . how many usda - sponsored sentinel plots were in 3a . ( enter 0 if 3c . rows 3a , 3b , and 3c should add up to the total number above . how many other sentinel plots ( eg , funded or sponsored by state government , the north central soybean research program , the united soybean board , or by other grants. ) how many of these plots used only soybeans as the host ? how many of these plots used only other ( nonsoybean ) plants as hosts ? ( enter 0 if none. ) how many of these plots used both soybeans and other ( nonsoybean ) plants as hosts ?