other factors . epa considers other factors in addition to those described above to determine if an industrial category warrants further review . according to epa , one such factor is inadequate data from which to make a clear determination . for example , in its 2010 screening phase , epa excluded several industrial categories from the further review phase because it did not have conclusive data but said that it would “continue to review” the categories' discharges to determine if they were properly controlled . these industries included pulp , paper , and paperboard ; plastic molding and forming ; and waste combustors . figure 3 illustrates the exclusion process epa applies in its initial screening phase . during the screening phase , epa uses existing industry classifications as the basis for identifying industrial categories . epa groups these industry classifications , which are identified by one of two standardized coding schemes , into industrial categories that it then considers for effluent guidelines . if epa identifies an industrial category that does not have effluent guidelines but has discharges that present a potential hazard , it decides whether the category produces a product or performs a service similar to one subject to existing effluent guidelines . if so , epa generally considers the former category to be a subcategory of the latter . conversely , if the products or services differ from categories subject to existing guidelines , epa considers the category as a potential new category . in either case , epa may decide that the industrial category warrants further review and , possibly , new effluent guidelines . throughout the screening phase , epa also obtains stakeholder and public input , which may identify industrial categories warranting new or revised effluent guidelines that were not identified by their hazard ranking . stakeholder and public input comes from epa's solicitation of comments on its biennial preliminary and final effluent guidelines program plans . reg . years and final plans for effluent guidelines in even years . if epa decides that an industrial category requires new or revised effluent guidelines , it generally establishes them through a regulatory process that involves proposing new effluent guidelines , obtaining public comment , making revisions , and publishing a final regulation . throughout much of the effluent guidelines program's history , epa's schedule for issuing effluent guidelines has been driven by litigation and resulting consent decrees . in 2002 , following extensive consultation with an advisory task force formed in response to a 1992 consent decree , epa issued a draft strategy for national clean water industrial regulations , outlining a new process by which it planned to meet the requirement to review industries in the future to determine whether new or revised effluent guidelines were appropriate . the draft strategy calls for epa to conduct an annual screening of industrial categories to consider ( 1 ) the risks the industrial categories pose to human health or the environment ; ( 2 ) the availability of treatment technology or other approaches to reduce the risk ; ( 3 ) the cost , performance , and affordability of the technology ; and ( 4 ) implementation and efficiency considerations .