ii. ) to be eligible for benefits , individuals must have a specified number of recent work credits under social security when they first become disabled . individuals must also demonstrate the inability to engage in substantial gainful activity by reason of a physical or mental impairment that has lasted or is expected to last for twelve continuous months or to result in death . if not eligible on medical grounds , ssa must also consider age , education and past work history . in particular , medical eligibility criteria for di are less stringent for applicants over the age of 55 . based on prior work , gao has designated modernizing federal disability programs ( including the di program ) as a high risk area because of challenges that continue today . for example , gao found that federal disability programs remain grounded in outmoded concepts that equate medical conditions with work incapacity . while ssa has taken some actions in response to prior gao recommendations , gao continues to believe that ssa should continue to take a lead role in examining the fundamental causes of program problems and seek the regulatory and legislative solutions needed to modernize its programs so that they are aligned with the current state of science , medicine , technology , and labor market conditions . moreover , ssa should continue to develop and implement strategies to better manage the programs' accuracy , timeliness , and consistency of decision making . social security's financing social security is currently financed primarily on a pay - as - you - go basis , in which payroll tax contributions of current workers are used primarily to pay for current benefits . since the mid1980s , the social security program has collected more in taxes than it has paid out in benefits . however , because of the retirement of the baby boomers coupled with increases in life expectancy , and decreases in the fertility rate , this situation will soon reverse itself . according to the social security administration's 2007 intermediate assumptions , annual cash surpluses are predicted to turn into ever - growing cash deficits beginning in 2017 . absent changes to the program , these deficits are projected to deplete the social security di trust fund in 2026 and the oasi trust fund in 2042 , leaving the combined system unable to pay full benefits by 2041 . reductions in benefits , increases in revenues , or a combination of both will likely be needed to restore long - term solvency . a number of proposals have been made to restore fiscal solvency to the program , and many include revenue enhancements , benefit reductions , or structural changes such as the introduction of individual accounts as a part of social security . because many reforms to the benefit side of the equation would reduce benefits through changes in the benefit formula , they could affect di and dependents' benefits as well as old age benefits . unless accompanied by offsets or protections , these reforms might reduce the income of disabled workers and dependents . this situation could be challenging for these beneficiaries as they may have relatively low incomes or higher health care costs and rely heavily on social security income .