i for details. ) correspondence and face - to - face audit rates also varied by taxpayer income . for example , in fiscal year 2000 , the face - to - face audit rate ( face - to - face audits divided by all returns filed ) for higher income individuals was 0.60 percent compared with 0.13 percent for lower income individuals . for correspondence audits in fiscal year 2000 , the audit rate for higher income individuals was 0.37 percent and for lower income individuals was 0.50 percent . ( see table 14 in app . we also used information from our discussions with irs officials . we did our work at irs' national office in washington , d.c. , between september 2000 and march 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the commissioner of internal revenue . we received written comments from the commissioner in a letter dated april 19 , 2001 . the comments are reprinted in appendix iv and discussed at the end of this letter . from fiscal years 1996 through 2000 , the overall income tax audit rate of individuals declined . as table 1 shows , irs' annual audit rates for individuals declined from 1.67 percent to 0.49 percent — about 70 percent . because of the possibility that changes over time in the economy , tax laws , demographics , and irs compliance programs have changed the relationship between audit rates and voluntary compliance , we did not cite the studies . these two studies did report a positive relationship between audit rates and voluntary compliance . this finding is consistent with the concern , which we describe in the report , that a decline in audit rates could lead to a decline in voluntary compliance . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this letter until 30 days from its date of issue . we will then send copies to representative william m. thomas , chairman , and representative charles b. rangel , ranking minority member , house committee on ways and means ; representative william j. coyne , ranking minority member , subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means , and senator charles e. grassley , chairman , and senator max baucus , ranking minority member , senate committee on finance . we will also send copies to the honorable paul h. o'neill , secretary of the treasury ; the honorable charles o. rossotti , commissioner of internal revenue ; the honorable mitchell e. daniels , jr. , director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . copies of this report will be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions , please contact me or tom short at ( 202 ) 512- 9110 . key contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix v .