gao - 06-696t . washington , d.c.: may 4 , 2006 . subsidies may have other intended effects . for example , they may encourage employers to continue contributing to the system , even if they provide only a part of the contribution they should make . under the current framework , state policy makers decide the appropriate balance between experience rating and the other policy objectives of a state's unemployment insurance program . what steps could states take if they wished to ensure that the taxes paid by individual firms more closely matched the benefits paid to the former employees of each firm ? to answer the first and third questions , we reviewed pertinent literature and interviewed department of labor ( labor ) officials and officials of national organizations representing the perspectives of business , labor , and state unemployment insurance agencies , as well as nationally recognized experts on unemployment insurance . we also conducted in - depth interviews with representatives of unemployment insurance agencies in five states — california , illinois , michigan , texas , and washington . we selected these states because they are relatively populous and geographically dispersed , and because they take different approaches to ensuring experience rating . we discussed each state's approach to financing unemployment insurance benefits , and the implications that various aspects of these systems had for experience rating and the existence of cross - subsidies . in addition , we reviewed pertinent documents describing the unemployment insurance - financing systems in each of these five states . to answer the second question , we identified and reviewed 10 studies published between 1972 and 2000 that measured how closely taxes paid by firms and industries matched the benefit costs they imposed . we confirmed with the department of labor and national experts on unemployment insurance that these 10 studies constituted the definitive work done to date on this subject . to supplement these studies , we obtained data on tax and benefits payments by industry type from three of the five selected states . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes . see appendix i for more details on scope and methodology . we conducted our work between september 2005 and june 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the unemployment insurance program was established in 1935 to ( 1 ) give workers temporary and partial insurance against income loss during unemployment for which they are not at fault , and ( 2 ) to help stabilize the nation's economy in economic downturns by maintaining workers' purchasing power . the program operates as a partnership between the states and the federal government . under this arrangement , labor provides broad policy guidance and program direction , while the states design and implement specific program details . within certain limits , states have broad autonomy in carrying out their basic program operations . they decide the requirements that unemployed workers must meet for eligibility , the amount of benefits , and the length of time they will pay benefits . they also decide on the tax rates employers must pay on their payrolls . further , states can and do make changes in these and other aspects of their unemployment insurance system .