iv ) . doe stated that , overall , the draft report provided a useful overview of the climate vision program and agreed with our recommendation regarding a tracking system and said it will consider our recommendation regarding establishing a written policy ( see app . v ) . for example: the american public power association and the large public power council joint letter states that , “full realization hinges on achieving targeted reforms to the current federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) regulatory process.” . and “ although estimates vary , opportunities exist to improve the generation efficiency of existing coal - fired capacity by 4 to 8 percent . our ability to implement such energy efficiency projects will hinge on removal of regulatory barriers to such projects under the clean air act.” the edison electric institute ( eei ) states that , “a combination of power sector and government efforts will be necessary , including . government laws , regulations , and policies favoring the full utilization or maintenance of nuclear and hydroelectric plant generating capacity ; adequate supplies and delivery infrastructure for natural gas ; economic incentives for renewables ; and the full benefits of energy efficiency and dsm , as well as offset projects.” attached to the letter is a list of specific government policies that would help eei meet its goals . these policies include , among other things , hydroelectric licensing reform , nuclear power plant licensing extensions , reform of new source review regulations under the clean air act , transmission siting authority for the federal government , and tax policies , such as accelerated depreciation and amortization of pollution control equipment and tax credits for renewable energy . the electric power supply association states that , “epsa member companies are committed to utilizing this generation capacity to the fullest extent possible and will work diligently to develop and maximize electricity production for clean energy sources to levels that are necessary to achieving the greenhouse gas intensity goals outlined above . the ability of our members to realize these industry goals is tied to the advancement of policies for promoting competitive markets for electricity . specifically , it depends on actions and policies to expand wholesale electric competition and rationalize regulations , such as federal energy regulatory commission's standard electric market design and regional transmission organization initiatives ; advance market - based multi - emissions legislation ; streamline current regulatory programs , and seek better disclosure and market transparency.” the nuclear energy institute states that , “the nation's ability to realize the promise of nuclear energy after 2012 will depend on actions and policies we undertake in the next one to two years , particularly new policy initiatives designed to stimulate investment in technologies that require large capital investments and long lead times.” as part of the sia memorandum of understanding with epa , epa's responsibilities include: ( 1 ) participating in and supporting conferences to share information on emission reduction technologies ; ( 2 ) addressing regulatory barriers that may impede voluntary , worldwide emission reduction strategies ; ( 3 ) recognizing sia and the participating companies for their emission reduction commitment , technical leadership , and achievements over time .