only a portion of the action has been implemented . when the wording of the action item had multiple parts , if one part or a portion of a part had been implemented ( but not all parts ) , we categorized the action item as “partially implemented.” ( 3 ) not implemented - action taken . no part of the action item has been implemented , but steps have been taken toward the completion of the action item . for example , if legislation had been introduced to address the action but had not been enacted into law , we categorized the action item as “not implemented - action taken.” ( 4 ) not implemented - no action . no part of the action item has been completed , and no action has been taken to address the action item . for example , if the action item called for changes in legislation but no legislation has even been proposed , we categorized the action item as “not implemented - no action.” ( 5 ) insufficient information . insufficient or conflicting information prevented us from determining the status of the action item . implementation has occurred or action has been taken that , while not responsive to the letter of the action item , generally was consistent with its purpose . for example , if the action item states that a particular position should be created to coordinate an effort but the coordination is achieved without the creation of the position , we categorized the action item as “other.” we compared our assessment with osd's and the army's assessment , and , in making our final determination on implementation status , we provided osd and army officials the results of our initial determinations . ( 1 ) fully implemented . the entire wording of the action item has been fulfilled . certification requirements are the same for civilian and military acquisition workforce members . table 2 shows the nature of certification training for one of the dawia career fields — system planning , research , development , and engineering ( sprde ) — systems engineering , as well as shows the education and experience requirements for each level in the career field . besides the certification training it offers , dau approves alternative certification training providers based on a review by an independent organization — the american council on education — of the capability of a potential provider to offer acquisition training and whether the provider's course content addresses the dau course's learning outcomes . an equivalent course provider must certify annually that its course is current with the dau plan of instruction for the course . similarly , dcai provides both required certification training and supplemental training for the auditor career field . in addition to certification training , dau offers supplemental training for each career field and for particular types of assignments . for example , for level ii contracting in contingency or combat operations , dau provides courses such as a contingency contracting simulation , a contingency contracting officer refresher , and a joint contingency contracting course .