these practices are as follows . align individual performance expectations with organizational goals . connect performance expectations to crosscutting goals . provide and routinely use performance information to track organizational priorities . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) your agency formally provides performance information that allows you to compare the performance of your work unit to that of other work units . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) your agency formally provides performance information that allows you to compare the performance of your work unit to that of your agency . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) your agency formally provides performance information that is available to you when you need it . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) your agency formally provides performance information that is useful for making improvements in your work unit's performance . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) . you identified areas for improvement based on performance information formally provided by your agency . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) you took action on any identified areas of improvement . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) you documented areas for improvement in your individual performance plan . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) you are recognized through your performance management system for taking follow - up actions . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) . the competencies you demonstrate help you contribute to the organization's goals . to a great extent ( percent ) to a moderate extent ( percent ) to a small extent ( percent ) to no extent ( percent ) no basis to judge / not applicable ( percent ) you are recognized through your performance management system for your demonstration of the competencies .