( see figs . in addition , about 29 percent of fhwa federal - aid highway program obligations from the highway trust fund went toward project development , safety , and other improvements . project development activities include funding for activities such as preliminary engineering activities , construction engineering , research , and other planning activities . there is no standard definition of administrative expenses . however , for the purposes of our review , administrative expenses were defined as salaries , benefits , travel , and other service contracts . we conducted this performance audit from march 2014 to october 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in fiscal year 2013 , fhwa spent $41 billion from the highway trust fund . of this amount , $39 billion was apportioned to states through the federal - aid highway program . fhwa also spent about $2 billion of its $41 billion from the highway trust fund for other purposes , including transfers to other dot and non - dot federal agencies ( $610 million ) , federal lands transportation program ( $558 million ) , and research activities ( $438 million ) , among others . in fiscal year 2013 , fhwa allocated highway trust monies to 28 agencies ( 8 dot and 20 non - dot agencies ) , including dot's federal railroad administration and the department of interior , among others . our analysis of fhwa fmis data of fiscal year 2013 obligations showed that about 47 percent of total federal obligations went to road improvements , and 17 percent went to bridge improvements . the majority of both road and bridge projects went toward reconstruction , resurfacing , and rehabilitation activities versus new construction . specifically: for roads , about 43 percent was dedicated to resurfacing and rehabilitation of roads with most of the remainder going toward reconstruction with increased or no added capacity . for bridges , about 59 percent was dedicated for bridge rehabilitation and replacement with no added capacity and most of the remainder went toward rehabilitation and replacement with increased capacity and other bridge improvements . our analysis of this data showed that most of this funding went toward construction engineering ( 32 percent ) and preliminary engineering ( 29 percent ) . ( see fig . safety , enhancements , and other improvements include safety , safety education for pedestrians and bicyclists , and highway crossing activities , among others . our analysis of this data showed that most of this funding went to safety activities ( 67 percent ) . an additional 15 percent went toward facilities for pedestrians and bicycles . ( see fig . 7 ) we also analyzed fhwa fmis data of projects funded under each of fhwa's five core formula programs . these core programs account for $31 billion ( about 76 percent ) of the $41 billion that fhwa obligated from the highway trust fund in fiscal year 2013 .