elasticity of demand . there is uncertainty associated with demand analysis , because the estimated reductions in air travel are highly dependent on the assumptions about consumers' sensitivities to changes in price . as noted above , to account for this uncertainty , we used an elasticity rate of - 0.8 , meaning that a 1 percent increase in price would result in a 0.8 percent reduction in the quantity of air travel . this rate is based on the assumption that pfc increase will affect all routes across the nation and will affect all routes equally . if pfc increases occur at fewer airports , demand would be more elastic because consumers could substitute their routing to some extent and the elasticity rate might be greater . ( 2 ) how well does the current pfc collection process work ? and ( 3 ) what is known about alternative pfc collection methods and how well they might work ? we developed an economic model to assess the potential effects of increasing the pfc cap on funds for airport investment and the aviation system , taking into account their effect on passenger demand and consequently on aviation taxes that contribute to airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) revenues which help fund the faa , aip , and other aviation programs and activities . to develop this model , we collected and summarized the most recently available data from faa on ( 1 ) pfc category from 2009 to 2013 and ( 2 ) faa collections by airport hub passenger boardings ( i.e. , enplanement ) forecasts from 2016 to 2024 . we determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes by reviewing documentation and interviewing knowledgeable faa officials . faa categorizes commercial service airports into four primary hubs — large , medium , small , and nonhub . large hubs are defined by statute as having at least 1 percent of total passenger traffic in the most recent year ( approximately 7.4 million passengers in 2013 ) , while medium hubs have between 0.25 and 1 percent ( approximately 1.85 million to 7.4 million passengers in 2013 ) of total passenger traffic . small hub airports are those with at least .05 percent but less than .25 percent of total passenger traffic and non - hub airports are at least 10,000 enplanements but less than .05 percent of enplanements . non - primary commercial service airports that have scheduled air service and process at least 2,500 enplanements annually are eligible to collect pfcs . we conducted a literature search on elasticity ratesinterviewed a non - generalizable sample of industry experts selected for their knowledge of airline passenger demand modeling to discuss our research , and selected a spectrum of rates to show the potential effects of pfc changes on passenger demand . with these results , we estimated the effects on anticipated taxes and fees that fund the aatf . to assess how well the current pfc collection process works and alternatives , we updated work from our february 2013 report through a literature review and interviews with key faa and industry stakeholders , including the principal airline and airport trade associations , technology companies , airline passenger consumer representatives , and four airlines and five airports .