project planning . this phase began in may 2010 and was completed in october 2010 — 1 month later than planned due to fsa's requirement that the system integrator address deficiencies in its planning deliverables . during this phase , the system integrator developed — and fsa approved — planning documents that define and detail the management of processes , products , activities , and milestones for the succeeding phases of midas , including a project plan , concept of operations , sap implementation road map , technical development approach , organizational change management strategy , and data management plan . fsa also established a federal program office for midas and filled most program office positions , including key management positions for the program director and deputy directors for requirements and project management , it solutions , and change management / communications . proof of concept and system design .  are not interoperable . fsa personnel at the local offices must switch between applications hosted on each system . in addition , the application system 400 computers can only store customer information at a local office . therefore , customers cannot use different offices to complete their transactions .  do not satisfy federal directives for internal controls and security .  are difficult to modify or change , hampering fsa's ability to promptly implement new benefits programs . in early 2004 , fsa began planning the midas program to streamline and automate farm program processes and to replace obsolete hardware and software . fsa identified these goals for the program:  replace aging hardware: replace the application system 400 computers with a hosting infrastructure to meet business needs , internal controls , and security requirements .  reengineer business processes: streamline outmoded work processes by employing common functions across farm programs . for example , determining benefits eligibility might be redesigned ( using business process reengineering ) as a structured series of work steps that would remain consistent regardless of the benefits requested . improve data management: make data more readily available to fsa personnel and farmers and ranchers — including self - service capabilities — and increase data accuracy and security . improve interoperability with other usda and fsa systems: integrate with other usda and fsa modernization initiatives , including the financial management modernization initiative for core financial services that meet federal accounting and systems standards , the geospatial information systems to obtain farm imagery and mapping information , and the enterprise data warehouse to provide enterprise reporting . in april 2011 , fsa officials stated that they would begin revising the program's cost estimate in september 2011 and would incorporate new information gained from requirements development . however , they could not provide a date for completing the revised estimate because this information was still being identified . midas is to be executed in four phases with incremental deployment of system capabilities , as recommended by omb . fsa calls these four phases planning , proof of concept and system design , initial operating capability , and full operating capability . these phases were to run from fiscal year 2010 through fiscal year 2014 , as shown in figure 3 . fsa completed the program planning phase in october 2010 .