the information is in appendix i . in performing our analysis , we used the underlying principles of “knowledge management” and lessons sharing best practices as the criteria for assessing the program systems that capture and share lessons learned . both dod and the army endorse lessons learned systems.knowledge management includes four fundamental principles: leadership that articulates management's vision and goals ( e.g . in written policies and guidance ) , processes ( including performance measurements ) to turn vision into reality , technology that allows implementation of goals and supports the processes , and a culture of knowledge sharing and reuse . together they create an environment in which a lessons learned program can successfully function . we conducted our review from october 2001 to may 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix ii for a description of our scope and methodology . in 1985 , congress required the department of the defense to destroy the u.s. stockpile of chemical agents and munitions and to establish an organization within the army to manage the agent destruction program . later , congress also directed dod to research and develop technological alternatives to incineration for disposing of chemical agents and munitions . these activities evolved into the chem - demil program . the chem - demil program includes the chemical stockpile emergency preparedness program , created in 1988 , to enhance the emergency management and response capabilities of communities near the storage sites in case of an accident . the nonstockpile chemical materiel product was added in 1993 to destroy any chemical weapons or materiel not included in the stockpile disposal program . the chemical stockpile disposal project has or plans to use incineration to destroy chemical agents at five sites: johnston atoll in the pacific ocean ; anniston , alabama ; pine bluff , arkansas ; umatilla , oregon ; and tooele , utah . tooele is the only site with a facility currently operating . the three other stateside facilities are scheduled to begin operations in fiscal years 2002-2003 . the johnston atoll facility has finished destroying its stockpile and is being closed . the alternative technologies and approaches project will use non - incineration methods ( such as agent neutralization by chemical treatment ) to destroy agents in bulk containers at newport , indiana , and aberdeen , maryland . the assembled chemical weapons assessment program is also researching alternative methods to destroy agents in weapons at pueblo , colorado , and blue grass , kentucky . the office of the secretary of defense and the department of the army share management roles and responsibilities in the chem - demil program . the program manager of the assembled chemical weapons assessment program reports to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics . thus , it is independent of the program manager for chemical demilitarization , who reports to the assistant secretary of the army ( installations and environment ) . also , the lessons learned program lacks procedures to validate the effectiveness of implemented lessons . the lack of a validation step partially defeats the purpose of the lessons learned process , which relies on the confirmed effectiveness of solutions emerging from knowledge and experience .