the military personnel were reassigned to other activities . eighty - three full - time civilian positions were eliminated . of the employees in positions eliminated , 53 people retired and received a $25,000 separation incentive along with their pension ; 28 people found other government positions . only two permanent employees were involuntarily separated and received severance pay based on their years of service . impact on pay and benefits: the study results were implemented primarily through reduction - in - force procedures . with the exception of a few employees that experienced a salary increase by obtaining a higher grade level , employees in the new government organization or those that found other government jobs kept the same salary and benefits they had when working in the previous activity . for the 310 employees in the new government organization that were previously assigned to the organization: 52 percent experienced a reduction in grade , 31 percent remained at the same grade level , 1 percent obtained a higher grade level , and 15 percent changed wage systems , making it difficult for us to determine the impact on their grade level . however , according to reduction - in - force procedures , employees that experience a reduction in grade are eligible to retain their former grade and pay for 2 years . while at the end of the 2-year period , the employee's grade is lowered , the current pay would not be lowered ; however , future pay raises could be limited . overview: in may 1996 , wright patterson air force base announced its intent to conduct an a - 76 study on 499 positions — 411 civilian and 88 military — associated with base operating support activities . these activities included base supply , transportation , maintenance , a laboratory , and a laboratory supply function . in 1998 , the base awarded firm fixed - price plus award fee contracts to two separate contractors . the air force estimates the study will result in $14 million in annual savings , for a total of almost $58 million over a 49-month contract period . impact on employment: as a result of the contractor win , 411 civilian positions and all 88 military positions were eliminated through a reduction - in - force , with the military personnel being reassigned to other activities . figure 2 shows what happened to civilian employees as a result of this competition . most of the civilian personnel whose positions were eliminated ( about 75 percent ) retired or voluntarily separated . these employees received a separation incentive of up to $25,000 and in the case of those that retired , a retirement pension . fifty - eight other civilians ( 14 percent ) found other government jobs with the air force and generally retained their same salary and benefit level . another 47 people were involuntarily separated and received separation pay based on their years of service . according to the contracting official in charge of overseeing the contract , 46 of the affected government employees came to work for the contractor . the department of labor is responsible for administering the provisions of these acts .