( see fig . while the amount of time veterans spend in the vr&e program varies substantially among participants , it can be lengthy for many veterans . among those who started in fiscal year 2003 , the average time from application to successful placement in a suitable job was 4 years 7 months . while about half of these veterans completed the program within 3 to 6 years , many took considerably longer ( see fig . furthermore , it appears that time frames for completing the program have not changed substantially for more recent applicants . for example , looking at vr&e participants who successfully attained suitable employment during fiscal year 2012 , we found their average time from application to completion was also 4 years 7 months , with a range similar to that for fiscal year 2003 applicants . meanwhile , among veterans who entered in fiscal year 2003 and have discontinued without yet returning , the average time from application to the final discontinuation was very similar — 5 years . factors contributing to varied but generally lengthy time frames include the services veterans receive , as well as the fact that many extend their overall time in the program by interrupting or discontinuing along the way . of those veterans who started since fiscal year 2003 and received some employment services , most ( about 70 percent ) pursued a 4-year college degree , and these veterans typically took longer to complete the program than those who pursued other types of training such as community college degrees or vocational training . in addition , we estimate that among veterans who started since fiscal year 2003 and achieved suitable employment , about one - quarter interrupted their programs at least once . almost the same proportion discontinued and returned to the program at least once before ultimately achieving success , and some did so two or three times . the small proportion ( 4 percent ) who received job placement assistance only , meanwhile , attained suitable employment more quickly than those who received other types of services . once veterans attain suitable employment , they rarely come back for additional services , even though they may be entitled to such services if , for example , their disability worsens or they qualify under new expanded criteria established by the vow act . of veterans who entered the program in fiscal year 2003 and were placed in suitable jobs , 4 percent have applied for and 2 percent have actually received additional employment - related vr&e services , with 3 years on average between completing the program and re - applying . the data on applying again following rehabilitation are similar for veterans who entered in fiscal years 2004 and 2005 . moreover , the expanded eligibility criteria authorized by the vow act have not so far had a substantial impact on the number of veterans returning for additional services . according to data provided by va , between may 2012 and april 2013 only 10 veterans nationwide received additional vr&e services under these new vow act criteria .