thank you . for further information on this testimony , please contact thomas j. mccool on ( 202 ) 512-2642 or mccoolt@gao.gov . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . however , because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material , permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately . we will continue to refine and monitor the indicators . additionally , we plan to use the treasury survey data in our efforts to evaluate changes in lending activity resulting from cpp . we recognize that the data has certain limitations primarily that it is self - reported and difficult to benchmark because it is unique . nonetheless , we think it will prove valuable in future analyses . you also asked that i discuss the impact of tarp and related activities on the national debt and borrowing . congress has assigned to the treasury department the responsibility to borrow the funds necessary to finance the gap between cash in and cash out subject to a statutory limit . since the onset of the current recession in december 2007 , the gap between revenues and outlays has grown . because the treasury must borrow the funds disbursed , tarp and other actions taken to stabilize the financial markets increase the need to borrow so adding to the federal debt . also , federal borrowing needs typically increase during an economic downturn — largely because tax revenues decline while expenditures increase for programs to assist those affected by the downturn . in addition , the american recovery and reinvestment act enacted on february 17 , 2009 contains both decreases in revenues and increases in spending . further , all of this takes place in the context of the longer - term fiscal outlook , which will present treasury with continued financing challenges even after the return of financial stability and economic growth . treasury's primary debt management goal is to finance the government's borrowing needs at the lowest cost over time . issuing debt through regularly scheduled auctions lowers borrowing costs because investors and dealers value liquidity and certainty of supply . treasury issues marketable securities that range in maturity from one month to 30 years and sells them at auction on a pre - announced schedule . the mix of securities that treasury has outstanding changes regularly as new debt is issued . the mix of securities is important because it can have a significant influence on the federal government's interest payments . longer - term securities typically carry higher interest rates — or cost to the government — primarily due to concerns about future inflation . however , these longer - term securities offer the government the certainty of knowing what the treasury's payments will be over a longer period . at the end of february 2009 , treasury's outstanding marketable securities stood at just under $6 trillion — an increase of $1.476 trillion since december 31 , 2007 .