reg . 3533 ) on december 19 , 2003 . specifically , table 2 describes proposed biobased product categories and the items to be included in each as discussed in the preamble to the proposed guidelines . table 3 enumerates other key provisions proposed in the notice . the following are gao's comments on the u.s. department of agriculture's letter dated march 23 , 2004 . on page 29 of the draft report ( now p. 28 ) , we state usda's view that their progress compares favorably to epa's implementation of its program for the purchase of recycled products . we also state that a comparison of usda's efforts to implement the biobased procurement provisions in section 9002 of the farm bill with government efforts to develop other preference programs , such as epa's program for the purchase of recycled products , was outside the scope of our work . however , we have previously reported on epa's efforts to implement this program . specifically , in may 1993 , we reported that epa's efforts were slowed by a lack of a comprehensive , written strategy for completing this work . among other things , we noted that such a strategy would lay out funding and staff needs , goals and milestones , information and coordination needs , and a systemic approach to selecting items for procurement guidelines . we also noted that this strategy would serve as a basis for communicating epa's progress to the congress and others , including the agency's senior management . in addition , we reported that epa's efforts to fulfill the legislative provisions for the purchase of recycled products lacked priority and adequate staffing and resources , and because of the agency's slow progress in identifying recycled products for preferred procurement , other federal procuring agencies had made little progress in developing their own affirmative programs for the purchase of these products . the conference report for the farm bill notes that the new program for the purchase of biobased products by federal agencies is modeled on the existing program for the purchase of recycled materials . presumably , there are lessons to be learned from epa's experience in implementing the recycled program . however , more than 10 years after the issuance of our earlier report , we are now raising similar concerns regarding usda's implementation of the farm bill biobased procurement provisions . usda is correct in stating that we do not offer an opinion on whether the farm bill time frame for full implementation of the biobased procurement program is realistic . this is a matter that usda must address with the congress . however , we do offer our views on how this implementation process might be accelerated . regarding the specific factors that usda cites as slowing this process , we believe these factors are adequately discussed in the draft report . on page 29 ( now p. 28 ) , we acknowledge that the complexity and novelty of the issues that usda faces are challenging . on page 26 ( now p. 25 ) , we state that the farm bill requires usda to consult with other agencies , including epa , gsa , and nist .