rrgs are not the only form of self - insurers . “captive insurance companies” ( captives ) , also chartered and regulated by states , are established by single companies or groups of companies to self - insure their own risks . states chartering captives offer some regulatory relief to these companies based on the presumption that owners of captive companies have sophisticated knowledge about managing their risks and would protect their own interests . states can charter rrgs under regulations intended for traditional insurers or for captives . non - rrg captives exist largely to cover the risks of their parent , which can be one large company ( pure captive ) or a group of companies ( group captives ) . group captives share certain similarities with rrgs because they also comprise several companies , but group captives , unlike rrgs , do not have to insure similar risks . gao staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . our objectives were to ( 1 ) describe changes in the financial condition of the risk retention group ( rrg ) industry from 2004 – 2010 ; ( 2 ) examine the regulatory treatment of rrgs across domiciliary and nondomiciliary states ; and ( 3 ) examine changes to federal and state regulatory practices regarding rrgs since 2004 . to determine the extent to which the financial condition of the rrg industry has changed since 2004 , we examined previous gao reports , various financial indicators from data provided by the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) and the risk retention reporter , a trade journal and data source for the industry . we interviewed representatives of two industry associations on their members' regulatory experiences operating in domiciliary and nondomiciliary states . we reviewed correspondence from state insurance regulators to rrg representatives about topics such as registration processes and fees charged to rrgs . naic officials calculated the overall market share of rrgs in the commercial liability insurance market for each year during 2004 – 2010 and the overall market share of rrgs in the medical professional liability line for 2007 – 2010 only . we examined the amount of premiums written by rrgs and traditional property / casualty insurers for commercial liability insurance in all 50 states , the district of columbia , the u.s. territories ( american samoa , guam , northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the virgin islands ) , and canada . to ensure data were comparable , we limited our analysis to commercial liability lines of insurance that rrgs are allowed write . we examined and analyzed rrg industry data on financial indicators of profitability and ability to pay claims , such as policyholder surplus , return on equity and combined ratio for 2004 – 2010 . to determine the number of rrgs domiciled in and operating by state , and the percentage of direct written premiums written outside the state of domicile , we analyzed information provided by naic . to assess the reliability of naic data we received , we ( 1 ) performed electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness ; and ( 2 ) worked with agency officials to identify any data concerns .