pproprite ? reqt denied y musm pio pio ubmit propoal to review committee overeen by the office of public affair for final determination on three additional criteria ( in conultation with the office of general counel , a necessary ) . i the requet part of an academic , cholarly , or curriculum - baed proram ? i the film bein ditributed via a noncommercial ditributor ? i the propoed ue of smithonian content incidental in the context of the finihed proram ? if “ ye” to a one - off ? filmmaker may ubmit project independently to the new venture ( eparate process ) filmmaker can reduce the amount of propoed smithonian content o that it i conidered incidential uin the case of scholarly programs , uestions 1 and 2 above must be answered “yes” for the program to be approved . appendix iv: comments from showtime networks inc . the committee's work is ongoing . also contributing to the report were john finedore , carol kolarik , alison o'neill , jena y. sinkfield , and william woods . in entering into the contract with showtime , the smithsonian generally followed its internal guidelines regarding competition , oversight , and conflicts of interest . regarding competition , only sbv's limited written contracting guidance , which promotes the use of commercial business practices and consultation with the office of general counsel , was applicable to the solicitation of a strategic business partner in this case . pio determine , based on ppliction , whether reqt i pproprite nd content with the smithonin' filming policy . conidertion inclde whether reqt will / i: 1 . content with the smithonin' mission ; 2 . rech the pproprite audience ; 3 . involve pproprite use of smithonin fcilitie , collection , nd ff rerce ; 4 . whether the relevnt ff or ctorve the time to cooperte with the reqt ; 5 . whether the relevnt ff or ctor re intereted in cooperting with the reqt ; 6 . whether nde co or expen will e incrred cooperting with the reqt ; 7 . whether the intended use me deftory of or impct the smithonin' reption negtively ; 8 . compete with or detrct from n exiting or plnned smithoniuse or project . in addition to the individual named above , jeffery d. malcolm , assistant director ; jean cook ; michele fejfar ; richard p. johnson ; jamie j. meuwissen ; and anne stevens made key contributions to this report . sbv officials applied a general principle of commercial business practices — fostering competition — by initially reaching out to multiple major media companies , and they relied heavily on consultation with the office of general counsel to guide their actions . the board of regents is composed of 17 members . the board's bylaws provide that it “shall hold meetings at such times and places as may from time to time determine,” and , as such , the board generally holds three business meetings annually . in addition , the board of regents' executive committee – – composed of three board of regents members elected by the full board – – can exercise all powers of the board of regents when the full board is not in session .