( see fig . 1 for a map of the counties included in the 12 areas . ihs conducts an annual assessment to estimate the chs program's unmet need , which helps inform its budget request for the chs program . to gather information for its needs assessment , ihs headquarters sends an annual request for information to each of the 12 area offices asking them to report information from the federal and tribal chs programs in their respective areas . the annual request contains a template that asks each area office to provide , among other things , summary counts of deferrals and denials that were recorded by the chs programs in their areas . for example , each area office is asked to provide areawide totals of the number of new deferrals that remained unfunded at the end of the fiscal year . they are also to provide summary counts of denials that have been issued for each of eight categories of denial reasons , regardless of the type of service denied . the eight categories generally correspond to the chs program's eligibility , administrative , and medical priority requirements . although funding for a service may be denied for multiple reasons , programs are required to categorize each denial by a single primary reason . the officials said that they have delegated responsibility to the area offices for issuing specific guidance to chs programs , as well as conducting oversight regarding funds management and other issues . the officials , however , acknowledged that additional guidance and training from ihs headquarters for the chs programs on funds management would be helpful . of the 103 tribal chs programs that responded to our survey , most reported they did not have chs funds available to pay for all services for patients who otherwise met eligibility and administrative requirements , with 73 reporting that they depleted their chs funds at some point during fiscal year 2009 . in our survey , each tribal chs program identified the three most common categories of services that were requested but not funded in fiscal year 2009 . the most commonly cited categories of services that were requested but not funded were dental services , orthopedic services , prescription drugs , diagnostic and imaging services , and hospital services . in the absence of a process to determine patient eligibility for the chs program , 12 providers said they submit claims for payment to chs programs for all patients who self - identified as being american indian or alaska native or eligible for the chs program . fourteen providers said that when a patient presented for care with a chs program referral , the likelihood that they would receive payment for the services delivered to the patient increased . for example , one provider stated that for the care delivered to american indian and alaska native patients without a chs program referral , about 80 percent of claims were denied ; in comparison , about 20 percent of claims were denied when patients had a chs referral . ihs officials said that denials may occur for a patient who has a referral if the patient presented for care at the external provider before the referral was approved by the chs program committee .