these results are summarized in table 1 . our survey results showed that there were wide variations between the hours worked and the hours charged to the program among the employees who did not work and charge the same amount of time to mlap . for example , we found three respondents who reported working 50 , 70 , and 75 percent of their time on mlap during our study period , but charged 100 percent of their time to the program . one respondent reported doing no work on mlap and charging 60 percent of the work hours to the program . in contrast , another respondent reported working 60 percent of the time on mlap and charging only 11 percent to the program . from our survey results , we were able to compute the total number of hours worked and charged to the program and calculate an estimated net overcharge to the program of about 10.8 percent . based on this percentage being applied to the 10-month mlap payroll of approximately $11.4 million for the nine administrative states and offices under review , we estimate the potential net dollar overcharge to mlap to be about $1.2 million . the total mlap payroll for all states and offices was approximately $24.0 million for fiscal year 2000 . we asked the employees who stated that they charged more time to mlap than they worked to explain why the additional time was charged to mlap . during survey pretesting we had identified four possible explanations , including: ( 1 ) time was charged based on the funding allocations ( in other words , charges were made to subactivities from which funds were available for obligation rather than from the subactivity related to the task ) , ( 2 ) time was charged based on the directions of a supervisor , ( 3 ) time was charged based on the directions of a budget officer , and ( 4 ) no other codes were available to charge ( for example , the task being done may not have been anticipated in the budget allocation and therefore the proper subactivity code was not available to the office ) . the results of their responses are presented in table 2 . employees could provide more than one explanation for the overcharging ; therefore the percentages in the table total to more than 100 percent . in addition , we asked the employees who stated that they charged more time to mlap than they worked to specify the tasks that they had charged to mlap . they reported charging time for such non - mlap related tasks as processing and approving applications to drill oil and gas wells , working on environmental remediation projects , doing recreation management , and performing vehicle maintenance . blm officials stated that work involving these tasks should not have been charged to mlap . employees also stated that they had charged mlap for labor involved in preparing mineral reports for land exchanges and conducting work on common variety minerals , such as sand and gravel .