government to government . the primary goal of these initiatives is to enable federal , state , and local governments to more easily work together to better serve citizens within key lines of business . for example , geospatial one - stop seeks to provide a single portal for accessing standardized and coordinated federal , state , and local geospatial data . the disaster management initiative seeks to provide federal , state , and local emergency managers on - line access to disaster management information , planning , and response tools . internal efficiency and effectiveness . the initiatives in this category seek to improve the performance and reduce the costs of federal government administration by using e - business best practices . for example , the integrated acquisition environment initiative seeks to consolidate business processes and information to facilitate cost - effective acquisition of goods and services across the federal government . lastly , e - travel is planned to streamline the administration of government travel by creating a governmentwide web - based travel management process . cross - cutting initiative . the e - authentication initiative is to develop common interoperable authentication techniques to support all the other initiatives . authentication refers to the critical process of confirming the identity of the participants in an electronic transaction . without a means to satisfactorily establish identities , e - government transactions are too risky , and the potential of e - government to transform citizen services remains severely constrained . the initiative plans to provide authentication services through an electronic “gateway,” which will offer different assurance levels to meet the varying needs of the other projects . while several of the projects have already achieved tangible results , not all of them are making the same degree of progress . for example , some have had major management changes — management of the safecom initiative , for example , was transferred from treasury to the federal emergency management agency . major management changes such as this have led to delays in project milestones and changes in objectives . we believe that fluctuations such as these indicate a need for oversight to ensure that the larger goal — to realize the full potential of e - government — is not jeopardized . when we reviewed project - planning documentation collected by omb from each of the initiatives , we found indications that important aspects of some of the initiatives had not been addressed and that , for many of them , funding strategies and milestones were in a state of flux . these findings add urgency to our concern that the initiatives be carefully monitored to ensure that implementation challenges are identified and addressed as quickly as possible . i would like to go through some of the specific results of our analysis now . as part of omb's selection process , the quicksilver task force screened over 350 project ideas during the summer of 2001 and selected 34 potential project proposals for more in - depth consideration . in september 2001 , task force members developed brief ( or “mini” ) business cases for each of the 34 proposals . according to omb officials , these mini business cases were to include all the information necessary to enable sound selection decisions .