1 ) and then declined . sales fell from 6.6 million sold in the first quarter of fiscal year 2004 — when the sales period began — to 2.8 million sold in the first quarter of fiscal year 2007 — when the sales period ended . the stop family violence stamp raised about $3.2 million , which the service transferred to acf to fund domestic violence prevention programs . this review reconfirmed our previous findings regarding the factors that likely affected stop family violence semipostal sales . in 2005 , we reported that factors such as stamp design , confusion about how the proceeds would be used , and limited advertising were factors that likely affected sales . for this review , four of the five advocacy groups we spoke with about the stop family violence stamp told us that the stamp's design — an image of a crying child — played a key role in low stamp sales ( see fig . several advocacy group officials commented that as a result , postal customers were not likely to use the stamp on wedding invitations or holiday mail . at least two officials told us that the service should have consulted with the domestic violence community before selecting the stamp's final design . one official told us that in so doing , the service would have immediately learned that a different design would have been more appropriate . another advocacy group official told us that because domestic violence is an emotionally charged issue , a softer image was needed for the stamp to have been more effective . this official suggested , for example , that a purple ribbon — often associated with domestic violence , would have been a more appropriate design . in contrast , the service felt that the design of the stop family violence stamp was not a key factor in the stamp's lower sales . the service noted that there are few subjects that will garner the same level of support as the breast cancer research stamp . the service also noted that it rarely consults with advocacy groups regarding the stamp design because it is difficult to gain consensus . the sales period for the three semipostals has varied . initially , the breast cancer research stamp was authorized for 2 years in 1998 . since then , it has been reauthorized four times and there are currently proposals in congress to further extend the sales period for either two or four additional years beyond the current expiration date of december 31 , 2007 . the breast cancer research stamp raises money for breast cancer research programs supported by nih and dod , with nih receiving 70 percent of the funds available and dod receiving the remaining 30 percent . the heroes of 2001 stamp was offered for sale from june 7 , 2002 , to december 31 , 2004 , and funds raised were transferred to fema to assist the families of emergency relief personnel who were killed or permanently disabled in the line of duty in connection with the terrorist attacks against the united states on september 11 , 2001 . the stop family violence stamp was offered for sale from october 8 , 2003 , to december 31 , 2006 .