( see fig . given the length of time a rule typically requires to be developed under the apa and extent to which map - 21 transformed surface transportation programs , the rulemaking deadlines established by map - 21 may have been ambitious . in our prior work , we found that rulemakings can range from 1 to nearly 14 years to complete , depending on a number of factors . more specifically , we found that a rulemaking takes an average of four years to complete , based on a sample of 16 rulemakings from four federal agencies , including dot . within this sample , these four federal agencies took an average of about 2 ½ years to develop and issue a proposed rule . in contrast , the timeline for map - 21 generally gave dot approximately 1 to 1 ½ years to develop and issue some of the proposed rules . the number and extent of comments received may affect the duration and complexity of the rulemaking process . specifically , agencies are required to respond to comments that have been received in response to a notice of proposed rulemaking . as of january 5 , 2015 , five out of nine rules have been available for public comment , and the remaining four rules are still under development . nhtsa issued an interim final rule for public comment in january 2013 but has not established a timeline for issuing a final rule . according to nhtsa officials , the agency is awaiting enactment of a new surface transportation reauthorization act before deciding on a timeframe since the timing and content of such a statute could require nhtsa to revise its interim rule . fhwa has released three of its five proposed rules for public comment . fhwa released two proposed rules on safety for public comment in march 2014 and is currently evaluating the comments it received . these funds are distributed through annual apportionments established by statutory formulas . fhwa oversees the federal - aid highway program , primarily through its 52 division offices located in each state , the district of columbia , and puerto rico . fhwa division offices have 10 to 61 staff each , depending on the size of the state's highway program and other factors . as of october 2014 , fhwa had approximately 2,900 staff — about two - thirds in the field and the remaining third at fhwa headquarters in washington , d.c. fta provides approximately $10.5 billion each year for transit project grants to states , transit agencies , and mpos . the grant funding provided by fta represents 98 percent of its overall $10.7 billion budget ; the remaining portion of the budget funds the administration and oversight of its various grant programs by about 500 federal employees in its washington , d.c. , headquarters and 10 regional offices . nhtsa provides about $500 million per year , or about 60 percent of its annual budget of approximately $800 million , to state highway safety offices through grants . nhtsa awards these grants to state highway safety offices to support projects that focus on mitigating behavioral factors associated with crashes and improving traffic safety information systems , among other things .