inquiries to 1-800-medicare . beneficiaries with dme questions — referred to by cms as inquiries — are directed to call cms's 1-800- medicare call line . callers are assisted by customer service representatives trained to answer questions and assist beneficiaries in finding dme suppliers . one cms official told us the agency tracks dme - related inquiries to 1-800-medicare but does not track whether inquiries are received from beneficiaries in cbp areas versus non - bid areas . health status monitoring tool . cms analyzes medicare claims data to monitor real - time health outcomes , such as death , hospitalizations , emergency room visits , and physician visits for beneficiaries in both cbp and non - bid areas . cms posts information on its website to show historical and regional trends in health outcomes for specific groups of beneficiaries . monitoring changes in the number of suppliers and beneficiary utilization rates . cms officials told us they closely monitor changes in the number of suppliers furnishing items subject to adjusted rates in non - bid areas as well as changes in beneficiary utilization of rate - adjusted items . monitoring assignment rates . cms monitors the percentage of claims suppliers have submitted as “assigned” in non - bid areas . according to cms , assignment rates are a good indicator of whether ffs payment amounts are sufficient . while cms conducted beneficiary satisfaction surveys before and after the implementation of previous cbp rounds in order to measure changes in beneficiary satisfaction in cbp areas , cms officials reported they have not conducted similar surveys of beneficiaries residing in non - bid areas . the payment rate reductions for dme items in non - bid areas were generally significant . the average unweighted percentage reduction across the top product category items combined — measured by calculating the percentage change between the 2015 non - adjusted and the 2017 fully adjusted rates — was 46 percent . however , payment rate reductions varied by dme product category and by individual item within product categories . this is not unexpected given that the adjusted rates for each item were based on competitively determined payment rates from prior or current cbp rounds , and rate reductions for those payment rates also varied widely by product category and item . specifically , average payment rate reductions by dme product category ranged from 18 percent to 74 percent with a midpoint of 47 percent . for example , the average payment rate reduction for the top items in the oxygen product category — the category that accounted for the highest percentage of total expenditures in 2016 — was 39 percent . the range of reductions among individual items within product categories also varied . for example , payment rate reductions for the top items in the enteral nutrients product category ranged from 46 percent to 56 percent . in contrast , payment rate reductions for the three items in the negative pressure wound therapy ( npwt ) product category ranged from 6 percent to 61 percent . ( see table 2. )