work issentilly completed . nel inlltion egn on novemer 9 , 2006 . plaster ceilingve een completed in the min lobbre nd th assemly room . ( see app . the sequence 2 contractor attributed the slippages to a number of factors , including design issues and a need to relocate ductwork , add steel support for wall stone , and resequence work . value of completed work has increased since the last hearing , but trend reflects the sequence 2 contractor's difficulties in meeting scheduled completion dates . another indicator of construction progress that we and aoc's construction management contractor have been tracking is the value of the completed construction work billed to the government each month . overall , the sequence 2 contractor's monthly billings , including the bills for march through october 2006 , indicate that construction work is about 2 months behind the late finish curve , which indicates completion around november 2007 . while this indicator has some limitations ( for example , billings lag behind construction ) , it is generally regarded in the construction industry as a useful measure of how likely a project is to be completed on time . figure 2 compares the sequence 2 contractor's billings since may 2003 with the billings needed to complete construction work on schedule and suggests that aoc faces challenges in meeting its fall 2007 completion date and is more likely to complete the facility later than its current schedule shows . installation of interior wall and floor stone is taking longer than expected . overall , about 86 percent of the cvc's interior wall stone has been installed ( in the cvc , east front , atrium areas , and tunnels ) , according to aoc's construction management contractor , and the sequence 2 contractor installed nearly 85,000 of the 129,780 square feet of interior floor stone required as of november 9 . although the sequence 2 contractor has installed almost all of the wall stone in the cvc itself and all of the wall stone in the atrium areas , wall stone installation in the east front is significantly behind schedule . according to the sequence 2 contractor's january 2006 wall stone installation schedule , the east front wall stone was to be completely installed by july 10 , 2006 . as of november 10 , about 4,700 pieces of wall stone remained to be installed in the east front — the same quantity as we reported at the subcommittee's last cvc hearing . during the 8 weeks since that hearing , the sequence 2 contractor installed about 34,900 square feet of interior floor stone , or about 65 percent of the 52,060 square feet specified in the floor stone installation plan that the contractor had previously provided to aoc . according to the construction management contractor , the sequence 2 contractor's installation of interior floor stone has been impeded by a lack of available space and by some work taking longer than expected . figure 3 shows the sequence 2 contractor's progress in installing interior floor stone since february 13 , 2006 . as we have indicated during the subcommittee's previous cvc hearings , we believe that the cvc team continues to face challenges , risks , and uncertainties in quickly completing the project .