we disagree . we have developed these types of information as part of our annual mandated review of dod's 50-50 report , and the information has been valuable in understanding and evaluating dod's depot maintenance funding allocations . for example , we compared fiscal year 2004 reported allocations for specific programs and reporting centers with fiscal year 2003 allocations , and followed up with the military services to determine the reasons for significant differences . the goal of this recommendation is not to place an unnecessary burden on the department but to provide additional information on depot maintenance funding that would make the annual 50-50 report to congress more informative and useful as an oversight tool . furthermore , we believe that if dod would provide more detailed and analytical information to congress , it would place additional emphasis on assuring the accuracy of the data provided in its annual 50-50 report . because it does not appear to us that dod's actions will address the persistent deficiencies we identified in its 50-50 reporting processes or improve the usefulness of the information provided to congress , we have added a matter for congressional consideration suggesting that congress require the secretary of defense to enhance the department's annual 50-50 report as stated in our recommendations . dod also stated in its written comments that its 50-50 data quality has improved , as shown by reductions in the navy's and the air force's private - sector corrections . dod further noted that the army's one transcription error accounted for 99.3 percent of its private sector corrections . our report does not conclude that the department's data quality has improved . on the contrary , we state as in past years that dod's 50-50 data , with our adjustments , provide only a rough approximation of the allocation of depot maintenance funding between the public and private sectors . we reported that dod's april 1 , 2005 , report to congress contained errors , omissions , and inconsistencies that if corrected , would increase the army's and navy's percentages of funding allocations going to the private sector . additionally , we did not conduct a detailed review of all reported 50-50 data ; therefore , there may be additional errors , omissions , and inconsistencies that were not identified during our review . we agree that the army's $399.4 million transcription error was the single largest correction we identified . however , this error involved a public - sector correction rather than a private - sector correction as dod stated . we noted several other errors in the army's data for both the public and private sectors , as shown in table 3 of this report . we continue to believe that adequate management attention and review of 50-50 data to ensure accurate and complete reporting would have helped identify the transcription error and other errors prior to submitting the data to dod and congress . dod believes , based on guidance from the general counsel's office in the department of the navy , that it has properly excluded depot maintenance associated with nuclear carrier refueling and inactivation work performed on non - nuclear ships .