collaboration . as previously noted , lack of interagency collaboration was also on the list of barriers . in addition , we interviewed the acting and newly appointed executive directors of the interagency council on homelessness and reviewed certain documents related to their activities ; interviewed agency officials at education , hud , hhs , dol , and doj ; and reviewed agency planning and performance documents to identify coordination with other agencies . we conducted this performance audit from may 2009 to june 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . folsom , david p. , william hawthorne , laurie lindamer , et al . “prevalence and risk factors for homelessness and utilization of mental health services among 10,340 patients with serious mental illness in a large public mental health system.” american journal of psychiatry 162 , no . greenberg , greg a. , and robert a. rosenheck . “homelessness in the state and federal prison population.” criminal behaviour and mental health 18 , no . gubits , daniel , jill khadduri , and jennifer turnham . housing patterns of low income families with children: further analysis of data from the study of the effects of housing vouchers on welfare families . joint center for housing studies of harvard university , 2009 . ji , eun - gu . “a study of the structural risk factors of homelessness in 52 metropolitan areas in the united states.” international social work 49 , no . johnson , timothy p. , and michael fendrich . “homelessness and drug use - evidence from a community sample.” american journal of preventive medicine 32 ( 2007 ) : s211-s218 . kingree , j . b. , torrance stephens , ronald braithwaite , and james griffin . “predictors of homelessness among participants in a substance abuse treatment program.” american journal of orthopsychiatry 69 , no . kuhn , randall , and dennis p. culhane . “applying cluster analysis to test a typology of homelessness by pattern of shelter utilization: results from the analysis of administrative data.” american journal of community psychology 26 ( 1998 ) : 207-232 . leal , daniel , marc galanter , helen dermatis , and laurence westreich . “correlates of protracted homelessness in a sample of dually diagnosed psychiatric inpatients.” journal of substance abuse treatment 16 , no . lee , barrett a. , townsand price - spratlen , and james w. kanan . “determinants of homelessness in metropolitan areas.” journal of urban affairs 25 ( 2003 ) : 335-355 . lehmann , erika r. , philip h. kass , christiana m. drake , and sara b. nichols . “risk factors for first - time homelessness in low - income women.” american journal of orthopsychiatry 77 , no . metraux , stephen , and dennis p. culhane . “family dynamics , housing , and recurring homelessness among women in new york city homeless shelters.” journal of family issues 20 , no .