evaluation policy . washington , d.c.: department of health and human services , november 2012 . accessed september 24 , 2014. http: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / programs / opre / resource / acf - evaluation - policy . bourgeois , isabelle , and j. bradley cousins . “understanding dimensions of organizational evaluation capacity,” american journal of evaluation , 34:3 ( 2013 ) : 299 — 319 . chapel , thomas . what are the key elements and extent of agency evaluation capacity — that is , the ability to obtain and use evaluations in decision making ? what progress , if any , has been made since 2010 across the government in improving evaluation capacity ? what activities , if any , especially those related to gprama provisions , have agencies found useful in building their evaluation capacity ? to answer our first objective , we reviewed published domestic and international research and commentary on key components of organizational capacity for program evaluation , including gao reports and recommendations of national and international evaluation organizations . we identified the key organizational characteristics , expertise , and policies believed either to be required for or to indicate the ability to obtain credible evaluations of agency programs and policies and to use the results in management and policy decisions . we also identified strategies used or proposed for building an organization's evaluation capacity . to answer all three objectives , we surveyed the performance improvement officers ( pio ) of the 24 executive branch agencies covered by the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , as amended . the survey questionnaire was designed to obtain information on their agencies' elements of evaluation capacity as described above , and their observations and perceptions of the usefulness of various resources and activities for building their agencies' capacity to produce evaluations and use the results in decision making . we administered the web - based survey from may through june 2014 , receiving responses from all 24 agencies . throughout this report except where specifically noted , when we refer to agencies , we are referring to both cabinet departments and independent agencies . ( more information on the survey is in appendix i . the survey questions and summarized results are in appendix ii. ) in addition , we reviewed examples of agency evaluation plans and policies that the survey respondents provided . we also interviewed omb and office of personnel management ( opm ) staff about their capacity - building efforts , reviewed agency guidance and memorandums , and attended related interagency information - sharing forums . we conducted this performance audit from september 2013 to november 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . program evaluations are systematic studies that use research methods to address specific questions about program performance . evaluation is closely related to performance measurement and reporting .