collecting data . data collection was one of the top challenges identified by state vr agencies in our survey , with 48 of 74 reporting that collecting data on the provision of pre - employment transition services was moderately difficult , very difficult , or extremely difficult during fiscal year 2017 . prior to wioa , agencies collected and reported data only on individuals who had applied and enrolled in the vr program . for pre - employment transition services , agencies now collect data on who provided and received each of the five required activities , including for individuals who have not submitted a vr application . state vr officials in two of our three discussion groups said that they have experienced challenges collecting sensitive information ( such as social security numbers ) for minors and collecting data on individuals for group services . officials in one of the three discussion groups also said that these problems are particularly significant when trying to collect information on potentially eligible students for whom they do not have open vr cases . these students could include all those with an iep and those that receive accommodations in school based on their disability , among others . updating data tracking systems . updating data systems was also one of the top challenges reported in our survey , and was cited as an additional administrative burden by state vr officials in our discussion groups . specifically , 53 of 74 state vr agencies reported that it was moderately difficult , very difficult , or extremely difficult to update tracking systems to collect and report financial and service data on pre - employment transition services during fiscal year 2017 . according to a state vr agency official we interviewed , updating that state's tracking system is difficult because data collected on pre - employment transition services — such as the type of service provider and how the service was provided — do not fit well into a case management system designed for the full vr program . updating these tracking systems also created an additional administrative burden for vr agency staff , according to officials from all three discussion groups and three of the four state agencies that we interviewed . officials in two of our three discussion groups said that they have one or more full - time staff members doing only administrative tasks or that they have had to hire additional staff to handle data tracking . education officials said that they plan to document and share best practices with states ; however , they said the agency does not have a final written plan for managing these efforts because plans are still under discussion in light of inquiries received . education officials said they are collecting information on state vr agencies' practices through monitoring and they are sharing this information with wintac — information that could be useful for sharing best practices across states — but a comprehensive summary of states' efforts will not be available until after education officials conduct monitoring visits of all states by the end of fiscal year 2021 .