communication . in light of the backlash from congress and other regarding treasury's initial shift in the program from purchases of mortgages and mortgage - backed securities to capitalization of financia institutions , we made a series of recommendations over the past year aimed at improving ofs's communication with congress and the public . while the theme has been constant , the recommendations have attempte to help ensure that treasury develops a comprehensive communication strategy and clearly articulated vision for the program that goes beyon d just providing information . we have recommended , for instance , that treasury develop a communication strategy that includes building an understanding and support for the various components of the program treasury continues to take steps to address these recommendations , including hiring a communications officer , integrating communicatio into tarp operations , scheduling regular and ongoing contact with congressional committees and members , and attempting to leverage technology . we made one recommendation that was not directed to treasury . to help improve the transparency of cap — in particular the stress test results — we recommended that the director of supervision and regulation of th federal reserve consider periodically disclosing to the public the aggregate performance of the 19 bank holding companies against the mo adverse scenario forecast for the duration of the 2-year forecast period and decide whether the scenario needs to be revised . at a minimum , the federal reserve should provide the aggregate performance data to ofs program staff for the 19 institutions partic ipating in cap or cpp . we are addressing these issues in ongoing work . tarp is one of many programs and activities the federal government h put in place over the past year to respond to the financial crisis . as of september 25 , 2009 , it had disbursed almost $364 billion to participa institutions . participating institutions have in turn made billions in dividends , interest , and principal payments on loans and some have started to repurchase their preferred shares and warrants . with the exception of cpp , which has hundreds of participants of various typ sizes , most of the other investment - based programs have provided substantial amounts of assistance to individual institutions . for exam aig has received assistance under ssfi and gm and chrysler have received support through aifp . amid concerns about the direction of the program and lack of transparency , the new administration has attempted to provide a more strategic direction for using the remaining funds an created a number of programs aimed at stabilizing the securitization markets , preserving homeownership , and most recently at providing assistance to community banks and small businesses . some programs , such as talf — which is operated by frbny , with treasury providing a backstop against losses — appear to be achieving the intended re a reduced scale . others , such as hamp and ppip , face ongoing implementation or operational challenges . finally , over the past year ofs tegy and has also started to take steps to formalize its communication stra improve the way it communicates with congress and the public . in the past year , treasury has implemented a range of tarp progr stabilize the financial system .