moreover , these grandfathered rates can be permanent . flood maps identify the boundaries of the areas that are most at risk of flooding . property owners whose properties are within special flood hazard areas and who have mortgages from a federally regulated lender are required to purchase flood insurance for the amount of their outstanding mortgage balance , up to the maximum policy limit of $250,000 for single - family homes . according to fema , excess flood protection coverage above these amounts is available in the private insurance markets . personal property coverage is available for contents , such as furniture and electronics , for an additional $100,000 . business owners may purchase up to $500,000 of coverage for buildings and $500,000 for contents . the owners of properties with no mortgages or properties with mortgages held by lenders who are not federally regulated are not required to buy flood insurance , even if the properties are in a special flood hazard area . optional lower - cost coverage is available under the nfip to protect homes in areas of low to moderate risk . to the extent possible , the nfip is designed to pay operating expenses and flood insurance claims with premiums collected on flood insurance policies rather than with tax dollars . however , as we have reported , the program , by design , is not actuarially sound because congress authorized subsidized insurance rates for policies covering some properties in order to encourage communities to join the program . as a result , the program does not collect sufficient premium income to build capital to cover long - term future flood losses . moreover , the premiums collected are often not sufficient to pay for losses even in years without catastrophic flooding . this shortfall is exacerbated by repetitive loss properties that file repeated claims with nfip . fema regulations require each participating company to arrange and pay for audits by independent certified public accounting firms . however , many wyo insurance companies have not complied with the schedule in recent years . for example , for fiscal years 2005 and 2006 , 5 of 94 participating companies had biennial financial statement audits performed . in response to our recommendations , fema has agreed to take steps to ensure that it has reasonable estimates of the actual expenses that wyo insurance companies incurred to help determine whether payments for services are appropriate and that required financial audits are performed . building on this body of work , we are beginning a follow - up engagement that will analyze the expenses wyo insurance companies incur from selling and servicing nfip policies and determine whether the total operating costs paid to the companies are equitable relative to those costs . as we reported in 2004 , fema has embarked on a multiyear effort to update the nation's flood maps at a cost in excess of $1 billion . at that time we noted that nfip faced major challenges in working with its contractor and state and local partners to produce accurate digital flood maps . fema has taken steps to improve these working relationships by developing a number of guidelines and procedures .