residency . individuals must intend to reside in the state in which they are applying for coverage and are not required to have a fixed address in the state . the marketplace can accept self - attestation unless the information provided by the applicant is not reasonably compatible with other information provided by the applicant or in the records of the marketplace . hhs has recently stated that its previous assessments of available sources did not identify any comprehensive data source for verifying residency . however , we previously reported that cms did not document an evaluation of available external sources to determine the quality , relevance , and reliability of the data , and we recommended that it do so . incarceration . individuals must not be incarcerated ( unless incarcerated while awaiting disposition of charges ) . we have previously reported that there are many challenges associated with using incarceration data , including the risk of false positives . for more detailed information on our scope and methodology , see appendix i . we conducted this performance audit from november 2015 to december 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . cms operates the ffm consistent with ppaca and relevant hhs regulations . in plan year 2015 , 37 states relied on the ffm . the remaining 14 states , including the district of columbia , operated their own state - based marketplaces . according to published hhs figures , the ffm accounted for about 76 percent , or approximately 8.8 million , of plan selections made via marketplaces from november 15 , 2014 , through february 22 , 2015 . overall , we found that about 8.04 million applicants selected a plan , effectuated enrollment , and received coverage with an associated subsidy for plan year 2015 . we discuss these 8.04 million applicants later in this report . more than half of the 8.8 million plans in plan year 2015 were applicants who did not have a plan via the ffm in plan year 2014 , which was the ffm's first year . of the 8.8 million total plans , 87 percent qualified for an aptc with an average aptc of $263 per application per month . all marketplaces , including the ffm , are required by ppaca to verify applicant information to determine eligibility for enrollment and income - based subsidies , if applicable . marketplaces , among other things , must check for medicaid eligibility before determining eligibility for qualified health plans ; validate an applicant's ssn , if one is provided , by comparing with ssa records ; verify citizenship , status as a u.s. national , or lawful presence by comparing with ssa or dhs records , respectively ; and verify household income and family size by comparing with tax - return data from the irs , as well as data on social security benefits from ssa .