dhs agreed with the recommendation . to date , dhs has continued to make progress in completing some identified activities but has yet to do so for others . in 2007 , we reported and testified on the cybersecurity aspects of cip plans for 17 critical infrastructure sectors , referred to as sector - specific plans . lead federal agencies , referred to as sector - specific agencies , are responsible for coordinating critical infrastructure protection efforts with the public and private stakeholders in their respective sectors . dhs guidance requires each of the sector - specific agencies to develop plans to address how the sectors' stakeholders would implement the national plan and how they would improve the security of their assets , systems , networks , and functions . we determined that none of the plans fully addressed the 30 key cybersecurity - related criteria described in dhs guidance . further , while several sectors' plans fully addressed many of the criteria , others were less comprehensive . in addition to the variations in the extent to which the plans covered aspects of cybersecurity , there was also variance among the plans in the extent to which certain criteria were addressed . consequently , we recommended that dhs request that the sector - specific agencies , fully address all cyber - related criteria by september 2008 so that stakeholders within the infrastructure sectors will effectively identify , prioritize , and protect the cyber aspects of their cip efforts . we are currently reviewing the progress made in the sector specific plans . we testified in march 2009 regarding the need to bolster public / private partnerships associated with cyber cip . according to panel members , there are not adequate economic and other incentives ( i.e . a value proposition ) for greater investment and partnering with owners and operators of critical cyber assets and functions . as a result , intruders , as well as government and contractor employees , could potentially bypass or disable computer access controls and undertake a wide variety of inappropriate or malicious acts . these acts could include tampering with data ; browsing sensitive information ; using computer resources for inappropriate purposes , such as launching attacks on other organizations ; and disrupting or disabling computer - supported operations . according to the department , it has started remediation activities to strengthen security over these systems and implement our recommendations . in january 2009 , we briefed congressional staff on security weaknesses associated with the development of systems supporting the transportation security administration's ( tsa ) secure flight program . specifically , tsa had not taken sufficient steps to ensure that operational safeguards and substantial security measures were fully implemented to minimize the risk that the systems will be vulnerable to abuse and unauthorized access from hackers and other intruders . for example , tsa had not completed testing and evaluating key security controls , performed disaster recovery tests , or corrected high - and moderate - risk vulnerabilities . accordingly , we recommended that tsa take steps to complete security testing , mitigate known vulnerabilities , and update key security documentation prior to initial operations . tsa subsequently undertook a number of actions to complete these activities .