the impact of such fees can be considerable . as figure 5 illustrates , an annual return of 12 percent falls to about 7.6 percent after fees are deducted . several pension plans cited the costly fee structure fees as a major drawback to hedge fund investing . for example , representatives of one plan that had not invested in hedge funds said that they are focused on minimizing transaction costs of their investment program , and the hedge fund fee structure would likely not be worth the expense . on the other hand , an official of another plan noted that , as long as hedge funds add value net of fees , they found the higher fees acceptable . because many hedge funds may own thinly traded securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex , and in some cases subjective , a plan may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a hedge fund . what mechanisms regulate and monitor pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity funds ? to answer these questions , we reviewed relevant literature and survey data and conducted in - depth interviews with pension plan representatives and industry experts . we obtained and analyzed data on the extent of pension plan investments in hedge funds and private equity from private organizations such as greenwich associates , pensions & investments , and pyramis global advisors . although these surveys had several limitations — for example , the survey data generally represent the holdings of larger pension plans — we determined they were sufficiently reliable for purposes of our study . to answer the second and third questions , we conducted in - depth interviews with representatives of 26 public and private sector db pension plans and , where possible , obtained and reviewed supporting documentation . these plans were selected based on several criteria , including the range of investment in hedge funds and private equity and the amount of total plan assets . we also interviewed officials of regulatory agencies , relevant industry organizations , investment consulting firms , and other national experts . to identify state and federal regulatory and monitoring policies , we interviewed officials at the department of labor ( labor ) and representatives of relevant agencies in selected states , and reviewed relevant policy documents . we contacted regulators in 11 states , including the 10 states with the largest amount of public pension assets according to the national association of state retirement administrators ( nasra ) public funds survey data . we conducted this performance audit from june 2007 to july 2008 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . millions of current and future retirees rely on private or public db pension plans , which promise to pay retirement benefits that are generally based on an employee's salary and years of service .