we also interviewed cgfs officials . to determine the extent to which state has followed its process for determining hardship and danger pay rates at overseas posts , we compared state's implementation of its process for determining hardship and danger pay rates with its guidance . for hardship pay , we analyzed scoring for 192 overseas posts to determine whether the hardship rates for these posts accurately reflected the numeric scores they received based on state's analysis of conditions at posts . for danger pay , we reviewed memos and other documents approving changes to danger pay rates and analyzed these to determine whether they followed state's methodology . we also interviewed officials from the office of allowances ( als ) , cgfs , and the bureaus of diplomatic security ( ds ) and human resources ( hr ) . to examine the procedures state uses to implement its policies for stopping and starting hardship and danger pay when employees temporarily leave their assigned posts , we analyzed state policies and procedures and interviewed als , cgfs , and hr officials . figure 8 is an illustrative flowchart that summarizes state's policies for stopping and starting hardship pay when an employee is away from her permanently assigned post , based on our analysis of state documents and interviews with state officials . to implement state's policies for stopping and starting hardship pay for employees who temporarily leave their assigned overseas posts , officials at posts must use diplomatic cables to instruct cgfs to manually adjust hardship pay . gao staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix iii . the objectives of this review were to examine ( 1 ) the department of state's ( state ) spending at overseas posts for hardship and danger pay in fiscal years 2011-2016 , ( 2 ) the extent to which state has followed its process for determining hardship and danger pay rates at overseas posts , ( 3 ) the procedures state uses to implement its policies for stopping and starting hardship and danger pay when employees temporarily leave their assigned overseas posts , and ( 4 ) the extent to which state has identified improper payments related to hardship and danger pay . to examine state's spending at overseas posts for hardship and danger pay , we analyzed data in fiscal years 2011 to 2016 from state's consolidated american payroll processing system , which is administered by the bureau of the comptroller and global financial services ( cgfs ) . because hardship and danger pay are processed through payroll , cgfs provided us with spending data for the 26 pay periods that best approximated each fiscal year from 2011 to 2016 , and we used these data to summarize spending by fiscal year . all spending data in this report are presented in nominal dollars . we also used the gross domestic product price index to analyze trends in hardship and danger pay , expressed in terms of constant ( inflation - adjusted ) dollars . to assess the reliability of the data that state provided , we performed testing to identify missing data , outliers , and errors ; and interviewed cgfs officials .