as a federal agency , sec is subject to congressional oversight . in march 2002 , sec hired a consulting firm to work with an internal taskforce to perform an in - depth review of sec's operations , effectiveness , and resource needs . however , sec officials stated that because the 2003 budget has already been finalized under the current budget process , they were concerned that even if substantive improvements were recommended by the internal taskforce , the earliest that sec would be able to effectively react to these changes would be the 2004 budget cycle . a complete description of our methodology can be found in appendix i . congress created sec in 1934 to administer and enforce the federal securities laws to protect investors and maintain the integrity of the securities markets . sec's mission is to ( 1 ) promote full and fair disclosure ; ( 2 ) prevent and suppress fraud ; ( 3 ) supervise and regulate the securities markets ; and ( 4 ) regulate and oversee investment companies , investment advisers , and public utility holding companies . sec works to fulfill this mission through various divisions and offices , among them the office of the executive director , which formulates sec's budget and authorization strategies . congress oversees federal agencies primarily through two distinct but complementary processes — authorizations and appropriations , which are implemented through authorizing and appropriating committees in the u.s. senate and house of representatives . the authorizing committees are responsible for creating a program , mandating the terms and conditions under which it operates , and establishing the basis for congressional oversight and control . sec's authorizing committees are the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committee on financial services . the appropriations committees and subcommittees are charged with assessing the need for , amount of , and period of availability of appropriations for agencies and programs under their jurisdiction . sec's annual appropriations are under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on commerce , justice , state , and the judiciary , u.s. senate committee on appropriations ; and the subcommittee on commerce , justice , state , the judiciary , and related agencies , house committee on appropriations . to fund its operations , the federal securities laws direct sec to collect fees . sec generally collects three types of fees: securities registration fees , which are required to be collected under section 6 ( b ) of the securities act of 1933 ( the securities act ) , are paid when companies register with sec new stocks and bonds for sale to investors . in 2001 , sec collected $987 million in section 6 ( b ) fees ; securities transaction fees , which are required to be collected under section 31 of the securities exchange act of 1934 ( the exchange act ) are paid by national securities exchanges and national securities associations when registered securities and security futures are sold on or off exchanges through any member of such an association .