defense considered appropriate . since that time , the joint non - lethal weapons program , with the commandant of the marine corps assigned executive agent , has assumed a role in the requirements development process as well as research , development , test and evaluation . dod directive 3000.3 assigns the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics principal oversight for th non - lethal weapons program , including joint service program coordination to help highlight and prevent duplication of program development , while the assistant secretary of defense for special operations and low - intensity conflict under the under secretary defense for policy , has policy oversight for the development and employment of non - lethal weapons . the commandant of the marine corps is the executive agent for the dod non - lethal weapons program . the executive agent serves as the prim dod / u.s . coast guard point of contact for non - lethal weapons and is tasked to coordinate , integrate , review , and recommend , the join lethal weapons program to the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; and coordinate requirements among the services . program officials recognized that the roadmap had limitations and began to revise the initial version as soon as it was approved . as of march 2009 , the roadmap is still being revised . a key at&l official said that nlw program oversight is exercised through participation in the semiannual meetings of two departmentwide nlw groups: the joint coordination and integration group and the general officer - level integrated product team . the former advises on and assists in nlw system acquisition while the latter coordinates and integrates joint requirement and priorities and approves consolidated plans and programs . in addition , at&l officials meet quarterly with the jnlwd director and participate in other activities , such as the development of the roadmap , as necessary . notwithstanding the participation in meetings , however , strategic program direction rests on documents that have been delayed or that lack important elements necessary to make effective decisions . as a result , there is limited strategic direction for the program to guide its day - to - day efforts . while dod's nlw program lacks the visibility of other programs with higher priorities and larger budgets , sound program management and oversight practices should apply . without a greater degree of participation in setting program priorities and reviewing and reporting on performance by at&l , dod will not have the level of necessary information needed to make informed decisions about the effective and efficient management of the nlw program . we identified 6 cases in which the joint non - lethal weapons program did not make timely decisions about when to discontinue its research efforts when several years have passed without substantive progress . although not designed specifically for nlw efforts , dod's financial management regulation sets a goal of 6 years ( within the future years defense program ) for a program to advance through advanced technology development into the acquisition process . based on our analysis of jnlwd programs , three active development efforts and three terminated efforts reached or exceeded this time frame ( see table 5 ) .