research priorities . agency officials and experts told us that prenatal opioid use and nas had not been prioritized compared to other areas of research . for example , one expert suggested that there is a priority now on studying marijuana use and pregnancy . lack of funding . agency officials and experts cited a lack of research funds in general and specifically for nas - related studies . they commented that there are many competing priorities for limited research funds . funding structure . research funding is typically provided for a limited time period , such as 5 years , making research on the long - term effects of prenatal opioid use particularly challenging according to experts . experts also noted that funding for individual studies is often capped at a level too small to conduct the multi - site studies necessary in this area since it is difficult to find enough study participants at a single research site . lack of capacity to conduct research . agency officials and experts expressed concern that there may not be adequate expertise in this area to conduct this type of research . for example , agency officials and experts said that there were not enough services available that allow women to keep their children with them while in residential substance abuse treatment . they also cited program gaps in provider education — such as how to recognize substance abuse in patients , and how to appropriately prescribe and dispense opioids to prevent addiction — noting that many health care providers receive only limited training on these topics . agency officials and experts told us that these program gaps can result in women not getting the addiction treatment they need while pregnant and the continuation of substance use during pregnancy . this may result in poor health outcomes for infants because they may be exposed to more than one substance or at risk for increased severity of nas , according to agency officials and experts . ( see table 2. ) agency officials and other experts cited several reasons for these program gaps , some of which are similar to those we have found for other public health issues . the most frequently cited reasons were stigma and criminalization of pregnant women who use drugs . some state laws require health care providers to report substance use during pregnancy to state or local officials , which officials and experts said could result in women not getting substance abuse treatment or prenatal care out of fears of criminal charges , their children being taken away , or being stigmatized as a drug user . officials told us that providers are reluctant to recommend screening , treatment , or counseling when there are serious potential legal consequences , and as a result , pregnant women may not have access to appropriate programs that do not present legal consequences . gaps in current research . agency officials and experts attributed program gaps to the limited evidence base specific to prenatal opioid use or nas , particularly around screening and medication safety during pregnancy .