we found weaknesses in each of these areas . physical security controls are important for protecting computer facilities and resources from espionage , sabotage , damage , and theft . these controls involve restricting physical access to computer resources , usually by limiting access to the buildings and rooms where they are housed and periodically reviewing access granted to ensure that it continues to be appropriate . at nbc - denver , physical access control measures ( such as locks , guards , badges , and alarms , used alone or in combination ) are vital to safeguarding critical financial and sensitive personnel information and computer operations from internal and external threats . although nbc - denver policy requires a photo access card to gain access , via electronically controlled doors , to the building that contains the computer center , we observed on different occasions that several people entered the building by merely following one person with an authorized access card . while guards were posted at the entrance to the building , we observed that they were not checking each person entering the building for an appropriate nbc - denver photo access card . thus , individuals who did not have nbc - denver photo access cards could pass unchallenged through the main entry doors and gain unauthorized access to the facility , increasing the risk that intruders with malicious intent might obtain access to sensitive computer resources or disrupt operations . further , we identified 40 employees and contractors , including mail room , facility support , computer support , tape librarian , local - area network ( lan ) support , and personnel / payroll staff , who had access to the electrical room . this room contains fiber optic boxes that could be used by a knowledgeable person to establish an unauthorized internal connection to the center's computer system . while it is appropriate for facility and computer support staff to have access to the electrical room , care should be taken to limit access to only those staff who need access to perform their job responsibilities . nbc - denver had not established policies and procedures for granting access to the electrical room . we also determined that the center had not restricted physical access to a console in the tape library with master console authority , which could be used to issue sensitive operator commands . although at the time of our review this console had only recently been moved to its temporary location , the area was unprotected and provided an opportunity for unauthorized individuals entering the building to use the console to issue commands that could disable security access checking or cause the system to fail . allowing unrestricted access to this console increased the risk of unauthorized access to nbc - denver systems and disruption of services . in february 2001 , the acting assistant director of nbc - denver told us that a policy would be developed and implemented to ensure that photo identification access cards would be checked on all individuals entering the facility that houses the main computer . in addition , the acting assistant director told us that a policy for granting and periodically reviewing access to the electrical room would be developed .