( app . vi shows the number of service members who separated and those who attended tap components by military service. ) as expected , estimated participation rates have been the highest for preseparation counseling where attendance is mandated in law . the average rates for the three years ending in 2004 have ranged from 76 percent to over 100 percent , depending on the military service . also as expected , the estimated participation rates are generally lower for the 3,000 or more employment workshops held each year , where attendance is voluntary . the average rates for the three years ranged from 56 percent to 86 percent . this represents the number attending the workshops as a percentage of all who separated and were eligible for tap . the army reports that about 20 percent of those eligible each year indicated that they were not interested in attending the workshops . the marine corps , which has mandated attendance at the employment workshops , and the navy show the highest participation rates over the three years . although the navy shows higher rates for participation in employment workshops than in preseparation counseling , the discrepancy is more likely a reflection of reporting problems than of actual attendance , and the actual numbers of service members receiving counseling is probably higher . retirees were disproportionately represented in the employment workshops . across the armed forces , about one - third of all who participate are retirees , although they constitute about one - fifth of all who separate . the remainder are those separating or released prior to retirement . no data are available for participation in the va components of tap . because the veterans' benefits briefings are usually held on the last day of the employment workshops , va officials indicated that the participation rates for their briefings are equivalent to the rates for the employment workshops . in addition , va told us that dtap is provided to all service members who are receiving care or separating from medical treatment facilities by va counselors who are located at or make regular visits to these medical facilities . however , no data are available to determine the number of individuals eligible for dtap , and va's records do not distinguish the number who participate in this component from the total of all recipients of va outreach briefings . very few members of the reserve or national guard are able to attend the employment workshops , although at demobilization they complete their preseparation counseling checklists and may be briefed on veterans' benefits and health insurance coverage options , depending on the schedule developed for demobilization . the tap managers with dod and the military services explained that the chief problem is lack of time during demobilization , which is often completed in 5 days . in addition , many of these service members are anxious to return home and are not interested in prolonging their stay to attend workshops . further , many have jobs at home that are being held for them , so they may not need to attend the employment workshop .