gao - 12-175 . operations , we reviewed dod directives and policies , and the roles and responsibilities of the under secretary of defense for policy ; under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ; and u.s. strategic command . dod generally concurred with our recommendations . you requested that we examine several issues related to dod's electronic warfare capabilities . in march 2012 , we issued a report on dod's current and planned airborne electronic attack capabilities and investment strategies . approach to governing electronic warfare and the relationship between electronic warfare and cyberspace operations . specifically , we examined the extent to which dod has ( 1 ) developed a strategy to manage electronic warfare and ( 2 ) planned , organized , and implemented an effective governance structure to oversee its electronic warfare policy and programs , and their relationship to cyberspace operations . additionally , we reviewed and analyzed information found in policy documents along with information from relevant meetings with dod officials against dod's directives regarding electronic warfare . we also interviewed cognizant officials and reviewed dod policies , doctrine , reports , plans , and concepts of operation , and outside studies that discuss the relationship between electronic warfare and cyberspace operations . see appendix i for details on our scope and methodology . we conducted this performance audit from july 2011 to july 2012 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . in modern warfare , military forces are heavily dependent upon access to the electromagnetic spectrum for successful operations . communications with friendly forces and detection , identification , and targeting of enemy forces , among other tasks , are all reliant upon the ability to operate unhindered in the spectrum . for this reason , control of the electromagnetic spectrum is considered essential to carrying out military operations . figure 1 illustrates the electromagnetic spectrum and some examples of military uses at various frequencies . for example , infrared or thermal imaging technology senses heat emitted by a person or an object and creates an image . leveraging resources and acquisition efforts across dod — not just by sharing information , but through shared partnerships and investments — can simplify developmental efforts , improve interoperability among systems and combat forces , and could decrease future operating and support costs . such successful outcomes can position the department to maximize the returns it gets on its electronic warfare investments . in addition , multiple organizations are involved with electronic warfare and outdated guidance regarding management and oversight may limit the effectiveness of their activities . both the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics and the jemscc have been identified as the focal point for electronic warfare within the department , yet it is unclear what each organization's roles and responsibilities are in relation to one another .