faa . in addition to effects on nas users , faa officials told us that faa itself also experiences operational inefficiencies in managing air traffic during launches . this inefficiency is , in part , because faa's current policies and procedures were developed for aircraft operations and either have not yet been fully adapted for commercial space operations , or a relevant policy or process is missing altogether . for example , faa's current procedures for launch providers and faa to follow when they request , schedule , and conduct launches require different faa facilities to negotiate unique agreements for each separately licensed operation or activity . this process can be time - consuming . for example , one launch provider told us that it took 1½ years to finalize minor changes to a letter of agreement . as we discuss later , faa is taking steps to standardize these letters . launch providers . the effects on each of these groups are described below . commercial airlines . faa has estimated that , in fiscal year 2017 , about 1,200 commercial airline flights were directly affected — that is , rerouted or delayed — around 22 space launch operations , resulting in an estimated 39,000 additional miles flown . the majority of these miles were flown in proximity to cape canaveral in florida , which hosted the majority of domestic launches that year . faa further estimated that , of the 15 space launches from january to october 2018 around florida where airspace tends to be busy due to the high volume of commercial airline traffic along the east coast , an average of 60 aircraft per launch were directly affected . for all commercial launch sites , faa estimates that the number of directly affected aircraft ranged up to 153 for an individual launch with an average of fewer than 10 aircraft per launch outside of the florida area . according to faa officials , these estimates are based on historical data on the number of aircraft that typically fly through that area at the time of the airspace closure . because launches can be delayed by hours or days for reasons such as unforeseen weather conditions or technological issues , airlines and other affected airspace users may face challenges when attempting to plan around a launch to avoid flight reroutings and delays . representatives of a major airline trade association told us that the spread of launch activity beyond cape canaveral , as well as the development of new launch vehicles , has heightened their concerns about inefficiencies in how airspace around launch operations is used . the size and duration of aircraft hazard areas can make it difficult for faa to find time slots to accommodate commercial space launches because of its responsibility to ensure the efficient use of the national airspace , a limited resource . all the launch providers we spoke with that had conducted launches at u.s. commercial launch sites said they have been able to find suitable launch windows that met with faa approval . however , one launch provider told us of an occasion when faa had denied the originally requested launch date and time because it fell within a time of unusually congested airspace .