management practices . until recently , sba also certified small businesses as sdbs . in addition , procurement center representatives ( pcr ) and commercial market representatives ( cmr ) in sba's office of government contracting work to increase business opportunities for small businesses and ensure they receive a fair and equitable opportunity to participate in federal prime contracts and subcontracts . further , all federal agencies with procurement authority are required to establish an office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) to advocate for contracting opportunities for small businesses . procurement staff in most agencies also include small business specialists ( sbs ) , who are responsible for working with osdbus and agency contracting officers to advocate for small businesses . concerns have been raised about the extent to which federal agencies have met their small business contracting goals and about sba's efforts to facilitate federal contracting opportunities for small businesses , including those for 8 ( a ) firms . in response to your request , this report ( 1 ) describes the actions sba takes to set these goals and the extent to which federal agencies have achieved their small business contracting goals in recent years , ( 2 ) examines the role of sba staff in supporting small business contracting at selected federal agencies , and ( 3 ) examines sba's overall administration of the 8 ( a ) business development program . in addition , appendix ii describes how the use of the sdb certification has changed over time and appendix iii provides information on the roles of osdbus and federal agency procurement officials . to address these objectives , we reviewed sba guidance , our prior reports and those of the sba inspector general , and interviewed officials at sba in the office of business development , office of government contracting , and division of program certification and eligibility ( dpce ) . to address the first objective , we reviewed the results of sba's inaugural small business procurement scorecard for fiscal year 2006 and the midpoint scorecard for fiscal year 2008 . we used data from fiscal years 2000 through 2006 on sba's negotiated small business contracting goals with agencies and small business goaling reports to determine what percentage of agencies' contracting dollars was awarded to small businesses . sba uses the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) to prepare its annual small business goaling reports , which evaluate agencies' performance on the various small business goals . to assess these data , we reviewed related documentation , including the methodology used to create these reports . for the purposes of this report , we found these data to be reliable . to further understand the process for establishing contracting goals and related achievements , we selected five agencies for our review . we first selected four agencies ( the departments of commerce , defense , and homeland security ; and the social security administration ) based on level of contracting activity and sba's assessments of their goal achievement . the four agencies generally obligated larger amounts of contracting dollars to small disadvantaged businesses and , collectively , they received the full range of scores on sba's 2006 scorecard .