the absence of observable prices for such assets then caused their prices to deteriorate even more . according to the securities firm officials , firms that needed to sell assets to cover losses or meet margin calls helped to drive such asset sales . fdic and occ staff and officials from a credit rating agency told us that some banks tightened their lending standards for certain types of loans , namely those with less - favorable risk - adjusted returns . such loans include certain types of residential and commercial mortgages , leverage loans , and loans made to hedge funds . according to credit rating officials , banks essentially have set a target of slower growth for higher - risk loans that have performed poorly and deteriorated their loan portfolios . in addition , occ and credit rating officials said that the largest banks rely heavily on their ability to securitize loans to help them make such loans . to that end , they said that the securitization markets need to open up and provide funding . federal financial regulators ( federal reserve , fdic , occ , and ots ) generally have imposed capital and other requirements on their regulated institutions as a way to limit excessive use of leverage and ensure the stability of the financial system and markets . federal banking and thrift regulators have imposed minimum risk - based capital and non - risk - based leverage ratios on their regulated institutions . risk - based capital ratios are broadly intended to require banks to hold more capital for higher - risk assets . leverage ratios provide a cushion against risks not explicitly covered in the risk - based capital requirements , such as operational weaknesses and model risk . in addition , the regulators supervise the capital adequacy of their regulated institutions through ongoing monitoring , including on - site examinations and off - site tools . bank holding companies are subject to capital and leverage ratio requirements similar to those for banks . thrift holding companies are not subject to such requirements ; rather , capital levels of thrift holding companies are individually evaluated based on each company's risk profile . sec primarily uses its net capital rule to limit the use of leverage by broker - dealers . according to sec officials , firms that had participated in sec's now defunct consolidated supervised entities program calculated their risk - based capital ratios at the holding company level in a manner generally consistent with the method banks used . other financial institutions , such as hedge funds , use leverage but , unlike banks and broker - dealers , typically are not subject to regulatory capital requirements ; instead , market discipline plays a primary role in limiting leverage . finally , the federal reserve regulates the use of securities as collateral to finance security purchases , but federal financial regulators told us that such credit did not play a significant role in the buildup of leverage leading to the recent crisis . the financial crisis has revealed limitations in existing regulatory approaches that serve to restrict leverage .