required supervisory training . supervisors of caseworkers are required to attend training classes for 12 days , over a 5-month period . the classes cover topics such as leadership effectiveness , case consultation , and other topics designed to improve supervisors' skills . established partnerships to allow caseworkers to pursue graduate degrees . cfsa has agreements with howard university and the catholic university of america , two universities in the district of columbia , to allow its caseworkers to pursue master's level degrees in social work . cfsa , in partnership with these universities , will provide scholarships , stipends , and other sources of financial support . employees who receive this benefit must agree to remain with the agency for a period of time or repay any financial support provided . a pilot program is scheduled to begin in september 2004 . developed financial incentives . to encourage workers to remain at the agency , cfsa offered service agreement bonuses , reimbursement for first - time licensure fees , and additional income allowances . table 2 describes the financial retention incentives and the number awarded in fiscal year 2003 . in addition to these retention strategies , caseworkers told us that cfsa's training program for new caseworkers and the higher than average salary paid by cfsa were important factors that contributed to their decisions to remain with the agency . cfsa's pre - service training for new caseworkers was cited as a positive experience by several caseworkers that participated in our discussion groups and several who completed exit surveys . this training lasts 8-½ weeks and greatly exceeds the average training time of about 3-½ weeks offered by most child welfare agencies . cfsa's training program involves both classroom study and on - the - job training , and gradual assumption of case responsibilities under close supervision . caseworkers also cited cfsa's high salaries as a key incentive for continuing to work with the agency . cfsa's current average salary for a master's level caseworker is $41,440 compared with the national average of $37,097 at other public agencies . the student loan repayment program funded by the congress in fiscal year 2004 may further help cfsa's retention and recruitment efforts , once the program has been implemented . caseworkers who have worked or will work full - time for cfsa in a nonsupervisory capacity are eligible to apply for cfsa's loan repayment program . in addition , cfsa states that it determined caseworkers in a private agency under contract to cfsa will also be eligible for the loan repayment program . according to agency officials , the program offers up to $18,000 to caseworkers with msws and $10,000 for those with bsws toward repayment of student loans . the exact amount will depend on the size of the loan and the number of qualified program applicants . caseworkers must complete 2 years of service before any loan payments are made . cfsa pays one - half the total payment at the end of the caseworkers third year and the remaining half at the end of the fourth year . initially , applications for the program were due august 16 , 2004 , and candidates had to sign a continuing service agreement to work for cfsa by september 3 , 2004 .