b . the peace corps' post - service unit sends all feca applications — which includes information on the injury or illness reported by the volunteer — to dol for review and eligibility determination . feca applications submitted for volunteers are reviewed by dol , and the agency then makes an eligibility determination . for those applications that do not include sufficient information and require further development , volunteers are given approximately 30 days to submit additional information to support their request for feca benefits . if the additional information submitted is sufficient , the application is approved . if the additional information is not sufficient , the feca application is denied and medical treatment is not authorized . b . for those applications that are approved , dol assigns a medical diagnosis on the basis of medical evidence submitted in the feca application . this assigned medical diagnosis defines the medical treatment and services for which the volunteer is eligible for feca reimbursement . typically , after benefits are approved by dol , a volunteer obtains health care services through a medical provider . after receiving these services , the volunteer or the volunteer's medical provider submits a bill to dol for reimbursement . dol provides reimbursement for medical expenses . on an annual basis , dol requires the peace corps to pay dol back for these reimbursements . from 2009 through 2011 , dol provided a total of about $36 million in feca benefits for volunteers , providing about $22 million in health care benefits — reimbursements for medical expenses to treat service - connected injuries and illnesses for peace corps volunteers — and $13.8 million in other benefits . during this period , almost 1,400 volunteers each year received health care benefits . the average reimbursement for medical expenses per volunteer was about $5,000 in 2009 , and about $5,600 in 2011 . the most - common medical conditions for which dol provided health care benefits — reimbursements for medical services — were mental , emotional , and nervous conditions ; dental ; other / nonclassified diseases ; and infectious or parasitic diseases.these four medical conditions represented about 40 percent of all medical conditions and accounted for about $5.9 million — or more than a quarter — of all medical reimbursements for volunteers under feca between 2009 and 2011 . see table 1 for the medical conditions for which dol provided reimbursements for volunteers under feca . in addition to health care benefits , volunteers also received other benefits — such as wage - loss compensation and reimbursement for travel to receive medical treatment . specifically , from 2009 through 2011 , these other benefits received by volunteers totaled about $13.8 million . in 2011 , the total reimbursements for both health care and other benefits were about $12 million , which represents about 3.3 percent of the peace corps' 2012 appropriation of $375 million . according to peace corps officials , these health care and other expenses represent a growing portion of its annual budget . these officials explained that from 2009 through 2011 these expenses have increased a total of approximately 7.2 percent . volunteers who received feca benefits from 2009 through 2011 are unique in several ways when compared to other recipients of these benefits .