order no . 13514 , 72 fed . reg . 3919. conditions , could help agencies identify and reduce driver behaviors that cause excessive fuel use , but agencies do face some challenges in adopting these technologies . we have not fully evaluated the pros and cons of changing gsa's rates so that agencies pay for the fuel they actually consume , and according to gsa officials , no studies have been performed on its leasing rate structure . in a may 2008 report , we found that there are trade - offs to consider in designing government fees and that every design will have pluses and minuses . in addition to efficiency , which we have discussed , we found that considerations in designing fees include equity ( meaning that everyone pays a fair share ) , the extent to which collections cover costs , and the administrative burden on agencies . while gsa has flexibility in administering its rate structure , gsa's current leasing rate structure may not be fully equitable , as agencies that are more efficiently using fuel are to some extent subsidizing agencies that are less efficient because all agencies are charged the same mileage rate per category of vehicle . while gsa is required to collect adequate fees to cover the costs of its leasing program , the extent of the administrative burden for gsa and its customers of the current rate structure versus one in which agencies pay for their actual fuel costs is unclear and would depend on how any changes were implemented . nevertheless , under the current rate structure , some excessive fuel use due to driver behaviors such as idling and speeding may be occurring , resulting in higher costs to taxpayers than would be the case if agencies paid for actual fuel consumed and therefore had increased incentives to minimize fuel use . federal fleet managers on both our civilian and military panels told us that they sometimes receive large unexpected charges , as much as thousands of dollars , from gsa during vehicle lease terms for damage done to vehicles beyond normal wear and tear . in fiscal year 2012 , gsa issued damage charges for excessive wear and tear to 40,802 federal vehicles , or about 21 percent of its leased fleet , totaling about $18.5 million . for vehicles charged an excessive damage bill , the average bill was about $453 per vehicle . the highest bill was $10,400 , according to gsa . fleet managers told us that these charges could considerably increase the cost of managing a leased fleet . according to some of our panelists , lack of a clear gsa policy or guidance defining excessive wear and tear limits an agency's ability to decide whether it is more economical to lease or own vehicles . without this information , agencies may be hindered in keeping overall fleet costs down because it is more difficult to estimate life - cycle costs for leased vehicles , estimates that serve as a basis for agencies making decisions about whether to lease or own a vehicle .