gao - 09-684t . washington , d.c.: september 15 , 2009 . personnel security clearances: an outcome - focused strategy is needed to guide implementation of the reformed clearance process . gao - 09-488 . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2009 . dod personnel clearances: comprehensive timeliness reporting , complete clearance documentation , and quality measures are needed to further improve the clearance process . gao - 09-400 . washington , d.c.: may 19 , 2009 . the executive order also designated executive agents for suitability and security . the joint reform team , while not formally part of the governance structure established by executive order 13467 , works under the council to provide progress reports to the president , recommend research priorities , and oversee the development and implementation of an information technology strategy , among other things . membership on this council currently includes senior executive leaders from 11 federal agencies . in addition to high - level leadership , the reform effort has benefited from a dedicated implementation team — the joint reform team — to manage the transformation process from the beginning . although the high - level leadership and governance structure of the current reform effort distinguish it from previous efforts , it is difficult to gauge progress of reform , or determine if corrective action is needed , because the council , through the joint reform team , has not established a method for evaluating the progress of the reform efforts . without a strategic framework that fully addresses the long - standing security clearance problems and incorporates key practices for transformation — including the ability to demonstrate progress leading to desired results — the joint reform team is not in a position to demonstrate to decision makers the extent of progress that it is making toward achieving its desired outcomes , and the effort is at risk of losing momentum and not being fully implemented . in addition to the key practices , the personnel security clearance joint reform reports that we reviewed collectively also have begun to address essential factors for reforming the security clearance process , which represents positive steps . gao's prior work and irtpa identified several factors key to reforming the clearance process . these include ( 1 ) developing a sound requirements determination process , ( 2 ) engaging in governmentwide reciprocity , ( 3 ) building quality into every step of the process , ( 4 ) consolidating information technology , and ( 5 ) identifying and reporting long - term funding requirements . however , the joint reform team's information technology strategy , which is intended to be a cross - agency collaborative initiative , does not yet define roles and responsibilities for implementing a new automated capability . gao's prior work has stressed the importance of defining these roles and responsibilities when initiating cross - agency initiatives . also , the joint reform reports do not contain any information on initiatives that will require funding , determine how much they will cost , or identify potential funding sources . without long - term funding requirements , decision makers in both the executive and legislative branches will lack important information for comparing and prioritizing proposals for reforming the clearance processes .