b . what are example ( s ) of cost effective strategies to address insufficient information sharing among managers and staff within institutions ? the box will expand as you type . c. what are example ( s ) of cost effective strategies to address inmate overcrowding ? the box will expand as you type . which of the following corrections - related positions do you hold ? please check one answer . in general , how much , if at all , does each of the following affect the safety of correctional officers or of other staff performing corrections duties ? please check one answer for each row . ineffective inmate management ( eg , lack of controlled inmate movement , b . insufficient information sharing among managers and staff within institutions e. insufficient inmate programming ( eg , prison industries , drug rehabilitation , h. insufficient discipline of inmates following a violation i. intoxicated inmates as a result of inmate - manufactured alcohol j . disruptive inmate behavior due to the sale and use of illegal drugs k. inmate possession and use of unauthorized communication devices , m. inmates dissatisfied with food service n. population of inmates with characteristics that may lead to increased violent behavior ( eg , younger age , longer sentences , lack of parole opportunities ) 3.if you would like to elaborate on any of the factors above , please do so in the box below . which three of the following factors do you believe most affect corrections officer safety ? please check three and no more than three factors in the list below . ineffective inmate management ( e.g . lack of controlled inmate movement , insufficient supervision of inmates ) b . insufficient information sharing among managers and staff within institutions e. insufficient inmate programming ( eg , prison industries , drug rehabilitation , education , recreation ) h. insufficient discipline of inmates following a violation i. intoxicated inmates as a result of inmate - manufactured alcohol j . disruptive inmate behavior due to the sale and use of illegal drugs k. inmate possession and use of unauthorized communication devices , including m. inmates dissatisfied with food service n. population of inmates with characteristics that may lead to increased violent behavior ( e.g . younger age , longer sentences , lack of parole opportunities ) 5 . besides the factors listed above , if there are any other significant factors affecting corrections officer safety please describe them in the box below . the next questions ask you to provide examples ( s ) of strategies to address each factor that you believe to be cost - effective . please answer as many as you can . what are example ( s ) of cost effective strategies to address ineffective inmate management ( eg , lack of controlled inmate movement , insufficient supervision of inmates ) ? the box will expand as you type . the box will expand as you type . the box will expand as you type . d. what are example ( s ) of cost effective strategies to address corrections officer under - staffing ? the box will expand as you type .