gao - 06-779t . washington , d.c.: june 15 , 2006 . is this improvement related to the ability to work ? improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways , depending on whether the comparison point decision ( cpd ) was based on: ( 1 ) meeting or equaling a prior disability listing or ( 2 ) a residual functional capacity ( rfc ) assessment . meeting or equaling the prior listing: in this case , a disability examiner will determine if the beneficiary's same impairment ( s ) still meets or equals the prior listing . a disability examiner compares the beneficiary's condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded disability benefits . if the impairment ( s ) meets or equals the prior listing , then benefits are continued . if not , then the examiner proceeds with the cdr evaluation . residual functional capacity assessment: in this case , a disability examiner compares the beneficiary's previous functional capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment . if functional capacity for basic work activities has improved , then the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the cdr evaluation . the act allows ssa to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific “exceptions” to medical improvement appliesthe person benefits from advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology , the person has undergone a vocational therapy program that could help him or her work , new or improved diagnostic techniques or evaluations reveal that the impairment is less disabling than originally thought , or the prior decision was in error . in order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the exceptions , disability examiners must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in sga . ssa does not conduct cdrs on all beneficiaries each year . at the time beneficiaries enter the di or ssi programs , ddss determine when they will be due for cdrs based on their likely potential for medical improvement . based on ssa regulations , ddss classify beneficiaries into one of three medical improvement categories medical improvement expected — cdr generally once every 6 to 18 medical improvement possible — cdr once every 3 years ; or medical improvement not expected — cdr once every 5 to 7 years . ssa has also developed a method , called profiling , to determine the most cost - effective method of conducting a cdr . ssa applies statistical formulas that use data on beneficiary characteristics — such as age , impairment type , length of time on disability programs , previous cdr activity , and reported earnings — to predict the likelihood of medical improvement and , therefore , of benefit discontinuation . ssa assigns a “score” to beneficiaries indicating whether there is a high , medium , or low likelihood of medical improvement . in general , beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical cdrs .