prior to the u.s.s . john f. kennedy's retirement , the 2001 quadrennial defense review called for the navy to provide more warfighting assets more quickly to multiple locations and to meet this requirement , the navy made a preliminary decision to homeport additional surface ships at mayport . the navy subsequently prepared an environmental impact statement to evaluate a broad range of strategic homeport and dispersal options for atlantic fleet surface ships in mayport and on january 14 , 2009 , issued its decision to pursue an option that would include homeporting a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at mayport . the navy's decision was reviewed as part of the department of defense's ( dod ) 2010 quadrennial defense review , which in its report supported the navy's decision to homeport a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier in mayport , indicating that homeporting an east coast carrier in mayport would contribute to mitigating the risk of a terrorist attack , accident , or natural disaster . additionally , officials in dod's office of cost assessment and program evaluation , which was part of the review's working group assessing the navy's mayport decision , reviewed the navy's presentations and supporting documentation , but did not develop an independent cost estimate for comparison . in house report 111-491 , accompanying a proposed bill for the fiscal year 2011 national defense authorization act ( h.r . 5136 ) , the house committee on armed services directed gao to submit a report no later than february 15 , 2011 , that contains an independent estimate of the total direct and indirect costs to be incurred by the federal government for the proposed homeporting at naval station mayport . in response to this report , our objectives were to ( 1 ) develop an independent estimate of the full life - cycle costs associated with the navy's plan to establish a second east coast homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at naval station mayport and determine to what extent it differs from the navy's estimate and ( 2 ) determine to what extent the navy's estimate meets the characteristics of a high - quality cost estimate . to develop the independent cost estimate , we worked with an outside cost estimating consulting company with expertise in preparing estimates of the life - cycle costs of major federal acquisitions . we followed the 12 steps outlined in the gao cost estimating and assessment guide , which have been identified as best practices by gao and experts in the cost estimating community , to develop a risk - adjusted range of cost estimates . we compared our risk - adjusted range of estimates , at an 80 percent confidence interval , to the navy's point estimates to determine whether the navy's estimates were within our risk - adjusted range . for a direct element - by - element comparison between our estimate and the navy's , we also compared our estimates at the 65 percent confidence level with the navy's point estimates.additionally , we reviewed the navy's cost estimate and interviewed navy officials with knowledge of the methodology and key underlying assumptions used in developing the navy's estimate . we reviewed the navy's environmental impact study used in evaluating options for homeporting surface ships at mayport .