to participate in the program , clients also had to receive case management services . a detailed explanation of our methodology is included in our july 2009 report . in summary , we found that fema , hhs , and hud supported disaster case management programs following hurricanes katrina and rita . however , breaks in federal funding and coordination challenges adversely affected the delivery of disaster case management services to some hurricane victims . 2 ) what challenges did case management agencies experience in delivering disaster case management services under federally funded programs ? and 3 ) how will previous or existing federally funded programs be used to inform the development of a federal case management program for future disasters ? to prepare the report , we reviewed the roles and responsibilities of the federal government for disaster recovery services , as well as federal laws , regulations , and guidance for the federally funded disaster case management programs established to assist victims of hurricanes katrina and rita . we interviewed federal officials from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . we conducted site visits to louisiana and mississippi and interviewed organizations involved in disaster case management in those states . we also obtained data on clients in two disaster case management programs and used only those data elements we found to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our work . those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient , appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives . we conducted the performance audit from may 2008 to july 2009 and updated information in november 2009 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . coordination challenges included a lack of accurate and timely information sharing and incompatible data systems . we believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions . in addition , case management agencies experienced challenges in delivering services due to large caseloads , limited community resources , federal funding rules , and a lack of coordinated outreach . however , we found that fema had not established a time line for developing this program , and some of the evaluations had limitations , such as a lack of information on program outcomes . in our report , we recommended that fema establish a realistic and achievable time line for designing and implementing a single , federal , disaster case management program for future disasters , conduct an outcome evaluation to determine the results of the disaster case management pilot programs , and ensure that the federal disaster case management program it develops includes practices to enhance and sustain coordination among federal and nonfederal stakeholders . fema agreed with our recommendations and is taking steps to address them ; fema hopes to finalize the federal disaster case management program in june 2010 . for future disasters , fema is developing a federal case management program based on evaluations of several disaster case management pilot programs .