we were unable to observe burn pit operations in afghanistan . to address the second objective , we reviewed dod guidance and planning documents on current and future uses of alternatives to open pit burning , dod waste disposal studies , and relevant literature . we also observed burn pit alternatives during our site visits in iraq and discussed them with dod officials and contractors . in addition , we interviewed dod officials in the united states regarding alternatives to burn pits in afghanistan and iraq . to address the third objective , we analyzed data on ambient air sampling in afghanistan and iraq conducted from 2002 through 2010 . as of august 2010 , there were 39 solid waste incinerators installed in iraq , according to logcap data . two of the four bases we visited in iraq had solid waste incinerators on - site , all of which were supported by logcap . at taji , solid waste incinerators began operation in february 2009 , and at al asad , solid waste incinerators began operation in april 2009 . according to centcom officials , once the united states' presence in iraq ends , all solid waste incinerators will be transferred to the government of iraq . logistically , challenges included the transportation of incinerators , the availability of land to install them , and the life - expectancy and size of a base , which fluctuates , according to senior dod officials . for example , in afghanistan , centcom officials said that incinerators arrived by ship in pakistan and were loaded onto contractor vehicles for delivery to u.s. bases . centcom officials also reported that the lead time to get an incinerator to a u.s. base in afghanistan ranged from 6 to 8 months , and that there were operational concerns as well . for example , once an incinerator arrived , it had to be inspected , set up , and operated by trained personnel . centcom officials said that there is generally a training program for operating personnel to complete before operations begin . in addition , dod officials said that u.s. military servicemembers did not operate incinerators , and that operations were left primarily to contractors . senior dod officials said that many bases conduct incinerator operations 24 hours a day . in early 2010 , usfor - a developed plans to use incinerators at its bases in afghanistan and , as of june 2010 , there were 20 solid waste incinerators operational and 46 awaiting installation , as well as 11 burn boxes that were operational and 2 awaiting installation . dod data also show that 114 additional solid waste incinerators should arrive incrementally in afghanistan by the end of calendar year 2010 . the types of incinerators installed at bases in afghanistan differ from those at bases in iraq ; they are smaller , with burn rates ranging from 1 to 20 tons per day , and most are portable . the portability provides usfor - a commanders with the flexibility to relocate incinerators as bases close or as generated waste capacities fluctuate .