for that state . epa can revise such a program from time to time by regulation . the act authorizes epa to enforce requirements of an applicable uic program in a state with primary enforcement authority under certain circumstances . specifically , when epa finds a person in violation of such a requirement , has notified the state , and after 30 days the state has not commenced appropriate enforcement action , the act requires epa to issue an order requiring compliance or to initiate court action . the act defines “applicable underground injection control program” with respect to a state with primary authority as the program or most recent amendment that has been adopted by the state and approved by epa by rule . with respect to a state where epa has primary enforcement authority , “applicable underground injection program” is the program which has been prescribed by the administrator by regulation . charged with developing the new uic program , epa promulgated a series of regulations in the early 1980s . epa's regulations , as amended , are divided into distinct parts . permitting . states and epa regional offices review and approve permits for existing and new injection wells and regularly review historical well records . monitoring and inspections . states and epa regional offices review monitoring reports submitted by well operators , conduct field inspections of well sites , test wells to ensure protection of underground sources of drinking water , and ensure that operator reporting , inspections , and testing are done consistently and correctly . compliance and enforcement . states and epa regional offices are expected to identify wells that are not in compliance with regulations and guidance , take enforcement action against well operators in violation of regulations and guidance , and pursue legal action against violators when necessary . aquifer identification and exemption . states and epa regional offices are expected to conduct aquifer surveys and develop inventories of aquifers in the state . they assist with applications to epa for aquifer exemptions . in addition , they conduct investigations of potential contamination of aquifers . data management and reporting . states and epa regional offices develop a complete inventory of class ii wells in the state . they also collect and manage data on wells to satisfy epa's reporting requirements , including data on well inspections and compliance data , such as well operator violations and any enforcement actions taken . public information , training , and technical assistance . states and epa regional offices conduct public outreach and training to help staff and well operators keep current on technical issues . states and epa regional offices also provide technical assistance to well operators when necessary . epa and states provide a mix of resources to support the class ii program , including epa grants , state funding , and epa and state personnel . state programs are funded in part by epa grants . states receive epa grants to help pay for the costs of managing the class ii program .