v . to learn about real - estate tax billing practices and the proportion of local government entities with potentially nondeductible charges on their real - estate tax bills , we conducted a mail - based sample survey of 1,732 local governments primarily responsible for collecting real - estate taxes due on residential properties . in designing the sample for our survey , we used the survey population of the u.s. census bureau's quarterly property tax survey ( qpts ) as our sample frame . ( 4 ) is the tax assessed against all property within the jurisdiction ? ( 5 ) is the tax assessed at a uniform rate ? ( 6 ) whether the payer of the assessment is entitled to any privilege or service as a result of the payment . is the assessment imposed as a payment for some special privilege granted or service rendered ? is there any relationship between the assessment and any services provided or special privilege granted ? ( 7 ) is use of the funds by the tax authority restricted in any way ? are the funds earmarked for any specific purpose ? ( 8 ) is the assessment for local benefits of a kind tending to increase the value of the property assessed ? does the assessment fund improvements to or benefiting certain properties or certain types of property ? if so , is a portion of the assessment allocable to separately stated interest or maintenance charges ? irs officials also indicated that the following materials would be helpful in making their determinations: ( 1 ) a copy of the statute imposing the tax . ( 2 ) materials published by the local government or tax - collecting authority describing the levy , including taxpayer guides , publications , or manuals describing the tax . ( 3 ) the forms and instructions relating to the tax . ( 4 ) a printed copy of the web pages maintained by the jurisdictions related to the tax . to collect this information , we interviewed county officials and reviewed documentation either provided by county officials or found on county web sites . most of the selected counties' web sites provided tax rate tables or a list of the taxing authorities for the ad - valorem charges found on the tax bills ; some also had information for the non - ad - valorem charges . for each of the year 2006 tax bill charges , we searched the counties' web sites and used online search engines to collect supporting documentation . we also searched state constitutions and statutes to identify the legal authority for each charge on real - estate tax bills ; to a varying degree , county officials provided citations to the specific statutes that provided the legislative authorities for the charges . in addition to the real - estate tax information found online , we interviewed local tax officials in each of the five local counties to gather the requested information . based on the materials we submitted , irs concluded that some charges were deductible , some were nondeductible , and others required information for irs to determine their deductibility . table 1 below summarizes the results of irs's determinations .