these deficiencies are the most serious . a condition - level deficiency is one in which the provider violates one or more standards and the deficiencies are of such character as to substantially limit the provider's capacity to furnish adequate care or which adversely affect the health and safety of patients . when a hospice provider is cited for a condition - level deficiency , cms places the provider on a 90-day termination track ( or 23 days if the situation is determined to pose “immediate jeopardy” to beneficiaries ) within which the provider must correct the issue ( s ) and the correction must be confirmed via a follow - up survey visit . if this does not happen within 90 days of the survey date , cms terminates the hospice's medicare provider agreement ; termination is an enforcement remedy cms uses to ensure compliance . standard - level deficiencies . these deficiencies are less serious . a hospice provider that has a standard - level deficiency can be certified or re - certified only if the provider has submitted an acceptable plan of correction for achieving compliance within a reasonable period of time . according to cms officials , standard - level deficiencies must also have follow - up to ensure correction , although the type of follow - up depends on the nature of the deficiency . if a standard - level deficiency is very minor and does not place any beneficiaries at risk , the follow - up may be handled through email or telephone instead of a follow - up visit . according to cms officials , if a provider fails to submit or implement an acceptable plan of correction within a reasonable period of time acceptable to cms , the provider is placed on the 90-day termination track noted above . for - profit and non - profit hospices served roughly the same percentage of the approximately 1.5 million medicare hospice beneficiaries in 2017 , even though for - profit hospices make up about two - thirds of all hospice providers . according to our analysis of cms data , for - profit providers treated about 50 percent of those beneficiaries and non - profit providers treated about 48 percent in 2017 . this distribution has been about the same in each year from 2014 through 2017 . for example , for these years , the percentages of beneficiaries treated by for - profit providers ranged from 48.7 percent to 50.2 percent ( see additional details in app . i , table 7 ) . when comparing the beneficiary populations treated by for - profit and non - profit hospice providers , we found that they generally had similar demographic characteristics . we identified two primary exceptions to this general finding: ( 1 ) non - profit hospices had slightly higher percentages of white beneficiaries , and ( 2 ) for - profit hospices had a greater proportion of patients enrolled in both medicare and medicaid . see table 2 ( for more detailed data , see app . i , table 8 ) . while beneficiary demographic characteristics were generally similar , we found differences in beneficiary diagnoses between for - profit and non - profit hospices .