i would be pleased to respond to any questions . for questions about this statement , please contact gregory c. wilshusen at ( 202 ) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included season dietrich , vijay d'souza , nancy glover , and shaunyce wallace . this is a work of the u.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the united states . the published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from gao . a hybrid cloud is a composite of the deployment models . the adoption of cloud computing has the potential to provide benefits related to information security . the use of virtualization and automation in cloud computing can expedite the implementation of secure configurations for virtual machine images . other advantages relate to cloud computing's broad network access and use of internet - based technologies . federal agencies have begun to address information security for cloud computing ; however , they have not developed the corresponding guidance . about half of the 24 major agencies we asked reported using some form of public or private cloud computing for obtaining infrastructure , platform , or software services . these agencies identified measures they are taking or plan to take when using cloud computing . these actions , however , have not always been accompanied by development of related policies or procedures to secure their information and systems . most agencies have concerns about ensuring vendor compliance and implementation of government information security requirements . in addition , agencies expressed concerns about limitations on their ability to conduct independent audits and assessments of security controls of cloud computing service providers . several industry representatives agreed that compliance and oversight issues are a concern and raised the idea of having a single government entity or other independent entity conduct security oversight and audits of cloud computing service providers on behalf of federal agencies . agencies also stated that having a cloud service provider that had been precertified as being in compliance with government information security requirements through some type of governmentwide approval process would make it easier for them to consider adopting cloud computing . other agency concerns related to the division of information security responsibilities between customer and vendor . until these concerns are addressed , the adoption of cloud computing may be limited . while several governmentwide cloud computing security activities are under way by organizations such as the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) , significant work remains to be completed . for example , omb stated that it began a federal cloud computing initiative in february 2009 ; however , it does not yet have an overarching strategy or an implementation plan . according to omb officials , the initiative includes an online cloud computing storefront managed by gsa and will likely contain several pilot cloud computing projects , each with a lead agency . however , as of march 2010 , a date had not been set for the release of the strategy or for any of the pilots .