fema had none of them . officials at the agencies we reviewed that have few or no procurement - related suspensions or debarments , acknowledged that their agencies need to place greater emphasis on suspension and debarment as a tool to ensure that the government only does business with responsible contractors . some of these agencies have already begun efforts to develop more robust suspension and debarment programs . these ongoing efforts include the following:  an hhs oig official told us that since more than 80 percent of hhs's appropriations are for medicare and medicaid programs , their emphasis and budget have been largely directed toward monitoring those programs , including the exclusions program , which was designed to combat health care fraud . the hhs suspension and debarment official added that hhs now sees suspension and debarment as an underutilized management tool , and the agency has made a commitment to having a more active process , which so far includes training and researching best practices . the official noted that the tools for suspension and debarment are present and that the agency needs to emphasize using them .  fema officials have noted the need to improve their procurement - related suspension and debarment program , and are working closely with ice to adopt some of the characteristics of agencies with more active programs . at the same time , dhs has named a suspension and debarment official within the office of the under secretary for management , who has been tasked with developing a departmentwide suspension and debarment policy and program .  treasury also has efforts under way to improve its procurement - related suspension and debarment program . treasury officials noted that the office of inspector general is taking steps to promote the use of suspensions and debarments . according to an oig official , they are improving training and education throughout the office by having oig attorneys attend suspension and debarment training sponsored by cigie . in addition , investigators are beginning to receive training on using suspension and debarment with ongoing legal cases or those cases declined for prosecution by the u.s. attorney that meet the criteria for potential debarment .  commerce officials stated that the suspension and debarment official is working actively to build a robust suspension and debarment program . the oig expects to have a fully functioning suspension and debarment program by the end of fiscal year 2011 . the office of counsel to the inspector general has proposed to serve as liaison between the oig , other investigatory bodies within commerce , and the suspension and debarment official . the official is collaborating with the oig and the office of general counsel to develop an acceptable process and leverage available resources . governmentwide efforts to oversee and coordinate suspensions and debarments have faced a number of challenges . omb assigned responsibility for governmentwide coordination to isdc ; however , isdc relies on agencies' voluntary participation in its processes and member agencies' limited resources to fulfill its mission .