we also reviewed related studies of market power . to determine whether ferc's methodology was thorough enough to support its conclusion that generating capacity has not been withheld without legitimate reason , we evaluated their methodology and results . we also discussed our findings with state and federal energy officials and an economist at the university of california , at irvine who was familiar with all three studies . “report on plant outages in the state of california,” prepared by the office of the general counsel , market oversight & enforcement and the office of markets , tariffs and rates , division of energy markets , federal energy regulatory commission , february 1 , 2001 . ( 2 ) was ferc's study thorough enough to support its conclusions ? california moved to a deregulated electricity market in april 1998 . for roughly 2 years , wholesale prices were fairly low on average . however , the state experienced periods of higher prices , especially during peak summer hours . average prices rose dramatically in may 2000 and remained high . for example , average prices of electricity sold in the california power exchange during the months of may through december 2000 were between 2 and 13 times higher than in the same months of the previous year . in addition to higher prices , the frequency and duration of periods when the system is in danger of service disruptions have increased . actual rolling blackouts occurred on 6 separate days in winter and spring 2001 , for a total of 16 hours with shortfalls ranging from 400 to 1,000 mw . blackouts adversely affected consumers and caused business and traffic disruptions . the california electricity market operates within a larger western system consisting roughly of 11 states , and while california relies on imports for about 20 percent of its supplies , it also exports power at times to other states . as a result of this interconnectedness , the price and availability of power in california influence markets in other western states and vice versa . industry experts and academics generally agree that a tight power supply in california and other western states is one reason why prices increased and service reliability deteriorated starting in may 2000 . the demand for electricity in california has grown rapidly since 1995 , while very little new generating capacity has been added . for example , from 1995 through 2000 , total electricity consumption grew by about 13 percent , compared with about 2-percent growth in electricity generating capacity in the state . in addition , last summer saw an increase in the price of natural gas — used to produce about 40 percent of california's electricity supply — and in the price of emissions permits that are required to operate certain generators in california . lower levels of available hydroelectricity during summer 2000 in the pacific northwest reduced california's access to imports of hydroelectricity . rapid demand growth in other states has also reduced california's ability to import electricity from those states . finally , flaws in market design in california are widely believed to have contributed to california's problems .