iii. ) asp is a price measure established in the mma to provide a basis for payment rates for physician - administered drugs and now used by cms in setting rates for drug scods . ii and app . cms instructs pharmaceutical manufacturers to report asp data to cms within 30 days after the end of each quarter . the mma defined asp as the average sales price for all u.s. purchasers of a drug , net of volume , prompt pay , and cash discounts ; free goods contingent on a purchase requirement ; and charge - backs and rebates . under cms's final rule governing 2006 payment rates for hospital outpatient services , including scod products , cms uses manufacturers' asps in setting drug scod rates . for radiopharmaceuticals , cms has set 2006 rates based on an estimate of hospitals' costs derived from charges , but the agency has not decided how to pay for radiopharmaceutical scods after 2006 . hospitals can purchase radiopharmaceuticals , which consist of a radioisotope and a medicine or pharmaceutical agent , in different forms . they can purchase vials of the product in ready - to - use unit doses or in multidoses , or they can purchase a product's radioactive and nonradioactive components separately and compound them in - house . in a survey conducted by the society of nuclear medicine and the society of nuclear medicine technologist section , 76 percent of hospitals reported that they purchased their radiopharmaceuticals in unit doses . using our hospital survey of prices hospitals paid for scod drugs and radiopharmaceuticals , we examined the extent to which prices varied among the approximately 1,200 hospitals that submitted survey data . to do this , we looked at several hospital characteristics , or factors — including teaching status , location , and size of the outpatient department — while controlling for differences in the costliness of the mix of scods that hospitals purchased . we analyzed both ( 1 ) the separate effect of each factor , controlling for other factors ; and ( 2 ) the effect of the three factors combined . we found that teaching status had the largest separate effect on drug scod prices , whereas location had the largest effect on radiopharmaceutical scod prices . combining the three factors , we found , for example , that large , urban , hospitals with major teaching programs paid lower prices , on average , for drug scods — compared with small urban hospitals with other teaching programs . the importance of the three factors in accounting for variation in scod prices among hospitals differed by type of product purchased — that is , drug or radiopharmaceutical . a hospital's teaching status , for example , affected prices paid for drug scods but did not matter for the radiopharmaceutical scod prices pertaining to unit dose purchases in our survey . in contrast , a hospital's location was an important factor linked to price differences for radiopharmaceuticals but did not matter with respect to prices for drugs . in addition , hospital size was important in affecting price differences for both drugs and radiopharmaceuticals . ( see table 1. )